Plainview City Code
Printed August 1, 2006
Revised January 2008, January 2009

Chapter 100, General Provisions
101 Title 1-1
102 Rules of Interpretation 1-1
103 Definitions 1-1
104 Severability and References 1-2
105 Errors and Omissions 1-3
106 Ordinance Administration 1-3
107 Preservation of Penalties, Offenses, Rights and Liabilities 1-3
108 Official Copies of the City Code 1-4
109 Adoption of State Statutes and Rules by Reference 1-4
110 Enforcement 1-4
111 General Penalty 1-5
112 Public and Administrative Penalties 1-5
113 Calendar Days 1-6
Chapter 200, Municipal Administration
201 Elections 2-1
202 Meetings 2-1
203 Authority of the City Council, City Council Members, 2-2 Mayor, and Mayor Pro Tem
204 City Board, General Administration 2-3
205 Ambulance Advisory Board 2-3
206 Library Board 2-4
207 Planning Commission 2-4
208 Economic Development Authority 2-5
209 City Departments, General Administration 2-5
210 Police Department 2-5
211 Fire Department 2-6
212 Emergency Management Department 2-7
213 Ambulance Department 2-7
214 Municipal Liquor Department 2-8
215 Library Department 2-8
216 Administration Department 2-8
217 Public Works Department 2-8
218 City Policies 2-8
219 Compensation 2-9
220 Elected Official Travel 2-9
221 Fees and Charges 2-10
Chapter 300, Public Works
301 Street Designation 3-1
302 Property Address Numbering 3-1
303 Heavy Vehicle Routes 3-2
304 Parking on Public Right of Way 3-3
305 Street Excavations 3-4
306 Construction and Repair of Sidewalks 3-5
307 Removal of Snow and Ice On Sidewalks 3-6
308 Removal of Snow and Ice on Alleys, Streets, Avenues, 3-6
or Other Public Property
309 Shade and Ornamental Trees 3-7
310 Dutch Elm Disease 3-7
311 Weeds and Grass 3-9
312 Election to Manage the Public Right of Way 3-10
313 Public Park and Cemetery System 3-10
314 Municipal Compost and Brush Site 3-11
Chapter 400, Utilities
401 Sewer 4-1
402 Water 4-15
403 Natural Gas 4-21
404 Cable Communication 4-25
Chapter 500, Business Licensing
501 General Licensing and Permit Provisions 5-1
502 Garbage and Rubbish 5-2
503 Animals 5-5
504 Garage and Rummage Sales 5-14
505 Tattoo and Body Piercing Sales 5-15
506 Lawful Gambling 5-18
507 Tobacco 5-21
508 Public Dances 5-25
509 Special Events 5-27
510 Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants 5-29
511 Signs and Outdoor Advertising 5-33
512 Sexually Orientated Businesses 5-34
513 Liquor Licenses 5-40
Chapter 600, Construction, Planning, Zoning, Land Use
601 Building and Construction 6-1
602 Wellhead Protection 6-3
603 Comprehensive Plan 6-4
604 Storm Water Management 6-4
605 Blighted Properties 6-19
606 Zoning and Land Management, General Government Provisions 6-21
607 Zoning and Land Management, Definitions 6-23
608 Zoning and Land Management, Administrative Procedures 6-33
609 Zoning and Land Management, General Regulations 6-36
610 Zoning and Land Management, Manufactured Home Parks 6-43
611 Zoning and Land Management, Zoning Districts 6-45
612 Zoning and Land Management, AG, Agricultural District 6-47
613 Zoning and Land Management, R-1, Residential District 6-48
614 Zoning and Land Management, R-2, Residential District 6-49
615 Zoning and Land Management, T, Transition District 6-50
616 Zoning and Land Management, C-1, Central Business District 6-51
617 Zoning and Land Management, C-2, Service Commercial District 6-52
618 Zoning and Land Management, I, Industrial District 6-53
619 Zoning and Land Management, DWM, Drinking Water 6-54
Management
620 Zoning and Land Management, Submission of Plats 6-55
621 Zoning and Land Management, Application Guidelines 6-58
622 Zoning and Land Management, Subdivision Design Standards 6-63
623 Zoning and Land Management, Required Improvements 6-70
624 Zoning and Land Management, Variances and Board of 6-73
Adjustment
625 Communication Towers 6-75
626 Outdoor Solid Fuel Burners 6-76
Chapter 700, Public Safety
701 Definitions 7-1
702 Administrative Fines 7-1
703 Traffic Regulations 7-2
704 Public Nuisances 7-3
705 Offenses Against Public Property 7-5
706 Noise 7-7
707 Discharge of Firearms and Dangerous Weapons 7-8
708 Restrictions After Curfew Hours 7-8
709 Snowmobiles 7-8
710 ATVs 7-10
711 Bicycles 7-13
712 Roller Blades, Roller Skates, Roller Skis, and Skateboards 7-13
713 Abandoned Property 7-15
714 Fire Hazards and Fire Protection 7-15
715 Discharge of Fireworks 7-17
716 Emergency Management 7-18
Chapter 800, Miscellaneous
801 General Fees, Fines, Charges 8-1
802 Water and Sewer Rates 8-4
Appendix A
Map 1 Zoning Map
Map 2 Subdivision Plats
Map 3 Street Functional Classification
Map 4 DWSMA Vulnerability
Map 5 Wellhead Protection Area
Map 6 Drainage Basins
Index
1-1
100 GENERAL PROVISIONS
101 TITLE. This Code of Ordinances shall be known as the Plainview City Code.
102 RULES OF INTERPRETATION
102.1 Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
102.2 Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written “and/or,” whenever the context requires.
Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.
Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
102.3 Application To Future Ordinances. All provisions of the Plainview City Code compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless otherwise specifically provided.
102.4 Captions. Headings and captions used in this code other than the chapter and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
103 DEFINITIONS. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
City. The area within the corporate boundaries of Plainview as presently established or as amended by ordinance, annexation or other legal actions at a future time. The term CITY when used in this code may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized representatives.
Code, This Code, or This Code of Ordinances. This city code as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
1-2
County. Wabasha County.
May. The act referred to is permissive.
Month A calendar month.
Oath. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.
Officer, Office, Employee, Commission, or Department. An officer, office, employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly states otherwise.
Person. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm, corporation, partnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
Preceding or Following. Next before or next after, respectively.
Shall. The act referred to is mandatory.
Signature or Subscription Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
State. The State of Minnesota.
Subchapter. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.
Written Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
Year A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
104 SEVERABILITY AND REFERENCES
104.1 Severability. If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.
104.2 References to Other Sections. Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
104.3 References to Offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
1-3
105 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS. If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
106 ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATION
106.1 Ordinances Repealed. This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
106.2 Ordinances Unaffected. All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
106.3 Effective Date of Ordinances. All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from date of publication, unless otherwise expressly provided.
106.4 Repeal or Modification of Ordinances. Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect to it, unless otherwise expressly provided. No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided. When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided. No change or amendment to the City Code Chapter 600 shall be adopted until a public hearing has been held as established by Section 608.1.
106.5 Ordinances Which Amend or Supplement Code. If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its place. Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing City Code a new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
107 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES. All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws. The repeal of prior ordinances and adoption of this code are not to be construed to affect in any manner rights and liabilities existing at the time of repeal and the enactment of this code. Insofar as provisions in this code are substantially the same as pre-existing Ordinances, they shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. Any act done, offense committed, or right accruing, or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred or assessed prior to the effective date of this code is not affected by the enactment of the code. This code does not
1-4
affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway right-of-ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
108 OFFICIAL COPIES OF CODE. There shall be two official copies of this City Code available for public inspection; one shall be kept at the Public Library and a second in the office of the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable charge.
109 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE. It is the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary. The definitions and rules of construction, presumptions, and miscellaneous provisions pertaining to construction contained in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 645 are adopted by reference and made a part of this code. As so adopted, references in that chapter to laws and statutes mean provisions of this code and references to the legislature mean the Council.
110 ENFORCEMENT.
110.1 Law Enforcement Authority. Any Licensed Peace Officer of the city's Police Department, or the County Sheriff, Deputy Sheriff, or State Trooper shall have the authority to enforce any provision of this code.
110.2 City Clerk and City Council Authority. As permitted by M.S. 626.862, as it may be amended from time to time, the City Clerk shall have the authority to administer and enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain individuals designated within the code or by the Clerk or City Council shall have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified. All and any person or persons designated may issue a citation in lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
110.3 Permission to Enter Property To Inspect For Compliance. Any city official or employee designated by this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code may with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
110.4 Refusal to Allow Public Employees To Inspect For Compliance. If the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of a premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City Clerk, Peace Officer, or any employee or official charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
1-5
110.5 Unreasonable Refusal To Inspect For Compliance. Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to the property by the City Clerk or any other authorized city officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination of any and all permits, licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice shall be given to the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property, stating the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property shall be given an opportunity to appear before the City Clerk to object to the termination before it occurs, subject to appeal of the Clerk's decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled or special meeting.
110.6 Imminent Danger. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the City to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
111 GENERAL PENALTY.
111.1 Misdemeanor. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is designated to be a misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any offense which is a misdemeanor shall be the limits established by State Statue.
111.2 Petty Misdemeanor. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any offense which is a petty misdemeanor shall be the limits established by State Statue.
111.3 Cost of Prosecution. In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
111.4 Failure to Perform Duty. The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.
111.5 Correct or Abate Violation. In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code, the Council or any city official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.
111.6 Separate Violations - Unless otherwise provided, each act of violation and every day on which a violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense.
112 PUBLIC AND ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
112.1 General. Unless otherwise provided in this code, or by law, every public hearing required by law, Ordinance, or Resolution to be held on any legislative or administrative matter shall be conducted in accordance with this section.
1-6
112.2 Notice. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. Failure to give the notice or defects in it shall not invalidate the proceedings if a good faith effort has been made to comply with this section.
112.3 Conduct of Hearing. At the hearing, each party in interest shall have an opportunity to be heard and to present such evidence as is relevant to the proceeding. The Council may adopt rules governing the conduct of hearings, records to be made, and such other matters as it deem necessary.
113 CALENDAR DAYS. Unless specifically stated otherwise, all references to days in the City Code shall be considered calendar days, not business days.
2-1
200 MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION
201 ELECTIONS. Municipal elections, when required, shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, of each year, for the election of the following officers for the term as indicated below.
201.1 Mayor. The Mayor’s term shall be for two (2) years, with elections every two (2) years.
201.2 City Council Member. A City Council Member’s terms shall be for four (4) years, with
two (2) members elected every two (2) years.
202 MEETINGS. All Council meetings, including special and adjourned meetings of City Boards shall be conducted in accordance with the Minnesota Open Meeting Law and be open to the public, unless specifically closed by Council or Board action.
202.1 Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the 2nd and
4th Tuesdays of each calendar month at 7:00 p.m. All meetings, including special and recessed meetings, shall be held in the Council Chamber unless otherwise designated by the Council.
202.2 Special Meetings. The Mayor or any two (2) members of the Council may call a special
meeting of the Council upon at least 24 hours written notice to each member of the Council. Notice shall be delivered personally to each member or left at their usual place of residence. Attendance at a special meeting by a Council Member shall waive all requirements of notice. A public notice of a special meeting shall be posted at the City Hall, Public Library, and Post Office.
202.3 Emergency Meetings. Notice of emergency meetings shall be given as required by State Statutes.
202.4 Initial Meeting. At first regular Council meeting in January of each year, the Council shall: designate the depositories of City funds, designate the official newspaper, appoint such officers and employees and such members of boards and committees as may be necessary, and make any other designation or appointment as necessary.
202.5 Agenda and Order of Business. An agenda of business for each regular meeting shall
be prepared not later than three (3) calendar days before the date of the meeting. The agenda shall be posted at the City Hall, Public Library, and Post Office. The agenda shall be prepared in the following order: Call to Order, Approval of Agenda, Approval of Consent Agenda, Public Hearing, Unfinished Business, New Business, Council Comment, and Adjournment. The order of business may be varied by the Council, but all public hearings shall be held at the time specified in the notice of hearing. No item of business shall be considered unless it appears on the agenda for the meeting, or is approved for addition to the agenda by the majority vote of the Council Members present.
202.6 Quorum and Voting. At least three (3) members of the City Council must be present to constitute a quorum. The votes of all members of the City Council shall be recorded in the minutes. If any member is present but does not vote, the minutes shall reflect them being present and not voting.
A majority vote of all members of the Council shall be necessary for the approval of any Ordinance, unless a larger number is required by Statute. Except as otherwise provided by Statute or ordinance, a majority vote of a quorum shall prevail in all other cases.
2-2
202.7 Adoption of Ordinances, Resolutions, Motions, Petitions and Communications. Every Ordinance and Resolution shall be presented in writing. Every Ordinance shall receive at least one reading before the Council, prior to final adoption, but shall not be adopted at the same meeting unless the rules are suspended for that purpose. An Ordinance or Resolution shall be considered to have been read by the furnishing of a written copy to each member of the City Council.
202.7.1 Signing and Publication Proof. Every Ordinance and Resolution passed by the Council shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the Clerk and filed by the Clerk in the Ordinance or Resolution Book. Proof of Publication of every Ordinance shall be attached and filed.
202.7.2 Repeals and Amendments. Every Ordinance or Resolution repealing a previous Ordinance or Resolution or a section or subdivision thereof, shall give the number, if any, and the title of the Ordinance or code number of the Ordinance or Resolution to be repealed in whole or in part. Each Ordinance or Resolution amending an existing Ordinance or Resolution or part thereof, shall set forth in full each amended section or subdivision as it will read with the amendment.
202.7.3 Meetings, Petitions, Communications. Every motion shall be stated in full before it is submitted to a vote and shall be recorded in the minutes. Every petition or other communication addressed to the Council, shall be read in full upon presentation to the Council, unless the Council dispenses with the reading. Each petition or other communication shall be recorded in the minutes by title and filed with the minutes in the office of the Clerk.
202.8 Minutes. Minutes of each Council meeting shall be kept by the City Clerk or his or her
designee. Ordinances, Resolutions and correspondence need not be recorded in full in the minutes if they appear in other permanent records of the Clerk and can be accurately identified from the description given in the minutes. The minutes of each meeting shall be reduced to typewritten form and shall be signed by the City Clerk and the Mayor (or Presiding Officer if the Mayor was not present at the meeting). At the next meeting of the Council, approval of the minutes shall be considered. The minutes need not be read aloud, but the Mayor shall call for any additions or corrections. If there is an objection or a proposed change to the minutes, the Council shall vote upon the correction or addition. If there are no corrections or additions, the minutes shall stand approved.
202.9 Presiding Officer. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council. In the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall preside. In the absence of both, the City Clerk shall call the meeting to order and shall preside until the Council Members present at the meeting choose one of their number to act temporarily as presiding officer.
203 AUTHORITY OF THE CITY COUNCIL, CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS, THE MAYOR, AND MAYOR PRO TEM
203.1 Authority of the City Council. The City Council has complete authority over all administrative affairs of the City. It is responsible for adopting and enforcing ordinances, establishing policies, directing department heads, creating boards and commissions, overseeing the City's financial operations and transacting all other city business as required by law.
203.2 Authority of City Council Members. A Councilmember directs the City’s conduct of
daily affairs and plan for the future development of the city. A City Council Member has no authority outside of a City Council meeting.
203.3 Authority of the Mayor. The Mayor is the symbolic head of a city and is the presiding officer at City Council meetings. The Mayor has all the powers and duties as a City Council Member. The Mayor is a voting member of the City Council.
203.4 Authority of the Mayor Pro Tem (Acting Mayor). In the case of the absence or
2-3
disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duty of the Mayor during the period of such absence or disability. The Mayor Pro Tem is appointed by the Mayor.
203.5 City Council Compensation. The salary of the Mayor shall be set at the amount of $3,300 per annum, to be paid in a lump sum amount each December during term of office. The salary of each City Council Member shall be set at the sum of $2,500 per annum to be payable in a lump sum amount each December during term of office.
204 CITY BOARDS, GENERAL ADMINISTRATION.
204.1 Authority. Unless otherwise specified by State Statutes, all City Boards shall act only in an advisory capacity to the City Council. The City Council shall have final authority on all matters.
20.4.2 Bylaws and the City Code. If there is a conflict between the bylaws of the advisory board and the City Code, then the City Code shall take precedent. If there is a conflict between the City Code and State Statutes, then the State Statute shall take precedent.
204.3 Board Seats. The general public should be made aware of the availability of open seats on the advisory boards. A general notice of upcoming open seats for all advisory boards shall be posted at City Hall for at least 10 calendar days during the month of October or November each year. For the purposes of this section, an open seat shall be considered any advisory board member’s term that is ending, regardless if the member wishes to serve another term or not.
204.4 Removal of Office. Members of all City Boards serve at the pleasure of the City Council. Any member of any board may be removed with or without cause by a majority vote of the City Council at a public meeting.
204.5 Compensation. All members of all boards shall serve without compensation.
204.6 Sudden Vacancies. Sudden vacancies during any board term shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired portion of the term.
205 AMBULANCE ADVISORY BOARD. A City Ambulance Advisory Board is hereby continued, consisting of five persons (voting Board members) appointed by the City Council, and three ex-officio, nonvoting members made up of the Medical Director, City Council Liaison(s), and the Ambulance Director.
205.1 Term of Office. Each voting member shall be appointed by the City Council and shall serve for three (3) years or until his/her successor is appointed and qualifies.
205.2 Rules and Regulations. The Ambulance Advisory Board shall adopt, from time to time, such rules and regulations as it deems necessary and may amend the same. No such rules and regulations shall take effect until approved by the City Council.
205.3 Reports. The Ambulance Advisory Board shall make such reports of its activities to the City Council as are requested by the Council from time to time.
205.4 Powers. The ambulance advisory board shall recommend to the city council for
approval: 1) compensation of ambulance crewmembers, 2) contracts for ambulance service with other cities, townships, and other service areas, 3) an ambulance director, training directors, and maintenance director to be appointed by the city council, 4) by-laws, and a policies and procedures manual for the
2-4
operation of the volunteer ambulance service, 5) rules and regulations necessary to carry on the business of the volunteer ambulance service, 6) an annual budget for operation of the ambulance service, and 7) such other acts as are necessary to carry on the business of the volunteer ambulance service.
205.5 Funds. For the purpose of carrying out the powers of the Ambulance Board, there shall be established in the City Treasury a special fund to be called the Ambulance Fund. The City Council may transfer to and from the fund such money as it shall consider necessary for the management and operation of said Ambulance Service. All monies obtained through the operation of said ambulance service shall be deposited in said fund. No withdrawal from said fund shall be made except by authority of the City Council.
206 LIBRARY BOARD. A City Library Board is hereby continued and shall be comprised of seven (7) members which shall be appointed by the Council, but not more than one (1) member of said Board shall be a Council Member.
206.1 Term of Office. Each member of the Board shall serve for three (3) years and all terms shall end with the annual year or until a successor is appointed and qualified. Any member may be removed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council after a hearing.
206.2 Organization of Board. Immediately after appointment, such Board shall meet and organize by electing one (1) of its members as President and one (1) as Secretary and from time to time it may appoint such other officers as it deems necessary.
206.3 Library Rules. The Board shall adopt such by-laws and regulations for the government of the library and for the conduct of its business as may be expedient and allowed by State Statutes.
206.4 Accounting. The Board shall in the same manner as the Council, audit claims to be paid from the Library Fund and shall submit to the Council its proposed budget for the forthcoming year.
206.5 Annual Report. The Board shall deliver to the Council its annual report for the operation of the library for the past annual year.
207 PLANNING COMMISSION. A City Planning Commission for the City of Plainview is hereby continued. The commission shall be a City Planning Agency authorized by Minnesota Statutes Section 462.354
207.1 Membership. The City Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members. The City Council may select up to two (2) members of the Planning Commission from its own membership. The members shall be appointed and may be removed by the Council.
207.2 Terms, Vacancies, Oath. Each member of the Board shall serve for three (3) years. Appointees shall hold their offices until their successors are appointed and qualified. Every appointed member shall before entering upon the discharge of his duties, take an oath that he will faithfully discharge the duties of his office.
207.3 Organization, Meetings, Etc. The commission shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson from among its appointed members for a term of one (1) year. The commission may create and fill such other offices as it may determine. The committee shall hold at least six (6) regular meetings each year. It shall adopt rules for the transaction and findings, which records shall be a public record. On or before the second regular City Council meeting in January of each year, the commission shall submit a
2-5
report to the Council of its work during the preceding calendar year. Expenditures shall be within the amount appropriated for the purpose by the City Council.
207.4 Powers and Duties. The Planning Commission shall have the powers and duties given planning agencies generally by law. The commission shall also exercise the duties conferred upon it by the City Code and by the Council. After the commission has prepared and adopted a comprehensive plan, the commission shall periodically, but at least once every three (3) years review the plan, as well as any Ordinances and any capital improvement program the Council has adopted to implement the plan. After such review, it shall to the extent it deems necessary, revise the comprehensive plan, adopt the amendments or the new comprehensive plan and recommend it to the Council in accordance with law. Similarly after such review, it shall recommend to the Council any amendments it deems desirable to the capital improvement program and any Ordinance implementing the plan.
207.5 Zoning Ordinances, Public Hearings. No Zoning Ordinance or amendment shall be adopted by the Council until a public hearing has been held thereon by the Planning Commission upon notice as provided in Minnesota Statutes Section 462.357 Subdivision 3.
207.6 Approval. Any subdivision plat, conditional use permit, or variance submitted to the Council for approval shall be referred to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation as required by State Statutes.
208 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY. An Economic Development Authority for the City of Plainview is hereby established as allowed by State Statute 469.
208.1 Membership. The EDA shall consist of seven (7) members. The City Council must appoint two (2) members of the board from its own membership. The members shall be appointed and may be removed by the Council.
208.2 Terms, Vacancies, Oath. Each member of the board shall serve for three (3) years. Appointees shall hold their offices until their successors are appointed and qualified. Every appointed member shall before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties, take an oath that he will faithfully discharge the duties of his office.
208.3 Organization, Meetings, Etc. The board shall elect a chairperson, a vice chairperson, and a secretary from among its appointed members for a term of one (1) year. The commission may create and fill such other offices as it may determine. The committee shall hold at least four (4) regular meetings each year.
208.4 Powers and Duties. The EDA shall have the powers established by their charter, as approved by the City Council as well as authority granted by applicable State Statutes.
209 CITY DEPARTMENTS, GENERAL ADMINISTRATION. The City Council has final authority over the activities of City Departments. Department heads are appointed to assist in carrying out the will of the City Council. All department heads are responsible for the enforcement of the City Code and City Policies, as well as State and Federal laws.
210 POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department is responsible for the protection and safety of the community through crime prevention, preserving peace, investigating crimes and providing emergency services.
2-6
210.1 Duties of the Police Chief. The Police Chief has responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the Police Department and its members. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the proper training and discipline of the members of the Police Department. Every member of the Police department is subordinate to the Chief of Police. The Police Chief is responsible for the day to day administration of the Police Department.
210.2 Duties of the Assistant Police Chief. The Assistant Police Chief has the authority to make command decisions in absence of the Chief of Police. When the Chief of Police is unavailable the Assistant Police Chief shall have the same authority as the Chief of Police on making command decisions.
210.3 Uniform and Badge. Each member of the department shall, while on duty, wear a suitable badge and uniform to be furnished by the City, except that the Chief may authorize the performance of specific duties while not in uniform. Police uniform shall comply with state requirements.
2104 Extra Police. In case of riot or other law enforcement emergency, the Chief of Police may work with the Fire Chief to temporarily assign Volunteer Firefighters as Special Police Officers. During such term of appointment, the Special Police Officers shall have only those powers and perform only those duties as specifically assigned by the Chief of Police.
210.5 Part Time Officers. To provide for proper police protection and to serve as police officers at special functions requiring the same, the Chief of Police may appoint such additional part time officers as is deemed necessary.
210.6 Authority to Perform Background Information. Upon request of the City Clerk or designee, the Police Department is authorized to provide certain criminal history data contained in the Minnesota Criminal Justice Information System. The data to be provided must only be about finalists for City positions of employment and license applicants (where applicable). The City Clerk or designee must obtain the consent of the finalists, in writing, before requesting the data, but an applicant’s failure to provide consent may disqualify the applicant from the prospective position.
211 FIRE DEPARTMENT. The Fire Department is responsible for the health and safety of the community through providing emergency fire response services.
211.1 Duties of the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief has sole responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the Fire Department and its members. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the proper training and discipline of the members of the Fire Department. Every member of the Fire Department is subordinate to the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief is responsible for the day to day administration of the Fire Department. The Fire Chief is also charged with the enforcement of all ordinances aimed at fire protection. The Fire Chief shall have full authority to inspect all premises and to cause the removal or abatement of all fire hazards. The Fire Chief shall have control over all fire fighting apparatus and shall be ultimately responsible for its care and condition.
211.2 Membership. The officers of the Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Chief, three (3) Assistant Fire Chiefs, and as many volunteers as the Council may from time to time deem necessary for the safety and protection of the City. The Chief and the Assistant Chiefs, and the firefighters shall be appointed by the Council upon recommendation of the Fire Department. Each officer and every other member of the department shall serve during good behavior and may be removed by the Council only for cause.
2-7
211.3 Records. The Fire Chief shall keep in convenient form a complete record of all fires. Such records shall include the time of the alarm, location of the fire, cause of the fire, if known, type of building, name of owner and tenant, purpose for which occupied, value of building and contents, members of the department responding to the alarm and such other information as he may deem advisable or as may be required from time to time.
211.4 Assistant Chief. In the absence or disability of the Chief, the Assistant Chiefs shall perform all the functions and exercise all of the authority of the Chief. The Assistant Chiefs shall be responsible for training, safety, and maintenance.
211.5 Firefighters. All firefighters shall be able-bodied and not less than eighteen (18) years of age. The Council may require that each candidate must satisfy certain minimum requirements and any other qualifications which may be specified by the Council.
211.6 Compensation. The members and officers of the Fire Department shall receive compensation as the Council may, from time to time, provide by Resolution.
211.7 Relief Association. The members and officers of the Fire Department may
organize themselves into a Firefighter's Relief Association in accordance with law. All members must abide by the relief association bylaws.
211.8 Interference with Department. It shall be unlawful for any person to give or make, or cause to be given or made, a fire alarm without probable cause, or neglect or refuse to obey any reasonable order of the Fire Chief at a fire or interfere with the Fire Department in the discharge of its duties.
212 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT. The Emergency Management Department is responsible for the health and safety of the community through emergency planning preparation and disaster preparedness.
212.1 Duties of the Emergency Management Director. The Emergency Management Director has sole responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the Emergency Management Department and its members. The Emergency Management Director shall be responsible for the proper training and discipline of the members of the Emergency Management Department. Every member of the Emergency Management Department is subordinate to the Emergency Management Director. The Emergency Management Director is responsible for the day to day administration of the Emergency Management Department. The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the Civil Defense Agency, subject to the direction and control of the City Council.
213 AMBULANCE DEPARTMENT. The Ambulance Department is responsible for the health and safety of the community through providing emergency response medical services.
213.1 Duties of the Ambulance Director. The Ambulance Director has sole responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the Ambulance Department and its members. The Ambulance Director shall be responsible for the proper training and discipline of the members of the Ambulance Department. Every member of the Ambulance Department is subordinate to the Ambulance Director. The Ambulance Director is responsible for the day to day administration of the Ambulance Department.
2-8
214 MUNICIPAL LIQUOR DEPARTMENT. The Liquor Department is responsible for regulating off sale intoxicating beverages sold in Plainview, as allowed by State law.
214.1 Duties of the Liquor Store Manager. The Liquor Store Manager has sole responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the Liquor Department and its members. The Liquor Store Manager shall be responsible for the proper training and discipline of the members of the Liquor Department. Every member of the Liquor Department is subordinate to the Liquor Store Manager. The Liquor Store Manager is responsible for the day to day administration of the Liquor Department.
215 LIBRARY DEPARTMENT. The Library Department is responsible for providing information for public use.
215.1 Duties of the Library Director. The Library Director has sole responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the Library Department and its members. The Library Director shall be responsible for the proper training and discipline of the members of the Library Department. Every member of the Library Department is subordinate to the Library Director. The Library Director is responsible for the day to day administration of the Library Department.
216 ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT. The Administration Department is responsible for the financial management and record keeping of the City, and issuing licenses and permits.
216.1 Duties of the Finance Director/City Clerk. The Finance Director/City Clerk has direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the Administration Department and its members. The Finance Director/City Clerk shall be responsible for the proper training and discipline of the members of the Administration Department. With the exception of the City Administrator, every member of the Administration department is subordinate to the Finance Director/City Clerk. The Finance Director/City Clerk is responsible for the day to day administration of the Administration Department. The Finance Director/City Clerk reports to the City Administrator.
216.2 Duties of the City Administrator. The City Administrator is the Chief Executive Officer of the City and is responsible for advising the City Council, including needed legislation for the welfare of the citizens of Plainview and for the smooth operation of the City government.
217 PUBLIC WORKS. The Public Works Department is responsible for the management of streets, sidewalks, ice and snow removal, storm-water, water system, wastewater collection system, parks, recreation, pool, skating rinks, and cemetery, as well as maintenance of City buildings as required/requested (City Hall, Liquor Store, Library, Fire Hall, and Ambulance Building).
217.1 Duties of the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director has sole responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the Public Works Department and its members. The Public Works Director shall be responsible for the proper training and discipline of the members of the Public Works Department. Every member of the Public Works department is subordinate to the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director is responsible for the day to day administration of the Public Works Department.
218 CITY POLICIES. City Council may create city polices in order to provide guidelines necessary to keep the City functioning smoothly.
218.1 Personnel Policy. All employees, whether full time, part time, or volunteer, shall be subject to the regulations and guidelines established by the City Personnel Policy. A copy of the
2-9
personnel policy shall be available for employees to review. The Personnel Policy shall outline the City’s process for recruitment, termination, and other human resource issues necessary for the operation of the City. The contents of the Personnel Policy do not constitute a contract and are not binding.
219 COMPENSATION. Officials and employees of the City shall be compensated at a rate as
established from time to time by the City Council.
220 ELECTED OFFICIAL TRAVEL. The City of Plainview recognizes that its elected officials may at times receive value from traveling for workshops, conferences, events and other assignments. This section sets forth the conditions under which travel will be reimbursed by the City.
220.1 Advanced Approval by the City Council. The event, workshop, conference or
assignment must be approved in advance by the City Council at an open meeting and must include an estimate of the cost of the travel. In evaluating the travel request, the Council will consider the following:
A Whether the elected official will be receiving training on issues relevant to the city or to his or her role as the Mayor or as a council member.
B Whether the elected official will be meeting and networking with other elected officials from around the country to exchange ideas on topics of relevance to the City or on the official roles of local elected officials.
C Whether the elected official will be viewing a city facility or function that is similar in nature to one that is currently operating at, or under consideration by the City where the purpose for the trip is to study the facility or function to bring back ideas for the consideration of the full council.
D Whether the elected official has been specifically assigned by the Council to visit another city for the purpose of establishing a goodwill relationship such as a “sister-city” relationship.
E Whether the elected official has been specifically assigned by the Council to testify on behalf of the city at the United States Congress or to otherwise meet with federal officials on behalf of the city.
F Whether the city has sufficient funding available in the budget to pay the cost of the trip.
G No reimbursements will be made for attendance at events sponsored by or affiliated with political parties.
220.2 Payment. The city may make payments in advance for airfare, lodging and registration if specifically approved by the council. Otherwise all payments will be made as reimbursements to the elected official. The City will reimburse for transportation, lodging, meals, registration, and incidental costs using the same procedures, limitations and guidelines outlined below:
A Airfare will be reimbursed at the coach rate.
B Mileage will be reimbursed at the IRS rate. If two or more council members travel together by car, only the driver will receive reimbursement. The city will reimburse for the cost of renting an automobile if necessary to conduct city business.
C Lodging and meal costs are limited to those which are reasonable and necessary.
D Receipts are required for lodging, airfare, and meals and should accompany an expense report form. It is not necessary to have receipts for cabs and tips. The expense report form shall be submitted to the City Clerk for payment.
E The city will not reimburse for alcoholic beverages, personal telephone calls, costs associated with the attendance of a family member, rental of luxury vehicles, meal expenses included in the cost of registration, or recreational expenses such as golf or tennis.
2-10
221 FEES AND CHARGES. The City Council may enact an ordinance establishing those fees and charges that are authorized by this code. Until that ordinance becomes effective, all fees and charges established by ordinance or resolution prior to the adoption of this code shall remain in effect. All fees and charges established by the ordinance establishing fees and charges may be amended from time to time by amendment of that ordinance.
3-1
300 PUBLIC WORKS
301 STREET DESIGNATION. Streets within the city limits of the City of Plainview shall be designated in accordance with the Ordinance. The City Council shall issue street names; names shall not duplicate the names of other streets. All street names shall be in conformance with the current system of assigning numerical names, i.e. 7th Street NE. The creation of any new street within the City or annexation or addition thereto, shall bear a designation consistent with the street designation system established by this Ordinance with reference to the following rules:
301.1 Center Reference Point. The intersection of Minnesota State Trunk Highway Nos. 42 and 247, is hereby declared to be the center reference point of the street designation system.
301.2 Avenues and Streets. All roads running East and West shall be designated avenues. All roads running North and South shall be designated streets. All streets and avenues are to be designed so that they run perpendicular to each other.
301.3 Numerical Sequence. All streets or avenues shall be designated in numerical sequence from the center reference point as defined above so far as is practical and consistent with existing numerical designations.
301.4 Directional Designation. All streets and avenues shall bear the directional designation: Northeast (NE), Southeast (SE), Northwest (NW) or Southwest (SW), in accordance with the direction such street or avenue lies from the center reference point.
302 PROPERTY ADDRESS NUMBERING. A uniform system of numbering properties and principal buildings is hereby adopted for the use in the City of Plainview in order to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents.
302.1 Posting Numbers Required. All property owners of parcels containing buildings within the City limits shall post the official numbers for each principal building on the front of the building in a manner as to be visible from the street on which the property is located.
302.1.1 Multiple Front Entrances. In case a principal building is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance of a building shall bear a separate number.
302.1.2 View Obscured. If a house or principal building is obscured from view of the
street of an address by accessory buildings, trees, shrubbery or other visual obstruction, or is otherwise not visible from the street, the numbers must be displayed from a permanent mounting on the property so they are clearly visible from the street of address.
302.1.3 Final Determination. A final determination as to visibility will be made by the
Police Department.
302.2 Specifications for Posting Numbers. All property owners shall post the address numbers on the buildings in accordance with the following requirements: 1) All numbers shall be a minimum of 3 inches in height, but 4 inches in height is preferred, 2) numbers shall be visible from the street, 3) within 60 days of notification of assigned numbers, owner shall permanently place the assigned number on the structure, and 4) the numbers shall be made of metal, glass, plastic or other durable material, preferably reflective.
302.3. City Clerk-Implement System. The City Clerk is hereby authorized to implement this section by disseminating information regarding number designations by any appropriate means.
3-2
302.4. Penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate this ordinance by failing to affix proper numbering system or affixing unauthorized numbers or to fail to maintain the required visibility of address numbers. A violation of this section shall constitute a petty misdemeanor.
303 HEAVY VEHICLE ROUTES
303.1 Heavy Traffic Streets. The following streets and avenues and portions thereof
in the City of Plainview are hereby designated as heavy traffic streets: 1). West Broadway Avenue, 2) East Broadway Avenue, 3) Tenth Street Southwest (10th St. SW), 4) Second Avenue Southwest (2nd Ave. SW), between Tenth Street Southwest (10th St. SW) and Ninth Street Southwest (9th St. SW), 5) Ninth Street Southwest (9th St. SW), 6) Tenth Street Northwest (10th St. NW), 7) Third Street Southwest (3rd St. SW), 8) North Wabasha St, and 9) South Wabasha St. The Public Works Director is directed to post signs upon those streets and avenues herein designated as heavy vehicle streets and avenues at appropriate places indicating the character of said streets and avenues. The Council by Resolution may designate additional streets and avenues for heavy vehicles and direct the Public Works Director to post appropriate signs thereon.
303.2 Traffic Restricted. Whenever possible, all heavy vehicles carrying a weight of
four (4) ton or more per axle, shall travel in the City of Plainview only upon the streets, avenues, and routes designated for heavy vehicles.
303.3 Heavy Vehicle Parking. All heavy vehicles carrying a weight of four (4) ton or more
per axle shall be allowed to park overnight from 8:00 pm to 6:00 am only on designated heavy vehicle routes, unless specifically signed or marked as no parking. All heavy vehicles carrying a weight of four (4) ton or more per axle are not allowed to park on non-designated heavy vehicle routes, or alley and public parking lots at any time, other than to load or unload products or goods. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to park any heavy vehicle on any city street at any time not specifically authorized in this ordinance. All vehicles must be removed from streets during snow removal operations.
303.4 Special Permit. In case of emergency or necessity, the City Council upon
written application setting forth all pertinent facts as to weight of load, time and streets, avenues and routes to be traveled, may issue a special permit for a single trip or for a limited period, for the moving of vehicles, or buildings, or equipment, or contrivance on any of the streets, avenues and all alleys of the City of Plainview under such terms and restrictions as said Council in said permit shall specify.
303.5 Damages. Any person(s) driving or moving any vehicle, building, object or
conveyance upon any street, avenue, or alley in the City of Plainview is liable for damages incurred to such street, avenue, or alley whether used legally or illegally.
303.6 Seasonal Weight Restrictions. The Public Works Director may prohibit the operation of vehicles upon any public roadway under his jurisdiction or impose weight restrictions on vehicles to be operated on such public roadway, whenever the public roadway, by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions, will be seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles on the street is prohibited or the permissible weights thereof reduced. The Public Works Director shall erect and maintain signs plainly indicating the prohibition or restriction at each end of that portion of the public roadway effected. No person shall operate a vehicle on a posted public roadway in violation of the prohibition or restriction.
303.7 Semi-Trailer Parking. No person shall allow a semi-trailer by itself (without the tractor) to stand or be parked for any length of time on any street, in the City, except in an emergency or
3-3
in order to change tractors. This practice, known as “dollying down” is prohibited due to the potential damage to road surfaces.
304 PARKING ON PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY
304.1 West Broadway. No person shall park or leave unattended a truck-tractor, farm tractor, road tractor, trailer, semi- trailer, or implement of husbandry upon West Broadway between the intersections of 5th Street and extending East to the intersection of 1st Street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily. For purposes of this ordinance, the terms "truck-tractor, farm tractor, road tractor, trailer, semi- trailer, and implement of husbandry" shall mean those terms as defined under Minnesota Statutes S169.01.
304.2 Winter Parking.
304.2.1 To protect the citizen’s general health, safety and welfare and to facilitate snow removal, it shall be unlawful to park, or permit any vehicle or trailer to remain parked, upon any alley or street from November 1st to April 1st between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. or until streets are plowed from curb to curb during or following any snow fall which accumulates over two (2) inches of snow.
304.2.2 In the event of a continuous and/or substantial snowfall, a citywide “snow emergency” may be declared by the Public Works Director or his/her designee. It shall be unlawful to park on any city street during the time in which a snow emergency has been declared, until such time as the snow emergency is rescinded.
304.3 Establishment of Traffic Control Measures. The City Council may establish safety zones, lanes of traffic, and stop intersections, to assist in the direction and control of traffic to improve safe driving conditions at any intersection or dangerous location, and to warn pedestrians or drivers of motor vehicles of dangerous conditions or other hazards. The City Council may order installation by the Public Works Director of stop signs, yield signs, warning signs, signals, pavement markings, or other devices. No regulation may be established on a Trunk Highway unless the consent of the MnDOT is first secured. No regulation may be established on a County Highway unless the consent of the Wabasha County Highway Engineer is first secured.
304.4 Time Limit Parking. The City Council may by Resolution designate certain areas where the right to park is limited during hours specified. The Public Works Director shall mark by appropriate signs, each zone so designated. During the hours specified on the sign, no person shall park a vehicle in any limited parking zone for a, longer period than is so specified.
304.5 Angle and Parallel Parking. All parking shall be parallel, except where the City Council provides for angle parking by Resolution. Where angle parking is allowed, the Public Works Director shall erect and maintain signs plainly indicating such angle parking.
304.6 No Parking, Stopping or Standing Zones. The City Council may by Resolution designate certain streets or portion of streets as no parking or no stopping or standing zones and may limit the hours in which the restrictions apply. The Public Works Director shall mark by appropriate signs each zone so designated. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control device, no person shall stop or park a vehicle in an established no stopping or standing zone when stopping or standing is prohibited. No vehicles shall be parked in the no parking zone during hours when parking is prohibited except that a vehicle may be parked temporarily in such zone for the purpose of forming a funeral procession and a truck may be parked temporarily between the hours of 6:00 o'clock A.M. and 8:00 o'clock P.M. of any business day for the purpose of loading or unloading where access to the premises is not otherwise available.
3-4
304.7 Impoundment. Any police officer may remove a vehicle, equipment, or other obstruction, from a street to a garage or other place of safety, when the vehicle, equipment, or other obstruction, is left unattended and constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hinders snow removal or street improvement or maintenance operation. Such vehicle, equipment, or other obstruction, shall not be released until the fees for towing and/or removal and storage are paid in addition to any fine imposed for a violation of this Ordinance
304.8 Violations. Violation of City Code 304 shall constitute petty misdemeanors. The Plainview Police Department shall enforce the provisions of these ordinances and shall issue a notice of violation to offenders on such form as the City may prescribe. If the fine for said violations is not paid within 48 hours of issuance of a notice of violation, the City shall issue a uniform traffic citation and certify the violation to Wabasha District Court as a petty misdemeanor. Fines for violations shall be established by resolution of the City Council. Section 304.8 is not intended to limit the authority of the City to remove vehicles as authorized in Section 304.7.
305 STREET EXCAVATIONS - All excavations in public streets in the City, except when done by City employees or contractor performing work under a contract with the City, shall be done in accordance with this Ordinance.
305.1 Permit Required for Excavation. No person, except as hereinafter provided, shall make any excavation in a street, alley, sidewalk or public ground without first having secured a building permit from the City. The City may require that the applicant to fully restore the street to its pre-existing condition.
305.2 Application and Regulations. Application for permits shall be made in writing on the form provided for that purpose by the City. The forms shall set forth the permanent regulations applicable to the permit as prepared by the City Council or Public Works Director and as modified with respect to the particular work covered by the permit. The City Council, with the assistance of the Public Works Director, shall prepare such rules and regulations with the respect to excavations as they find necessary to protect the public from injury, prevent damage to public or private property and minimize interference with the public use of streets, alleys, sidewalks and public grounds. Any person making an excavation covered by this Ordinance shall comply with the minimum safety standards established by OSHA.
305.3 Refilling Excavations. Any permitee, except a public utility corporation, shall file with the City Clerk, a Corporate Surety Bond in the amount of Five Hundred Thousand and no/100 Dollars ($500,000.00), conditioned that the permitee will: 1) perform the work in accordance with the applicable Ordinances and regulations; 2) Indemnify the City and hold it harmless from all damage caused in the execution of such work; and 3) Pay all costs and damages suffered by the City by reason of the failure of the permitee to observe the terms of applicable Ordinances and regulations or because of negligence in execution of the work, and 4) the Bond shall be approved as to form and legality by the City Attorney. Any permitee, except a public utility corporation, shall furnish proof that the permitee has in existence, an insurance policy protecting him from liability to the public, including the City, to an amount equal to the maximum claim the City might be required to pay under Minnesota Statutes Chapter 466.
305.4 General Regulations for Excavations. Street excavations shall be made in a manner that will cause the least inconvenience to the public. Provisions shall be made for the passage of water along the gutters and at least one-half (1/2) of the traveled portion of the street shall be left open and in good condition for the safe passage of vehicles, unless otherwise provided in the permit. Open excavations shall be guarded with substantial barriers and marked with amber lights or flashing devices and 6” by 4” reflective tape and cones. Pipes or mains exposed to freezing temperatures shall be protected so as to prevent freezing. Any person responsible for exposing a city main or pipe and damages occur
3-5
related to, shall be liable to the City for all damages caused by such freezing and all damages sustained to others entites for which the City may be liable.
305.5 Refilling Excavation. Every street excavation shall be refilled as soon as
possible after the work is completed and paving sidewalks and appurtenances shall be replaced in at least as good condition as before the excavation to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. All dirt and debris shall be removed immediately. Any person who fails to comply with these requirements within twenty-four (24) hours after notice from the City, shall be liable to the City for the full cost incurred by the City in remedying the violation and restoring the street, sidewalk, alley or public ground to its proper condition. The cost shall be an obligation of the surety on the bond of the permitee.
305.6 Emergency Excavations. In case of an emergency or on Sundays or legal holidays, when an immediate excavation may be necessary for the protection of public or private property, the same shall be reported to the Public Works Department, which shall grant permission to make the necessary excavation upon the express condition that an application be made in the manner herein provided on or before noon of the following business day.
306 CONSRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS - All sidewalks currently located within the city limits and all future sidewalks constructed within said city limits and all repairs made upon existing or new sidewalks shall be in accordance with this Section.
306.1 Construction Permit Required. No sidewalk or curb and gutter shall be constructed on any street, alley, avenue or other public property without first having obtained a permit from the City Council. Application for such permit shall be made on forms approved by the City Council, and made available at City Hall, and shall sufficiently describe the contemplated improvements and the date of commencement and completion of work. No permit shall be required for any improvement to be installed by the City. All construction shall be in accordance with the specifications and regulations as adopted by the City Council and on file in the office of the City Clerk. All reimbursements to private property owners for the construction of new sidewalk or the replacement of existing sidewalks shall be in accordance with the regulations adopted by the City Council and filed in the office of the City Clerk.
306.2 Duty to Repair. The owner of any property within the city abutting a public sidewalk shall keep the sidewalk in repair and safe for pedestrians. Repairs shall be made in accordance with the standard specifications approved by the council and on file in the office of the city clerk.
306.3 Sidewalk Replacement Costs to be Shared. For all replacement sidewalk construction in the city, the city shall share in payment of the cost of the sidewalk replacement. Following the approval of a construction permit, proper construction of said sidewalk, and submittal of paid invoice from property owner, the City shall pay $2.50 per running foot for residential sidewalks (typically 5 feet in width) and $3.50 per running foot for commercial/industrial sidewalks (typically 8 feet in width). The City shall not share in the cost of new sidewalk construction in any area where there is not already existing sidewalk.
306.4 Cost to be Shared, Corner Lot Sidewalks.
306.4.1 Replacement of Corner Lot Sidewalks. For all replacement sidewalk
construction in the City of Plainview involving corner lot sidewalks, the owner shall be responsible for seventy percent (70%) of the costs of the corner lot sidewalk, and the City of Plainview shall share in payment of the costs of construction and shall pay thirty percent (30%) of the total costs of the construction. This reimbursement is provided that both sides are done at the same time.
306.4.2 Definition of Corner Lot Sidewalks. For purposes of this section, "corner lot sidewalks" shall mean all sidewalks extending over and across the length or width of any lot in the City which is
3-6
bounded on at least two sides by a street or highway, with the intersection of said streets and/or highways occurring at a corner of said lot, but shall not refer to the sidewalk extending across the front yard of said lot.
306.5 Removal of Sidewalk. No sidewalks, once constructed, shall be allowed to be permanently removed.
307 REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE ON SIDEWALKS. All snow and ice remaining
upon public sidewalks is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, and shall be abated within twenty four (24) hours after such snow or ice has ceased to be deposited. In the case of snow and ice remaining on sidewalks, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of such building to remove the snow and ice.
307.1 Public Works Director to Remove Snow and Ice. The Public Works Director
Has the authority to remove all snow and ice for all public sidewalks twenty-four (24) hours after any snow or ice has ceased to fall. The Public Works Director shall keep a record of the cost of said removal and the lot or lots adjacent to which such accumulations were found and removed, and shall deliver such information to the City Clerk as soon as the work of removal is completed.
307.2 Cost of Removal to be Assessed. The Public Works Director shall calculate the cost of the removal of snow or ice against the lot or parcels of ground abutting on alleys or streets or other public property which were cleared. The sum is to be billed to the appropriate property owner(s). If the bill is not paid within 60 days, the City Clerk shall, upon direction of the City Council, certify with the County Auditor the amount for collection as other special taxes are certified and collected. For purposes of this Section, the City Council shall annually establish by resolution the hourly rate to be applied for removal of such ice and snow by the City Public Works Director
307.3 Civil Suit for Cost of Removal. The Clerk, shall at the direction of the Council, bring suit in any Court of competent jurisdiction to recover the cost of said clearing and the cost of suit in a civil action from the person owning land adjacent to which-sidewalks were cleared
307.4 Public Works Director to Report Sidewalks Cleared. The Public Works Director shall present to the Council at its first meeting after any snow or ice has been cleared from the sidewalks as provided, and shall request the Council to determine by Resolution whether the procedure provided in Section 307.1 or Section 307.2 of this Ordinance shall be followed.
308 REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE ON ALLEYS, STREETS, AVENUES, OR OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY. It shall be unlawful for any private property owner or occupant to push, pile, or otherwise deposit snow or ice from his or her property onto the City’s alleys, streets, avenues, or other public property.
308.1 Public Works Director to Remove Snow and Ice. The City Street
Public Works Director shall give written or oral notice to any such property owner or occupant found to be pushing, piling, or depositing snow and ice onto the City streets or alleys or other public property, to remove said ice or snow from the street or alley within 24 hours after the time of notice. After said 24 hour period, the Public Works Director shall remove from the alley or street all snow and ice which may be discovered thereon and which has been determined to have come from adjacent private property. The Public Works Director shall keep a record of the time necessary for said removal and legal description of the lot or lots adjacent to which such accumulations were found and removed, and shall deliver such information to the Clerk as soon as the work of removal is completed.
3-7
308.2 Cost of Removal to be Assessed. The Public Works Director shall calculate the cost of the removal of snow or ice against the lot or parcels of ground abutting on alleys or streets or other public property which were cleared. The sum is to be billed to the appropriate property owner(s). If the bill is not paid within 60 days, the City Clerk shall, upon direction of the City Council, certify with the County Auditor the amount for collection as other special taxes are certified and collected. For purposes of this Section, the City Council shall annually establish by resolution the hourly rate to be applied for removal of such ice and snow by the City Public Works Director.
308.3 Civil Suit for Cost of Removal. The Clerk shall, upon direction of the Council, bring suit in any Court of competent jurisdiction to recover from the person owning or occupying land adjacent to which alleys or streets were cleared the cost of said clearing and the cost of suit in a civil action.
309 SHADE AND ORNAMENTAL TREES
309.1 Boulevard Trees and Public Works Director Authority To Control Trees. The Public Works Director shall have, under the direction of the City Council, control and supervision over all trees bordering or overhanging all public streets, alleys and highways, and all grass plots bordering public streets, alleys and highways. The word "tree" as used herein shall be deemed to include shrubs.
309.2 Public Works Director To Order Work Done. Whenever the Public Works Director shall find that any tree as described in 309.1 needs trimming, removal, treatment or other care in order to preserve the tree in good condition or to protect the public from damage or injury, the Public Works Director shall see that the necessary work is done and shall keep an account of the cost of such work and submit to the City Clerk.
309.3 Permit to Plant Trees in Public Ground. The Public Works Director shall keep a list of trees that are approved to be planted on public ground. Any person desiring to plant any tree or trees in any public ground shall submit an application to the Public Works Director. If the Public Works Director, approves the location, number, and type of trees, he/she shall issue the permit. If he/she does not approve such application, the applicant may appeal his/her disapproval to the Council, whose action shall be final. Public ground shall mean all streets, avenues, and alleys and their respective right-of-ways, as well as property owned by the City, such as parks, lots, and parking areas.
309.4 Trees and Vegetation Menacing Public Safety to be Reported. Every property owner whose property abuts on a public street shall notify the Public Works Director at once when the condition of any tree thereon or in the grass plot adjacent thereto is in such condition as to be a menace to public safety. Any tree shall not overhang closer than thirteen (13) feet above the surface of any street, or overhang closer than eight (8) feet above a public sidewalk; all such trees are hereby declared to be a menace to public safety. Any tree, hedge, shrub, or similar vegetation that impedes the ability of pedestrians to use a public sidewalk is hereby declared to be a menace to public safety. If a tree or other vegetation becomes a menace to public safety the Council shall notify the owner to remove or trim the same. If said owner fails to do so within thirty (30) days the Council shall order the required work done. The cost of such removal or trimming shall be assessed against the abutting property.
309.5 Tree Topping. It is unlawful for any person or organization to top any tree on any public right of way or public property. Topping is defined as “the cutting of an older branch or stem back to a stub or lateral branch not sufficiently large enough to assume the terminal role within the tree’s crown, to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree”.
310 SHADE TREE PEST CONTROL.
3-8
310.1 Declaration of policy. The health of the trees in the city is threatened by shade tree pests, and the loss or ill health of trees growing upon public and private property substantially depreciates the value of property within the city and impairs the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the public. In addition to and in accordance with Minn. Stat. §§ 89.001, 89.01, and 89.51-.64, the provisions of this section are adopted as an effort to control and prevent the spread of these shade tree pests.
310.2 Jurisdiction. The city shall have control of all street trees, shrubs, and other plantings now or hereafter in any street, park, public right-of-way or easement, or other public place within the city limits, and shall have the power to plant, care for, maintain, remove, and replace such trees, shrubs, and other plantings.
310.3 Declaration of a shade tree pests. The Council may by ordinance declare any vertebrate or invertebrate animal, plant pathogen, or plant in the community threatening to cause significant damage to a shade tree or community forest, as defined by Minn. Stat. § 89.001, to be a shade tree pest and prescribe control measures to effectively eradicate, control, or manage the shade tree pest, including necessary timelines for action.
310.3.1 Declaration of a shade tree pest - Oak Wilt.
(A) Oak wilt disease is a shade tree pest and is defined as any living or dead tree, log, firewood, limb, branch, stump, or other portion of a tree from any species of the genus Quercus existing within the control area defined that has bark attached and that exceeds three (3) inches in diameter or ten (10) inches in circumference and contains to any degree any spore or reproductive structures of the fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum.
(B) Control measures that may be taken to abate oak wilt disease are:
(1) Installation of a root graft barrier.
A root graft barrier can be ordered installed to prevent the underground spread of oak wilt disease. The city will mark the location of the root graft barrier. The barrier disrupts transmission of the fungus within the shared vascular systems of root grafted trees. The barrier is created by excavating or vibratory plowing a line at least forty-two (42) inches deep between any oak tree infected with oak wilt disease and each nearby and apparently healthy oak tree within fifty (50) feet of the infected tree.
(2) Removal and disposal of trees.
(a) On property zoned for residential and commercial use.
On property that is zoned residential and commercial the city may mark for removal trees that have the potential to produce spores of the fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum. After, and in no case before, the installation of the root graft barrier and no later than May 1 of the year following infection, all marked trees must be
3-9
felled. The stump from such felled trees must not extend more than three inches above the ground or, if taller, must be completely debarked.
If, however, after the city prescribes the location for a root graft barrier, the city determines that installation of the barrier is impossible because of the presence of pavement or obstructions such as a septic system or utility line, the city may mark for removal all oak trees whether living or dead, infected or not and located between an infected tree and the marked barrier location. These marked trees must be felled and disposed of no later than May 1 of the year following infection. The stump from such felled trees must not extend more than three inches above the ground or, if taller, must be completely debarked.
(b) On all other property.
On all other property, the city may mark for removal all oak trees whether living or dead, infected or not and located between an infected tree and the marked barrier location. These marked trees must be felled and disposed of no later than May 1 of the year following infection. The stump from such felled trees must not extend more than three inches above the ground or, if taller, must be completely debarked.
All wood more than three (3) inches in diameter or ten (10) inches in circumference from such felled trees must be disposed of by burying, debarking, chipping, or sawing into wane-free lumber, or by splitting into firewood, stacking the firewood, and immediately covering the woodpile with unbroken four (4)-mill or thicker plastic sheeting that is sealed into the ground until October 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the tree was felled, or by burning before May 1 of the year following infection. Wood chips from infected trees may be stockpiled or immediately used in the landscape.
(C) The control area for oak wilt disease is defined as: All lands within the boundaries of the city.
310.3.2 Declaration of a shade tree pest - Emerald Ash Borer.
(A) Emerald ash borer is a shade tree pest and is defined as an insect that attacks and kills ash trees. The adults are small, iridescent green beetles that live outside of trees during the summer months. The larvae are grub- or worm-like and live underneath the bark of ash trees.
(B) Control measures that may be taken to manage and abate emerald ash borer are [those currently advised by the University of Minnesota Extension website at http://www.extension.umn.edu/garden/insects/find/emerald-ash-borer/#management and the Emerald Ash Borer Information Network at http://www.emeraldashborer.info/resources.php].
(C) Definition of control areas. The control area for emerald ash borer is defined as: All lands within the boundaries of the city.
3-10
310.3.3 Declaration of a shade tree pest - Dutch Elm Disease.
(A) Dutch elm disease is a shade tree pest and is defined as a disease of elm trees caused by the fungus Ophiostoma ulmi or Ophiostoma novo-ulmi, and includes any living or dead tree, log, firewood, limb, branch, stump, or other portion of a tree from any species of the genus Ulmus existing within the control area defined that has bark attached and that exceeds three (3) inches in diameter or ten (10) inches in circumference and could contain bark beetles or any spore or reproductive structures of the fungus Ophiostoma ulmi or Ophiostoma novo-ulmi.
(B) Control measures that may be taken to abate Dutch elm disease are:
(1) Use of fungicide.
Fungicides may be effective in preventing Dutch elm disease when injected into living trees that do not already show symptoms of Dutch elm disease. Fungicide injections on private lands are optional and, if performed, are at the landowner’s expense.
(2) Removal and disposal of trees.
Prompt removal of diseased trees or branches reduces breeding sites for elm bark beetles and eliminates the source of Dutch elm disease fungus. Trees that wilt before July 15 must be removed within 30 days of detection. Trees that wilt after July 15 must be removed by April 1 of the following year. Diseased trees not promptly removed will be removed by the city at the landowner’s expense. Wood may be retained for use as firewood or saw logs if it is debarked or covered from April 15 to Oct. 15 with four (4)-mill plastic. The edges of the cover must be buried or sealed to the ground.
(C) Definition of control areas. The control area for Dutch elm disease is defined as: All lands within the boundaries of the city.
310.4 Public nuisances defined. A shade tree pest, as defined by Section 310.3 occurring within a defined control zone is a public nuisance.
310.5 Shade tree pest nuisances are unlawful. It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as defined in this section to remain on any premises the person owns or controls within the city. The nuisance may be abated as provided in this section.
310.6 Tree inspector. The Council hereby appoints the Public Works Director as tree inspector to coordinate the activities of the city relating to the control and prevention of damage by shade tree pests. The tree inspector will recommend to the Council the details of any program for the declaration, control, and prevention of shade tree pests. The tree inspector is authorized to enforce or cause to be enforced the tasks incident to such a program adopted by the Council. The term “tree inspector” includes any person designated by Council or the tree inspector to carry out activities authorized in this section.
310.7 Abatement of shade tree pest nuisances. In abating a nuisance, defined by ordinance under section 301.3, the organism, condition, plant, tree, wood, or material identified as injurious
3-11
to the health of shade trees shall be removed or effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of the shade tree pest. Such abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance with the control measures and areas prescribed by Section 301.3.
310.8 Reporting discovery of shade tree pest. Any owner or occupier of land or any person engaged in tree trimming or removal who becomes aware of the existence of a public nuisance caused by a shade tree pest as defined under Section 301.3 shall report the same to the city.
310.9 Registration of tree care firms. Any person, firm, or corporation that provides tree care, tree trimming, or removal of trees, limbs, branches, brush, or shrubs for hire must be registered with the Minnesota commissioner of Agriculture under Minn. Stat. § 18G.07.
310.10 Inspection and application of control measures.
(A) The tree inspector is authorized to inspect premises and places within the city to determine whether shade tree pests exist thereon and to investigate all reported incidents of shade tree pests. The tree inspector is authorized to take all reasonable measures to prevent the maintenance of public nuisances and may enforce the provisions relating to abatement in this section. Diagnosis of shade tree pests may be by the presence of commonly recognized symptoms; by tests as may be recommended by the commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Agriculture or the commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources; or other reliable means.
(B) Except in situations of imminent danger to human life and safety, the tree inspector shall not enter private property for the purpose of inspecting or preventing maintenance of public nuisances without the permission of the owner, resident, or other person in control of the property, unless the tree inspector has obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing the entry.
(C) No person, firm, or corporation shall interfere with the tree inspector or with anyone acting under the tree inspector’s authority while engaged in activities authorized by this section.
310.11 Standard abatement procedure. Except as provided in Sections 310.12 and 310.14, whenever a tree inspector determines with reasonable certainty that a public nuisance, as described by this ordinance, is being maintained or exists on premises in the city, the tree inspector is authorized to abate a public nuisance according to the procedures in this section.
(A) The tree inspector will notify in writing the owner of record of the premises that a public nuisance exists and order that the nuisance be terminated or abated. The notice may be given in person or by mail. Failure of any party to receive the mail does not invalidate the service of the notice. A copy of the notice shall be filed with the city clerk.
(B) The notice of abatement shall state that unless the public nuisance is abated by the owner, it will be abated by the city at the expense of the owner. The notice shall specify the control measures to be taken to abate the nuisance and provide a reasonable amount of time to abate the nuisance. The notice will also state that the owner has the right to appeal the determination that a public nuisance exists by submitting a request in writing to the city clerk
3-12
within seven (7) days after service of the notice, or before the date by which abatement must be completed, whichever comes first.
(C) If no timely appeal is submitted, and the control measures prescribed in the notice of abatement are not complied with within the time provided by the notice or any additional time granted, the tree inspector or designated person shall have the authority to obtain permission or an administrative search warrant, enter the property, and carry out abatement in accordance with the notice of abatement.
310.12 High-cost abatement. If the tree inspector determines that the cost of abating a nuisance will exceed $5,000 based on a reasonable, good faith estimate, the written notice referred to in Section 310.11 must provide that if the nuisance is not abated within the reasonable amount of time provided, the matter will be referred to the City Council for a hearing. The date, time, and location of the hearing must be provided in the notice.
310.13 Appeal procedure. If the city clerk receives a written request for a hearing on the question of whether a public nuisance exists, the City Council shall hold a hearing within fourteen (14) calendar days following receipt by the clerk of the written request. At least three (3) days notice of the hearing shall be given to the individual who made the written request for the hearing. The Council may modify the abatement notice or extend the time by which abatement must be completed. Each owner, agent of the owner, occupant, and lienholder of the subject property or properties in attendance, if any, shall be given the opportunity to present evidence at the hearing. After holding the hearing, the City Council may issue an order requiring abatement of the nuisance, upon a majority vote of the City Council present at the hearing.
310.14 Abatement procedure in event of imminent danger.
(A) If the tree inspector determines that the danger of infestation to other shade trees is imminent, and delay in control measures may put public health, safety, or welfare in immediate danger, the tree inspector may provide for abatement without following Section 310.11 or 310.12. The tree inspector must reasonably attempt to notify the owner of the affected property of the intended action and the right to appeal the abatement and any cost recovery at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting.
(B) Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition that poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.
310.15 Recovery of cost of abatement; liability and assessment.
(A) The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been completed and the cost determined, the city clerk or other official shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the city clerk.
(B) After notice and hearing, as provided in Minn. Stat. § 429.061 (which may be amended from time to time), the city clerk shall, on or before Sept. 1 next following abatement of the
3-13
nuisance, list the total unpaid charges as well as other charges for current services to be assessed under Minn. Stat. § 429.101 against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable. The City Council shall then certify the charges against the property to the county auditor for collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments as the City Council may determine in each case.
310.16 Penalty.
(A) Any person, firm, or corporation that violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty, which may be imposed for any crime that is a misdemeanor under this section, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.
(B) Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
(C) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this section shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.
(D) In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any person, firm, or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this section, the City Council or any official designated by it may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct, or abate the violation.
310.17 Severability. Should any part or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part held to be invalid.
311 WEEDS AND GRASS. The following are declared to be a nuisance affecting public health.
311.1 Definition of Terms. The word "weeds" as used in this Ordinance shall be construed to mean and include not only such noxious weeds as are described in Chapter 21.72 of the General Statutes of the State of Minnesota for the year 2005, but also such useless and troublesome plants as are commonly known as weeds to the general public. The word "weeds" shall also be construed to mean all rank vegetable growth which exhales unpleasant or noxious odors, and also high and rank vegetable growth that may conceal filthy deposits. The word “weed inspector” means the Mayor, as required by State Statute. The word “assistant weed inspector” means the Public Works Director or his/her designee.
311.2 Duty of Property Owner. Every owner of platted property abutting on any
platted public street or alley shall cause the grass and weeds to be cut from the line of such property nearest to such street or alley to the center of such street or alley. If the grass or weeds in such a place are twelve (12) inches or more in height, it shall be prima-facie evidence of a violation of this Section. However, property which is contained on a platted outlot and which is actively being used for an agricultural use (i.e. growing crops) is exempt from the grass and weed control and removal requirements contained in this section.
3-14
311.3 Nuisance. Any weed or grass growing upon any lot or parcel of land in the City of Plainview to a greater height than twelve (12) inches or which have gone, or are about to go to seed, are hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the health, safety and good order of the City.
311.4 Notice of Violation. When any conditions exist on any lot or parcel of land in the City of Plainview violative of the provisions hereof, it shall be the duty of the Weed Inspector and/or Assistant Weed Inspector to serve a notice, via certified mail, on the owner, occupant or agent of such lot or parcel of land, ordering such owner or agent to have such weeds or grass cut and removed within seven (7) days after notice, and also stating that in case of non-compliance, the same will be done by the weed inspector at the owner's expense. The letter shall also state that the City is only required to send official notice to the property owner once per calendar year; any additional violations of this ordinance may be addressed immediately by the City, as deemed appropriate by the Weed Inspector and/or Assistant Weed Inspector, with no further notice to the property owner for the remainder of the calendar year.
311.5 Weed Inspector and/or Assistant Weed Inspector The Weed Inspector and/or Assistant Weed Inspector shall cut and destroy all grass and weeds growing within the platted limits of any public street or alley when the same are not cut by the property owners as required. He/she shall likewise keep an accurate account of the cost of such cutting opposite each lot and certify the same to the Council, to be specially assessed against the abutting property.
311.6 Charges, Costs and Penalty. Upon failure of the owner, occupant or agent to comply with the provisions of said notice the weed inspector shall proceed to cut and remove such weeds or grass. The Weed Inspector and/or Assistant Weed Inspector shall determine the cost of remedying the nuisance and charge the owner of the property. The Weed Inspector and/or Assistant Weed Inspector shall, not later than the first day of October of each year, certify to the County Auditor, the amount so charged against said premises, lots or parcels of land, together with a description of the premises and the name of the supposed owner, and such charge shall be collected and collection enforced in the same manner as taxes against said premises. Such charge shall be a perpetual lien on said premises until paid; provided further, that where no owner, occupant or agent can be found.
311.7 Grass and Lawn Clippings Prohibited from Public Paved Surfaces. Because of the negative affects that grass and lawn clippings have on water quality (the release of nitrogen in waterways) and the tendency to plug storm sewer grates, no person shall cause or allow grass and lawn clippings on the City’s streets, avenues, or other public paved surfaces.
312 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY. In accordance with the authority granted to the City under state and federal statutory, administrative, and common law, the City hereby elects pursuant to this chapter to manage rights-of-ways within its jurisdiction.
313 PUBLIC PARK AND CEMETERY SYSTEM.
313.1. Operation and Management. The Public Works Director, or their designee, is responsible for carrying out the operation of and management of the park and cemetery system. The City Council, from time to time, may adopt such rules and regulations deemed necessary for the operation and maintenance of the public park and cemetery system.
313.2 Refuse on Park and Cemetery Property. No persons shall place, or allow to be placed, any garbage, rubbish, leaves, grass clippings, cut trees, brush, limbs, animal waste, or other refuse on any property constituting a public park or public cemetery with the City of Plainview, except in properly marked containers for collection.
3-15
314 MUNICIPAL COMPOST AND BRUSH SITE
314.1 Residents and Property Owners Only. It shall be unlawful for any person to use the designated municipal compost and brush site who is not either a resident or a property owner within the City of Plainview.
314.2 Approved Items. It is the intention of the City Council that only natural plant type materials may be disposed of at the municipal compost and brush site. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any materials not contained in the following list at the compost site: weeds, grass clippings, leaves, fruits and vegetables, sod, bush trimmings, and other similar degradable items. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any materials not contained in the following list at the brush site: trees, tree trunks, branches, and limbs (none of these four items to be more than 8 feet in length and must be small enough to lift with the City loader), bushes, shrubs, and roots with the soil removed.
4-1
400 UTILITIES
401 SEWER
401.1 Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also referred to as the Clean Water Act, being 33 USC 1251 et seq., as amended.
ADMINISTRATION. Those fixed costs attributable to administration of the wastewater treatment works such as billing and associated bookkeeping and accounting costs.
ASTM. American Society for Testing Materials.
AUTHORITY. This city or its representative thereof.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20C, expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning three feet outside the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also referred to as a house connection or service connection.
CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the city as presently established or as amended by ordinance or other legal actions at a future time. The term CITY when used herein may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized representative.
CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure specially constructed for the purpose of measuring flow and sampling of wastes.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. A charge levied on users of wastewater treatment facilities for the cost of repaying money bonded to construct the facilities.
EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of food.
INCOMPATIBLE WASTE. Waste that either singly or by interaction with other wastes interferes with any waste treatment process, constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance or creates any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment works.
INDUSTRIAL USERS or INDUSTRIES. Entities that discharge into a publicly owned wastewater treatment works liquid wastes resulting from the processes employed in industrial or manufacturing processes, or from the development of any natural resources. Also, any nongovernmental or
4-2
nonresidential user of a publicly owned treatment works which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, latest edition, which is categorized in Divisions A, B, D, E and I.For the purpose of this definition, domestic waste shall be considered to have the following characteristics: BOD5 - less than 287 mg/l; Suspended solids - less than 287 mg/l.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Gaseous, liquid and solid wastes resulting from industrial or manufacturing processes, trade or business, or from the development, recovery and processing of natural resources, as distinct from residential or domestic strength wastes.
INFILTRATION. Water entering the sewage system (including building drains and pipes) from the ground through means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections and manhole walls.
INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I). The total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow.
INFLOW. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including building drains) from sources such as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar drains, yard and area drains, foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers, catch basins, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage.
INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the city's wastewater disposal system processes or operations which causes or significantly contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES or SDS permit. The term includes sewage sludge use or disposal by the city in accordance with published regulations providing guidelines under Section 404 of the Act (33 USC 1345) or any regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act (42 USC 7401 et seq.), the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 USC 2601 et seq.), or more stringent state criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the city.
MAY. The term is permissive.
MPCA. The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Federal regulations establishing pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly-owned wastewater treatment facilities which are determined to be not susceptible to treatment by those treatment facilities or would interfere with the operation of those treatment facilities, pursuant to Section 307(b) of the Act (33 USC 1317(b)).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit issued by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may legally discharge into navigable waters of the United States pursuant to Sections 402 and 404 of the Act (33 USC 1342 and 33 USC 1345).
NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewers, which overflow into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or ground water.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only pollutant added is heat.
NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE. Wastewater that is primarily introduced by residential users with a BOD5 concentration not greater than 287 mg/l and a suspended solids (TSS) concentration not greater than 287 mg/l.
4-3
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. Activities required to provide for the dependable and economical functioning of the treatment works, throughout the design or useful life, whichever is longer of the treatment works, and at the level of performance for which the treatment works were constructed. The term includes replacement.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. Expenditures for operation and maintenance, including replacement.
PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in terms of grams per liter of solution.
PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewater from industrial sources prior to the introduction of the waste effluent into a publicly-owned treatment works.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than 2-inch (1.27 cm) in any dimension.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The person appointed by the City Council to supervise the sewer and water systems of the city.
REPLACEMENT. Obtaining and installing of equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the design life or useful life, whichever is longer, of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which the works were designed and constructed.
REPLACEMENT COSTS. Expenditures for replacement.
SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters which are not admitted intentionally.
SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. The preferred term is wastewater.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The aggregate of all charges, including charges for operation, maintenance, replacement, debt service, and other sewer related charges that are billed periodically to users of the city's wastewater treatment facilities.
SEWER SERVICE FUND. A fund into which income from sewer service charges is deposited along with other income, including taxes intended to retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for wastewater treatment. Expenditure of the sewer service fund will be for operation, maintenance and replacement costs and to retire debt incurred through capital expenditure for wastewater treatment.
SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
COLLECTION SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect wastewaters from individual point source discharges and connections.
4-4
INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport wastewater from collection sewers to a treatment facility.
PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned and maintained by a public authority.
PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer owned, maintained and controlled by a public authority.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A drain or sewer intended to carry storm waters, surface runoff, ground water, subsurface water, street wash water, drainage and unpolluted water from any source.
SHALL. The term is mandatory.
STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (SDS) PERMIT. Any permit (including any terms, conditions and requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S. ' 115.07, as it may be amended from time to time for a disposal system as defined by M.S. ' 115.01(8), as it may be amended from time to time.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, latest edition, and referred to as non-filterable residue.
TOXIC POLLUTANT. The concentration of any pollutant or combination of pollutants which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause adverse affects as defined in standards issued pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act (33 USC 1317(a)).
UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards, and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
USER. Any person who discharges or causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the city's wastewater disposal system.
USER CHARGE. A charge levied on a user of a treatment works for the user's proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement.
WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community and referred to as sewage. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that may be present.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of any devices, facilities, structures, equipment or processes owned or used by the city for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or industrial wastewater, or structures necessary to recycle or reuse water including interceptor sewers, outfall sewers, collection sewers, pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled water supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works including land which is an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from that treatment.
4-5
WPCF. The Water Pollution Control Federation.
401.2 Administration of Sewers and General Regulations
401.2.1 Control Of Sewers. The Public Works Director, or other official designated by the City Council shall have control and general supervision of all public sewers and service connections in the city, and shall be responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter to the end that a proper and efficient public sewer is maintained.
401.2.2 Building Sewers and Connections. Building sewer construction shall meet the pertinent requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code, which is those chapters of Minn. Rules referenced in Minn. Rules part 1300.2400, subpart 6, as they may be amended from time to time, and the Minnesota Plumbing Code, Minn. Rules Ch. 4715, as it may be amended from time to time. The applicant shall notify the City when the building sewer and connection is ready for inspection. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Building Official or the Building Official's representative. No backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved, or until the certification has been received.
401.2.3 Tampering With Wastewater Facilities. No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of a misdemeanor.
401.2.4 Cost of Repairing or Restoring Sewers. In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of any provision of this chapter, the city may assess against any person the cost of repairing or restoring sewers or associated facilities damaged as a result of the discharge of prohibited wastes by that person, and may collect the assessment as an additional charge for the use of the public sewer system or in any other manner deemed appropriate by the city.
401.2.5 Restrictions On New Connections. Any new connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities, including but not limited to capacity for flow, BOD5 and suspended solids, as determined by the Public Works Director.
401.2.6 Installation Of Service Connection To Public Sewer. The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes from which wastewater is discharged, and which is situated within the city and adjacent to any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the city shall be required at the owner's expense to install a suitable service connection to the public sewer in accordance with provisions of this code within 365 days of the date the public sewer is operational; provided, the public sewer is within 200 feet of the structure generating the wastewater. All future buildings constructed on property adjacent to the public sewer shall be required to immediately connect to the public sewer. If sewer connections are not made pursuant to this section, an official ten-day notice shall be served instructing the affected property owner to make the connection.
401.2.7 Deposits Of Unsanitary Manner Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the city's jurisdiction, any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste.
401.2.8 Discharge Of Wastewater Or Other Polluted Waters. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter and the city's NPDES/SDS permit. Any person, firm, or corporation violating this provision of the City Code can warrant a civil penalty. A violation of this provision of the City Code is a misdemeanor. Each day that violation is committed or permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The city may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, or correct violations or threatened violations. The imposition of any fine or sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this ordinance; and the city may pursue, by appropriate actions or proceedings, any or all additional other remedies.
4-6
401.2.9 Plainview Elgin Sanitary Sewer District. The City adopts the rules, regulations, and wastewater limitations established by the Plainview Elgin Sanitary Sewer District.
401.3 Private Wastewater Disposal System
401.3.1 Restrictions on Private Wastewater Disposal System. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
401.3.2 Public Sewer Not Available. Where a public sewer is not available under this section, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this subchapter and Minn. Rules Ch. 7080, Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Program, as they may be amended from time to time.
401.3.3 Requirements. Prior to commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city. The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary to the city.
401.3.4 Inspections. A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city or its authorized representative. The city or its representative shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice.
401.3.5 Type, Capacity, Location, and Layout. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of Minn. Rules Ch. 7080, Individual Sewage Treatment Systems Program, as they may be amended from time to time. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
401.3.6 Direct Connection Required. At the time as a public sewer becomes available to a property serviced by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 365 days in compliance with this chapter, and within 365 days any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal systems shall be cleaned of sludge. The bottom shall be broken to permit drainage, and the tank or pit filled with suitable material.
401.3.7 Operation and Maintenance by Owner. The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city.
401.3.8 Federal and State Requirements. No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the MPCA or the Minnesota Department of Health.
401.4 Altering, Connecting, or Disturbing Public Sewer.
401.4.1 Permit Required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
401.4.2 Applications. Applications for permits shall be made by the owner or authorized agent and the party employed to do the work, and shall state the location, name of owner, street number of the building to be connected and how occupied. No person shall extend any private building drain beyond the limits of the building or property for which the service connection permit has been given.
401.4.3 Classes. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: one for residential and commercial service, and one for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case,
the application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or any other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of activity.
401.4.4 Inspection and Connection. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection
4-7
and inspection shall be made under the supervision of the Public Works Director or authorized representative thereof.
401.4.5 Costs and Expenses. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
401.5 Separate Building Sewers Required.
401.5.1 Requirements. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. The building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered one building sewer. The city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any connection.
404.5.2 Exceptions. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the Public Works Director or his or her representative, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
401.6 Conformance To State Building And Plumbing Code Requirements.
401.6.1 Construction and Methods. The size, slopes, alignment, materials of construction of building sewers and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling of the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the State Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city.
401.6.2 Connection. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. All connections shall be made gastight and watertight, and verified by proper testing to prevent the inclusion of infiltration/inflow. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city prior to installation.
401.6.3 Elevation Below Basement Floor. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
401.7 Surface Runoff Or Groundwater Connections Prohibited. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, sump pumps, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or indirectly to the wastewater disposal system.
401.8 Excavations. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
401.9 Water Discharge into Sanitary Sewer System. The discharge of water from any roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile or swimming pool or other natural precipitation into the city sanitary sewer collection system has the potential to cause damage to residential property and over-load the Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP). Such damage can be caused by the backup of sewage into the living quarters of residential homes creating a potential health hazard and exceeding the capacity of the WWTP. The City, therefore, finds it essential to the maintenance of health, minimization of damage to property and to maintain the life and capacity of the WWTP that the provisions of this section be strictly enforced to avoid and minimize these problems in the future.
401.9.1 Restrictions and Definitions. No water from any roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile, swimming pool or other natural precipitation shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer collection system. Dwellings, including new housing construction or houses under construction, and other buildings
4-8
and structures which require, because of the infiltration of water into basements, crawl spaces and the like, a sump pump system to discharge water shall have a permanently installed discharge line which shall not at any time discharge water into the sanitary sewer collection system. A permanent installation shall be one which provides for a year-round discharge connection to the city subdrain/storm sewer system. If there is no subdrain available, the surface discharge point shall be located no closer than four feet from the curb or as approved by the city. It shall consist of a rigid discharge line, without valving or quick connections for altering the path of discharge and, if connected to the city subdrain/storm sewer line, include a check valve.
401.9.2 Disconnections Ordered. Any person, firm or corporation having a roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile or swimming pool now connected and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer system shall disconnect and/or remove the same. Any disconnects or openings in the sanitary sewer shall be closed or repaired in a manner as approved by the City Engineer or his or her representative.
401.9.3 Inspections. Every person owning improved real estate or contractors/builders who are building a structure within Plainview that discharges into the city's sanitary sewer system or on the ground shall allow an employee of the city or their designated representative to inspect the buildings to confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer system. This requirement may also be met by having the property owner contract with a licensed plumber to perform the televised inspection of the sanitary sewer service and the plumber shall provide either a DVD or VHS record of the inspection to the City. The plumber must also inspect the sump pump system and complete and return an inspection form provided by the City documenting the results of the inspection. All costs associated with an inspection by a privately retained plumber shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
Any property owner or contractor/builder of a structure refusing to allow their property to be inspected within 14 days of the date city employees or their designated representatives are denied admittance to the property shall immediately become subject to the daily surcharge noted in Section 401.9.5, unless the property owner or contractor/builder of a structure pays the monthly surcharge in lieu of inspection. Any owner of property or contractor/ builder found to violate this subchapter shall make the necessary changes to comply with the subchapter and furnish proof of the changes to the city within one hundred and twenty (120) days from the date the violation was identified.
401.9.4 Future Inspections. At any future time, if the city has reason to suspect that an illegal connection may exist in a premises, the owner, after written notice, shall allow city representatives to inspect the building.
401.9.5 Penalties. In addition to the criminal penalties noted above, a civil surcharge of $10 per day may be imposed by invoice and/or added to every sewer billing mailed to property owners or to the contractor/builder of a structure which are found not to be in compliance herein. The surcharge will be levied daily against those properties found not to be in compliance with this ordinance until the property has been certified by the City Engineer or his or her representative that the property is in compliance. The surcharge will be levied against the property owner and/or contractor/builder of a structure on the thirty-first day after notice of the violation has been provided to the owner/contractor/builder. Should an individual who has been notified of noncompliance with, and has corrected that noncompliance, be found that his or her sump pump system is out of compliance with this ordinance a second time will be fined $100 a day commencing upon the day he or she is found to be in noncompliance. There shall be no grace period for bringing the system into compliance.
A property owner or the contractor/builder of a structure can pay a monthly surcharge of $100 in order to avoid a viewing of the property to determine if the property is engaged in an illegal discharge into the sanitary sewer system. This surcharge shall commence on the first day of the month following the month when the property owner or contractor/builder provides written notice to the City of their intent to act pursuant to this provision and shall continue as long as the property owner or contractor/builder continues to own the property without providing the information noted above. This surcharge is intended to offset the added cost associated with having wastewater treatment facility process clear water unnecessarily when the status of a property’s connection to the sanitary sewer system cannot be ascertained.
4-9
401.9.6 Deadline Extension for Undue Hardship. In the event that the strict application of the terms of this ordinance would pose an “undue hardship” to a particular property owner, the property owner can ask the City Council to grant an extension of the compliance deadlines of this ordinance. Any extension of the compliance deadline granted by the City Council shall be effective for a period not to exceed 180 days beyond the 120 day grace period set forth in Section 401.9.3 above. “Undue hardship” shall include, but is not limited to, property owners who earn less than the median annual income for Wabasha County. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner seeking the deadline extension to provide verification of the owner’s income to the satisfaction of the City staff. In the event the City Council grants a property owner an extension of the compliance deadline, the extension shall only delay compliance with the terms of the ordinance for as long as the current property owner owns the property and shall not apply to a new owner of the property.
401.10 Use of Public Services
401.10.1 Discharges of Unpolluted Water. No person shall discharge or caused to be discharged any water such as stormwater, ground water, roof runoff, surface drainage or non-contact cooling water to any sanitary sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to those sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the city and other regulatory agencies. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet on approval of the city and upon approval and the issuance of a discharge permit by the MPCA.
401.10.2 Discharge of Waters or Wastes. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
A Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the wastewater disposal system or to the operation of the system. Prohibited materials include but are not limited to gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides.
B Solid or viscous substances which will cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as but not limited to grease, garbage with particles greater than 2-inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
C Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater disposal system.
D Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit or disrupt any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater disposal system. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act (33 USC 1317(a)).
401.10.3 Limited Discharges. The City adopts the rules, regulations, and wastewater limitations established by the Plainview Elgin Sanitary Sewer District. Discharges into the sanitary sewer system shall be limited to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either sewers, the wastewater treatment works, treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream and soil, vegetation and ground water, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The City may set limitations lower than limitations established by the Plainview Eglin Sanitary Sewer District if the more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In
4-10
addition to the minimum standards established by the Plainview Elgin Sanitary Sewer District, the following are also prohibited from the sanitary sewer system:
A Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute sludge.
B Any garbage not properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food on the premises or when served by caterers.
C Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair.
D Non-contact cooling water or unpolluted storm, drainage or ground water.
E Wastewater containing inert suspended-solids such as but not limited to fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues, or of dissolved solids such as but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate, in quantities that would cause disruption with the wastewater disposal system.
F Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the wastewater disposal system which violates any statute, rule, regulation or ordinance of any regulatory agency, or state or federal regulatory body.
401.10.4 Discharges Hazardous To Life Or Constitute Public Nuisances. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers which contain substances which in the judgment of the Public Works Director may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment facilities, processes, or equipment, receiving waters or soil, vegetation, and ground water, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
A Reject the wastes;
B Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers, pursuant to Section 307(b) of the Act (33 USC 1317(b)) and all amendments thereof;
C Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and
D Require payment to cover the added costs of handling, treating and disposing of wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer service charges.
E If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design, installation and maintenance of the facilities and equipment shall be made at the owner's expense and shall be subject to the review and approval of the city pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA.
401.10.5 Increasing the Use of Process Water. No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any manner, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained section 401, or contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any state requirements.
401.10.6 Pretreatment or Flow-Equalizing Facilities. Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation at the expense of the owner.
401.10.7 Grease, Oil, and Sand Interceptors. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in ' 51.082(B)(2), any flammable wastes as specified in ' 51.081(A), sand or other harmful ingredients; except that interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of the type to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the captured materials by appropriate means, and shall maintain a record of dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the Public Works Director. Any removal and hauling of the collecting materials not performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by a currently licensed waste disposal firm.
401.10.8 Industrial Wastes; Installations. Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure, or control manhole, with necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
4-11
sampling, and measurement of wastes. The structure shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by the owner to be safe and accessible at all times.
401.10.9 Industrial Wastes; Requirements. The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes may, at the discretion of the City or the Plainview Elgin Sanitary Sewer District, be required to provide laboratory measurements, tests or analyses of waters or wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special condition for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and frequency of sampling and laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city. The industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with federal, state and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at times and in the manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting required by the city. At those times as deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and supplies for analysis by an independent laboratory.
401.10.10 Measurements, Tests, and Analyses of Water and Wastes. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, duration and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the Plainview Elgin Sanitary Sewer District.
401.10.11 Protection From Accidental Discharge Of Prohibited Materials. Where required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a sanitary sewer shall provide protection from an accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the Plainview Elgin Sanitary Sewer District for review and approval prior to construction of the facility. Review and approval of the plans and operating procedures shall not relieve any user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. Users shall notify the City of Plainview and the Plainview Elgin Sanitary Sewer District immediately upon having a slug or accidental discharge of substances of wastewater in violation of this chapter to enable countermeasures to be taken by the Plainview Elgin Sanitary Sewer District to minimize damage to the wastewater treatment works. The notification will not relieve any user of any liability for any expense, loss or damage to the wastewater treatment system or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the city on account thereof under any state and federal law. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or discover a discharge are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
401.10.12 Permitting Substance Or Matter To Flow Or Pass Into Public Sewers. No person having charge of any building or other premises which drains into the public sewer shall permit any substance or matter which may form a deposit or obstruction to flow or pass into the public sewer. Within 30 days after receipt of written notice from the city, the owner shall install a suitable and sufficient catch basin or waste trap, or if one already exists, shall clean out, repair or alter the same, and perform other work as the Public Works Director may deem necessary. Upon the owner's refusal or neglect to install a catch basin or waste trap or to clean out, repair, or alter the same after the period of 30 days, the Public Works Director may cause the work to be completed at the expense of the owner or representative thereof.
401.10.13 Repairing Service Connection. Whenever any service connection becomes clogged, obstructed, broken or out of order, or detrimental to the use of the public sewer, or unfit for the purpose of drainage, the owner shall repair or cause the work to be done as the Public Works Director may direct. Each day after 30 days that a person neglects or fails to so act shall constitute a separate violation of this section, and the Public Works Director may then cause the work to be done, and recover from the owner or agent the expense thereof by an action in the name of the city.
4-12
401.10.14 Catch Basin Or Waste Traps Required For Motor Vehicle Washing Or Servicing Facilities. The owner or operator of any motor vehicle washing or servicing facility shall provide and maintain in serviceable condition at all times a catch basin or waste trap in the building drain system to prevent grease, oil, dirt or any mineral deposit from entering the public sewer system.
401.10.15 Special Agreement And Arrangement. No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern; provided, that National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and the city's NPDES/SDS Permit limitations are not violated.
401.11 Sewer User Rate Schedule for Charges. Each user of sewer service shall pay the charges applicable to the type of service, and in accordance with the provisions set forth in this section. The purpose of this section is to provide for sewer service charges to recover costs associated with operation, maintenance and replacement to ensure effective functioning of the city's wastewater treatment system, and local capital costs incurred in the construction of the city's wastewater treatment system.
401.12 Sewer Service Charges.
401.12.1 Sewer Service Charge. The city hereby establishes a Sewer Service Charge System whereby all revenue collected from users of the wastewater treatment facilities will be used to affect all expenditures incurred for annual operation, maintenance and replacement and for debt service on capital expenditure incurred in constructing the wastewater treatment works.
401.12.2 Sewer Rental - For the purpose of providing funds to pay for the construction, operation, repair and administration expenses of the Plainview Sewer Collection and Disposal System, a sewer rental is hereby levied and assessed against each lot, parcel of land, building or premises situated within the corporate limits of the City of Plainview, now or hereafter having any connection with the sanitary sewer system of said City or otherwise discharging domestic sewage, commercial and industrial waste, water or other liquids, either directly or indirectly into the sanitary sewer system of said City.
401.12.3 Sewer Service Charges - Sewer service charges are hereby imposed upon all users in a total amount sufficient to pay the costs of operation, maintenance, and replacement (OM & R) costs and capital costs of the disposal system. Sewer service charge shall consist of the sum of the Capital Charge and User Charge. In certain cases, User Charge may be replaced by either the Minimum User Charge or the Industrial User Charge.
A "User Charge" is the fee imposed upon all units of service of the treatment works in a total. amount sufficient to pay the costs of operation and maintenance, including costs of replacement of and for the wastewater disposal system.
B "Capital Charge" shall be imposed on all connections and shall be sufficient to recover capital and interest costs of the construction of the disposal system. Costs to be recovered shall consist of costs for City owned facilities as well as the City share of the sanitary district facilities. Capital charge shall be determined independent of usage by dividing the annual cost of capital repayment (including interest) by the number of equivalent connections. Industrial Capital Charges shall be determined by the City Council.
C. "Industrial User Charge" shall be applied to significant industrial users whose waste is routinely monitored as part of the industrial pre- treatment program and shall become applicable as the rate-determining method when the industrial waste is stronger than domestic strength and the industrial charge as determined by the method described in Subs. 3.6 of the Wastewater Rate System Report is greater than the user charge to the industry determined by application of the user rate.
4-13
Industrial users discharging wastewater that is stronger than domestic strength will be subject to regular monitoring of their waste for BOD and SS and flows. The BOD and SS and flow data become the basis of the industrial user charge determined by the unit rates calculated and are applied in lieu of the user charge if greater than the user charge. The industrial user charge is based on:
V = billable volume in 1,000 gal.
B = measured BOD in 100 lb.
S = measured SS in 100 lb.
The amounts duly billed for sewer service shall be charged in accordance with the billing, collection, delinquent, disconnection and reconnection policies as the water department.
401.12.4 Revenues Deposited in Sewer Service Fund. Revenues collected for sewer service shall be deposited in a separate fund known as “The Sewer Service Fund”. Income from revenues collected will be expended to off-set the cost of operation, maintenance and equipment replacement for the facility and to retire the debt for capital expenditure. Sewer service charges and the sewer service fund will be administrated in accordance with the provisions of this section.
401.12.5 Connection Fee, SAC. A connection fee as fixed in the Ordinance Establishing Fees and Charges adopted pursuant to this code, as that ordinance may be amended from time to time, shall be charged to each user connecting a new service to the Sanitary Sewer System.
401.12.6 Determination of Sewer Service Charges. The sewer service rates and charges to users of the wastewater treatment facility shall be as established by ordinance or resolution prior to the adoption of this code, unless amended or modified in the Ordinance Establishing Fees and Charges, as that ordinance may be amended from time to time.
401.12.7 Owner Responsible. The owner of the premises shall be liable to pay for the service to their premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the condition that the owner of the premises is liable therefore to the city.
401.12.8 Additional Costs Borne by Discharger. Any additional costs caused by discharges to the treatment works of toxics or other incompatible wastes, including the cost of restoring wastewater treatment services, clean up and restoration of the receiving waters and environs, and sludge disposal, shall be borne by the discharger of the wastes, at no expense to the city.
401.13 Powers and Authority of Inspectors
401.13.1 Permission Required, Unless Administrative Search Warrant or Emergency Situation. The Public Works Director or other duly authorized employees or agents of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, are authorized, with the permission of the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property within the city, to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observations, maintenance, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to the discharges to the city's sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property within the city does not permit the entrance to the property, the city shall obtain an administrative search warrant as provided for in Section 100 before entering the property, except in emergency situations.
401.13.2 Authorized Employees Obtaining Information for Industrial Processes. The Public Works Director or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the type and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. An industry may withhold information considered confidential; however, the industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors.
401.13.3 Authorized Employees to Observe Safety Rules. While performing necessary work on private properties, the Public Works Director or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the property owner shall be held
4-14
harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the property owner, subject to the constitution and laws of the State of Minnesota, against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions.
401.13.4 Authorized Employees Permitted To Enter All Property With Easements. The Public Works Director or other duly authorized employees of the city, as well as employees of the Plainview Elgin Sanitary Sewer District bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of but not limited to inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
401.14 Penalty.
401.14.1 Written Notice. Any person found to be violating any provisions of section 401shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for this section shall be punished as a misdemeanor, as provided in section 100. Each day in which any violation occurs shall be deemed as a separate offense.
401.14.2 Expense, Loss or Damage. Any person violating any of the provisions of 401 shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of that violation.
401.14.3 Charges Levied. Each and every sewer service charge levied is made a lien upon the lot or premises served, and all charges which are on October 31 of each year past due and delinquent shall be certified to the County Auditor by November 29 for collection. Nothing in this section shall be held or construed as in any way stopping or interfering with the right of the city to levy as taxes or assessments against any premises affected any delinquent or past due sewer service charges. As an alternative to levying a lien, the city may, at its discretion, file suit in a civil action to collect amounts as are delinquent and due against the occupant, owner or user of the real estate, and shall collect as well all attorney's fees incurred by the city in filing the civil action. Attorney's fees shall be fixed by order of the court. In addition to all penalties and costs attributable and chargeable to recording notices of the lien or filing a civil action, the owner or user of the real estate being serviced by the treatment works shall be liable for interest upon all unpaid balances at the rate of 10%.
4-15
402 WATER
402.1 General Operation. The city does hereby make provision for the establishment of a municipal water system (hereinafter called the water system) to be operated as a public utility.
402.2 Use of Water Service. No person other than a city employee shall uncover or make or use any water service installation connected to the city water system except in the manner provided by this chapter. No person shall make or use any installation contrary to the regulatory provisions of this chapter.
No person shall permit water from the water system to be used for any purpose to circumvent this chapter.
402.3 Damage to Water System. No unauthorized person shall remove or damage any structure, appurtenance, or part of the water system or fill or partially fill any excavation or move any gate valve used in the water system. No person shall make any connection of an electrical welder to the city water main, appurtenance or service or use an electric welder for the purpose of thawing frozen water mains, appurtenances or services.
402.4 No New Connections Beyond City Boundaries. No property and/or home or business located outside the City limits of Plainview shall be allowed to connect to the municipal water system. Those persons desiring municipal water service must first annex into the City limits. Those that currently have a legal water connection may continue to access the municipal water system.
402.5 Connection To System Required; Use Of Private Wells.
402.5.1 Unlawful to Construct Private Well. With the exception of the two existing industrial wells, it shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, or repair any private water system which is designed or intended to provide water for human consumption. Private wells, to provide water for other than human consumption, may be constructed, maintained and continued in use after connection is made to the water system; provided, there is no means of cross-connection between the private well and municipal water supply at any time. Hose bibbs that will enable the cross-connection of the two systems are prohibited on internal piping of the well system supply. Where both private and city systems are in use, outside hose bibbs shall not be installed on both systems.
402.5.2 New Building Must Connect to Water System. All new homes or buildings must connect to the municipal water system.
402.5.3 City To Determine Expansion of Water System. Where new homes or buildings do not have water available to the property, the city shall determine whether and under what conditions the municipal water system will be extended to serve the property.
402.5.4 Private Wells To Be Closed After Municipal Connection. Once a home or building is
connected to the municipal water supply, the private well must be closed. All well abandonment shall be
done in accordance with M.S. 103I.301 to 103I.345 and Minn. Rules Ch. 4725, Wells and Borings, as it
may be amended from time to time.
402.6 Use Of Water From Fire Hydrants; Temporary Connections.
402.6.1 Use of Fire Hydrants. Except for extinguishment of fires, no person, unless authorized by
the Public Works Director or Public Works Department, shall operate fire hydrants or interfere in any way with the water system.
402.6.2 Temporary Connection To Fire Hydrants. An owner of a private water system may make a temporary above ground connection to a fire hydrant. The method of connection to the private system and the type of meter used shall conform to all existing requirements of this chapter and city ordinance and shall meet the approval of the Public Works Director.
402.7 Water Deficiency, Shut Off And Use Restrictions. The city shall not be liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to consumers, whether occasioned by shutting the water off for
4-16
the purpose of making repairs or connections or from any other cause whatsoever. In case of fire, or alarm of fire, or in making repairs of construction of new works, water may be shut off without notice at any time and kept off as long as necessary. In addition, the City Council shall have the right to impose reasonable restrictions on the use of the city water system in emergency situations.
402.8 General Water Regulations
402.8.1 Supply from One Service. No more than one housing unit or building shall be supplied from one service connection. Each unit served shall have a separate water meter.
402.8.2 Tapping of Water Mains Restricted. No person, except persons authorized by the Public Works Director shall tap any distributing main or pipe of the water supply system or insert stopcocks or ferrules therein.
402.8.3 Abandoned or Unused Services. If the premises served by water has been abandoned, or if the service has not been used for one year, then the service shall be shut off at the curb stop box by the city and the water meter will be removed. When new buildings are erected on the site of old ones, and it is desired to increase or change the old water service, no connections with the mains shall be made until all the old service has been removed.
402.8.4 Disconnection Permit. An excavation permit must be obtained to disconnect from the existing water service curb stop box. The fee for the permit shall be set by the City Council.
402.8.5 Service Pipes. Every service pipe shall be laid so as to allow at least one foot of extra length in order to prevent rupture by settlement. The service pipe must be placed no less than seven feet below the ground and in a manner as to prevent rupture by freezing. Service pipes must extend from the curb stop box to the inside of the building, or if not taken into the building, then to the hydrant or fixtures which it is intended to supply. Type K copper tubing shall be used. All services over two inches shall be ductile or cast iron. All underground joints are to be mechanical, except joints under floors shall be silver soldered, unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Director. Joints of copper tubing shall be kept, to a minimum, with not more than one joint used for service for each 70 feet in length. Splicing may be approved with three-piece unions only. All joints and connections shall be left uncovered until inspected by the Public Works Director and tested at normal water line pressure. Unions must be three-part type. All services over two inches shall be ductile iron or cast iron. Connections with the mains for domestic supply shall be at least one inch up to the house.
402.8.6 Connection to Other Water Supplies Restricted. No water pipe of the water system shall be connected with any pump, well, tank, or piping that is connected with any other source of water supply except to service municipal systems.
402.9 Location of Curb Stop Box. Curb stop boxes will be installed with rods on the right-of-way line or easement limits at a location as determined by the City Engineer to be best suitable to the property and shall be left in a vertical position when backfilling is completed. Curb stop boxes will be installed at an approximate depth of seven feet below the finished ground elevation and the top of the curb stop box shall be adjusted to be flush with the finished ground elevation. Curb stop boxes must be firmly supported by a masonry block. No person shall erect any fence or plant any tree or other landscaping that would obstruct, or place a structure on, park a motor vehicle on, or otherwise obstruct the use of the curb stop box, or cause damage to the same.
402.10 Water Meters.
402.10.1 Generally. Except for extinguishment of fires, no person, unless otherwise authorized by the Public Works Department, shall use water from the water system or permit water to be drawn therefrom unless the same be metered by passing through a meter supplied or approved by the city. No person not authorized by the Public Works Director shall connect, disconnect, take apart, or in any manner change or cause to be changed or interfere with any meter or the action thereof, or break any meter or valve seal.
4-17
A Where a consumer has need for a larger line in addition to his or her domestic line, as in the case of a commercial consumer who needs a one-inch line for normal use and a six-inch or larger line for a fire sprinkler system, he or she will be permitted to run one line into the premises and “Y” off into two lines at the building. When this is done, the meter will be attached to the small or domestic line and a check valve as well as one-inch detection meter shall be put on the large line.
B The city shall maintain and repair all meters when rendered unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear and shall replace them if necessary. When replacement, repair, or adjustment of any meter is rendered by the act, neglect (including damage from freezing or hot water backup) or carelessness of the owner or occupant of the premises, any expense caused the city thereby shall be charged against and collected from the water consumer.
C A consumer may, by written request, have his or her meter tested by depositing an amount sufficient to cover the costs associated with testing the meter. In case a test should show an error of over 5% of the water consumed, a correctly registering meter will be installed, and the bill will be adjusted accordingly and the testing deposit refunded. This adjustment shall not extend back more than one billing period from the date of the written request.
D All water meters and remote readers shall be and remain the property of the city.
E Authorized city employees shall have access at reasonable hours of the day to all parts of every building and premises connected with the water system for reading of meters and inspections.
F It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to notify the city to request a final reading at the time of the customer's billing change.
402.10.2 Water meter setting. All water meters hereafter installed shall be in accordance with the Minnesota Plumbing Code and any standards established by resolution of the City Council.
402.11 Repairs
402.11.1 Determination Of Need For Repairs. Based on the information supplied by the property owner or available to the city, the city will make a determination whether a problem exists in that portion of the service which is the city's responsibility. If the problem appears to exist in the areas for which the city has no responsibility, the private owners will be responsible for correction of the problem.
402.11.2 Excavation Or Repair Of Water Service. The city will arrange for the investigative digging up and repair of any water service where the problem apparently exists within that area for which the city has responsibility. Unless it is clearly evident, however, that the problem is the responsibility of the city, the excavation and repair will not be made until the property owner requests the city in writing to excavate or repair the service and agrees to pay the cost. The owner further agrees to waive public hearing and be special assessed the cost of the excavation and repair if the problem is found to be other than the city's responsibility. The city will make the determination for responsibility of the cost of investigation or repair. The matter of whether the dig up is done by city forces or contracted would depend on the urgency or need of repair and the availability of city forces to do the work. Recovery by the city for faulty construction will depend upon the circumstances and the decision of the City Council on the likelihood of recovery.
402.11.3 Failure to Repair. In case of failure upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak occurring in his or her service pipe within 24 hours after verbal or written notice, as determined by the Public Works Director, the water may be turned off by the city and shall not be turned on until the leak has been repaired and a fee has been paid to the city.
402.12 Excavation and Construction Requirements. No excavation shall be made until a permit for the connection has been issued by the city.
402.12.1 Separation. No water service pipe or water connection shall be installed in the same trench or closer than ten feet horizontally to a sewer trench or drain laid, or to be laid, either in the street or in private property, except that the water pipe on private property may be in a common trench with a sewer
4-18
drain which is of a material that is in conformance with the current Minnesota Plumbing Code, Minn. Rules Ch. 4715, as it may be amended from time to time.
402.12.2 Water Above Sewer. Where it is desired to lay the water service pipe and the building sewer pipe in the same trench, or in separate trenches less than ten feet apart, the water service pipe shall be above the sewer pipe unless approved by the City Engineer. It shall be placed at least one foot above the sewer and on a solid shelf excavated at one side of the trench. The sewer pipe shall be of a material that is in conformance with the Minnesota Plumbing Code with tested watertight joints. The water service pipe shall be watertight and corrosion resistant. K-copper pipe and ductile or cast iron water pipe with specially protected joints is acceptable for this construction. Ductile iron pipe shall conform to the American Water Works Association specifications for this pipe. Bell joint clamps with rubber gaskets are provisionally acceptable as extra protection for the joints on cast iron water pipe. In all cases, precautions shall be taken to assure a firm foundation for the pipes. The intervening space between the pipes shall be backfilled with compacted earth.
402.12.3 Surfaced Street. In case the installation is on a surfaced street, the following shall apply: All backfill materials shall be mechanically compacted in 12-inch layers to the density of the adjacent material in the roadway area and to the existing street grades in accordance with the Minnesota Department of Transportation Standards. Complete surface restoration shall be made at property owners expense.
402.13 Water Connections; Applications and Charges.
402.13.1 Connection Applications. All applications for service installations and for water service shall be made to the City Clerk. All applications for initial service installations and water service shall be made by the owner or agent of the property to be served and shall state the size and location of service connection required. The applicant shall, at the time of making application, pay to the city the amount of fees as established by the City Council or deposit required for the installation of the service connection as hereinafter provided. Applications for services larger than one inch shall be accompanied by two sets of plans or sketches indicating preferred location of service pipe and size of service based on building demand. The size of the water service connections and meter shall be subject to approval of the City Engineer. Utility services provided to non-owner occupants of residential property are responsible for payment of a deposit for services to the City.
402.13.2 Connection Charges. A permit must be obtained to connect to the existing water service leads at the curb stop box. The city shall install or have installed all service connections from the water main to the curb stop box including the stop box.
402.13.3 Additional Charges. Additional charges shall be paid at the time of making application for tapping and making connections with the water main to where a curb stop box and service lead is not previously installed. The charge shall include the tapping of the water main, corporation cocks, the installation of a service line, the installation of a curb stop box, cost of restoring disturbed areas and all other costs related to the installation.
402.13.4 Connection Charge, WAC. There shall be a connection charge levied by the city to contribute to the payment of the costs of the City’s water system.
402.13.5 Water Services Stopped. When water services have been stopped because of a violation of this chapter, the city shall collect the fee before service is recommenced.
402.14 Water User Rates and Charges
402.14.1 Water Unit. A water unit (hereinafter called unit) shall be one residential equivalent connection based on usage of 1,000 gallons.
402.14.2 Rates, Fees, and Charges Generally. The City Council shall establish a schedule of all water rates, fees and charges for permits or services.
402.14.3 Water Service Billing; Change of Address. All bills and notices shall be mailed or delivered to the address where service is provided. If nonresident owners or agents desire personal notice
4-19
sent to a different address, they shall so note on the water service application. Any change or error in address shall be promptly reported to the City Clerk.
402.15 Water Rates and Water Meters. The rate due and payable by each user within the city for water taken from the water system shall be established by the City Council.
402.15.1 Water Meter Faulty. In case the meter is found to have stopped, or to be operating in a faulty manner, the amount of water used will be estimated in accordance with the amount used previously in comparable periods of the year.
402.15.2 Minimum Rate Begin. The minimum rates established shall begin to accrue after connection of the service pipe with the curb stop box, and the installation of a water meter and the water turned on.
402.15.3 Installation. A meter shall be installed on the water valve in the house.
402.16 Water Rental. For the purpose of providing funds to pay for the operation, repair, additional construction, and administrative expenses of the Plainview Municipal Water System, a water rental is hereby levied and assessed against each lot, parcel of land, building or premises situated in the corporate limits of the City of Plainview, now, or hereafter having any connection with the municipal water system of said City, either directly or indirectly.
402.16.1 Rate Charged - There is hereby levied and assessed against each lot, parcel of land, building or premises having a connection with the municipal water system of said City, whether directly or indirectly, a water service charge or rental payable as established from time to time by the City Council by Resolution.
402.16.2 Payment. The rental rates or charges herein set forth shall be due and payable on due date as specified in the billing. If such rental charge as herein set forth is not paid by the due date, the City shall disconnect water and/or certify the same to the County Auditor of the County of Wabasha. If a measurement of the use of the water system is not made due to damage to a meter or for any other reason, then the customer shall be charged a rate based upon a rate based upon the rate paid for the same period of the previous year.
402.16.3 Collection of Charges. Any prepayment or overpayment of charges may be retained by the city and applied on subsequent charges. If a monthly service charge is not paid when due, then a penalty of 10% shall be added thereto. In the event a user fails to pay his or her water user fee within a reasonable time following discontinuance of service, the fee shall be certified by the City Clerk and forwarded to the County Auditor or other collection agency for collection pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 444.075.
402.16.4 Disconnection. The City shall endeavor to collect delinquent bills promptly. If the customer has not paid their municipal utility account balance in full at the end of the month that the bill was due in, the account shall be considered delinquent. The City shall immediately disconnect a delinquent utility account. In the event a customer tenders a payment to the City which is refused for non-sufficient funds, then the City may immediately terminate service to the delinquent Customer by shutting off the water.
When water service to any premises has been discontinued, service shall not be restored except upon the payment of all delinquent amounts due plus a fee for re-connection as established by the City Council in Section 801, General Fees, Fines, and Charges.
402.16.5 Owner's Liability for Water Service. In the event the owner of the property does not occupy the property, but has rented the property out to a tenant pursuant to a written lease, and the owner has contracted with the City directly for utility service on behalf of the tenant, the owner of the premises receiving City water service shall be liable for water service consumed upon the promises. For purposes of this Section, "owner" shall be defined to include the fee owner, contract for deed vendor, contract for deed vendee, life tenants and remaindermen of the property in question. The City may rely on the records in the office of the Wabasha County Recorder to determine the legal owner of the property.
4-20
402.16.6 Voluntary Disconnection. Any person desiring a disconnection with the City water system for any other reason must serve written notice to the City Clerk at least seven (7) days before such disconnection is desired. The fee for this service shall as established by the City Council in Section 801, General Fees, Fines, and Charges. No re-connection shall be made until the reconnection fee has been paid. In the event of a disconnection due to a mortgage foreclosure, impending bankruptcy, or other similar event which results in the Customer ceasing to occupy the property, water service will only be reconnected when the lender or other party temporarily responsible for management of the property pays the fee to cover the cost for disconnection and subsequent reconnection prior to transfer of ownership of the property to any subsequent purchaser.
402.17 Powers and Authority of Inspectors. The Public Works Director and other duly authorized employees of the city, upon proper identification, are authorized, with the permission of the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property within the city, to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspections, maintenance, observation and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property within the city does not permit the entrance to the property, the city shall obtain an administrative search warrant before entering the property, except in emergency situations.
402.18 Discontinuance of Service. Water service may be shut off at any connection.
402.19 Authorized Employees to Turn Water On and Off. No person, except an authorized city employee or a private contractor acting on behalf of the City, shall turn on or off any water supply at the curb stop box.
402.20 Liability for Expense, Loss, or Damage. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of the violation.
4-21
403 NATURAL GAS
403.1 Franchise Granted. The City of Plainview, (hereinafter referred to as "Grantor") hereby grants a non-exclusive franchise to Aquila, Inc, d/b/a Aquila Networks, a Delaware corporation, (hereinafter called "Grantee"), its lessees, successors and assigns. Grantee is hereby granted the right, privilege, franchise, permission and authority to lay, construct, install, maintain, operate and extend in, along, over or across the present and future streets, alleys, avenues, bridges, public rights-of-way and public places as are now within the present or future limits of said Grantor, a natural gas distribution system and all facilities necessary for the purpose of supplying natural gas or processed gas for all purposes to the inhabitants of said Grantor and consumers in the vicinity thereof, and for the distribution of natural gas from or through said Grantor to points beyond the limits thereof. Such facilities shall include, but not be limited to, all mains, services, pipes, conduits and appliances necessary or convenient for transmitting, transporting, distributing and supplying natural gas for all purposes for which it may be used, and to do all other things necessary and proper in providing natural gas service to the inhabitants of Grantor and in carrying on such business.
403.2 Term. The rights and privileges granted by this Ordinance shall remain in effect for a period of 20 years from the effective date of this Ordinance.
403.3 Franchise Fees
403.3.1 Compensation. The laws of the State of Minnesota authorize a payment of compensation to a city by the provider of natural gas services in the form of the imposition of a city franchise fee to raise revenue or to defray costs accruing as a result of such operations, or both. This payment is commonly referred to as a franchise fee.
403.3.2 Franchise Fee. During the term of the Franchise, and as a condition of its grant, a City franchise fee is hereby imposed on the Company as indicated in the table below. The volumetric fee rate is per 100 cubic feet of gas by volume, transported, sold, furnished or delivered by Company to a retail customer located within the current and future limits of City, utilizing any of the Company’s services or facilities.
Commercial
Industrial
Interruptible
Residential
Flat Fee (annual) per meter
$ 6.00
$ 6.00
$ 6.00
$ 6.00
Volumetric Fee (per 100 cu.ft volume)
$ 0.01
$ 0.01
$ 0.005
$ 0.01
403.3.3 Franchise Fee Adjusted. The Franchise Fee shall be adjusted for net write-off of uncollectible accounts and corrections of bills theretofore rendered. The Company may list the local franchise fee collected from customers as a separate item on bills for utility service issued to customers.
403.3.4 Franchise Fee Effective. The franchise fee shall be effective January 1, 2004 following adoption of this Ordinance and shall continue until amended or repealed by the City during the term of this Ordinance. Initial and final payments shall be prorated for the portions of the periods at the beginning and end of the term of this Ordinance.
The Company must report and pay the franchise fee to the City on a quarterly basis. Such payment shall be made not more than thirty days following the close of the period for which payment is due. Company shall provide information by customer class to City to show how the fee was determined.
The franchise fee rates provided may be adjusted annually for inflation, based upon the most recent Urban Consumer Price Index inflation adjustment rates. Such adjustment shall not require formal amendment to this Ordinance.
4-22
If any person challenges the collection, any aspect of the franchise fee or any other payment to be made to City pursuant to this Franchise, the Company must promptly give notice to City and must, in any case, diligently and continuously exercise its efforts to sustain said fee and payments and the time and manner of its collection. If at any time the MPUC, or other authority having proper jurisdiction, prohibits recovery of the franchise fee costs, then the Company will no longer be obligated to collect and pay the franchise fee. The Company agrees to make its records related to the calculation and payment of the franchise fee available for inspection by the City at reasonable times.
If for any reason the amount or rate of the franchise fee is determined to be in excess of the amount or rate allowed by law, then the amount or rate shall automatically, and without further action by City or Company, be reduced to the maximum amount or rate permitted by law.
The franchise fee is in lieu of any other permit or licensing fee, charge or cost imposed by the City on the Company for providing gas service or performing work necessary to provide gas service. The City cannot charge the Company any right-of-way fee imposed by a right-of-way ordinance or other ordinance or City practice during this franchise term.
403.4 Governing Rules And Regulations. This Ordinance is granted subject to all conditions, limitations and immunities now provided for, or as hereafter amended, and applicable to the operations of a public utility, by State or Federal law. The rates to be charged by Grantee for service within the present or future corporate limits of Grantor and the rules and regulations regarding the character, quality and standards of service to be furnished by Grantee shall be under the jurisdiction and control of such regulatory body or bodies as may, from time to time, be vested by law with authority and jurisdiction over the rates, regulations and quality and standards of service to be supplied by Grantee. Provided however, should any judicial, regulatory or legislative body, having proper jurisdiction, take any action that precludes Grantee from recovering from its customers any cost associated with services provided hereunder, then Grantee and Grantor shall renegotiate the terms of this Ordinance in accordance with the action taken, so as to allow Grantee to be made whole economically. In determining the rights and duties of the Grantee, the terms of this franchise Ordinance shall take precedence over any conflicting terms or requirements contained in any other Ordinance enacted by the Grantor.
If an energy supplier is unable to furnish an adequate supply of energy due to an emergency, an order or decision of a public regulatory body, or other acts beyond the control of the Grantee, then the Grantee shall have the right and authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations limiting, curtailing or allocating extensions of service or supply of energy to any customers or prospective customers, and withholding the supply of energy to new customers, provided that such rules and regulations shall be uniform as applied to each class of customers or prospective customers, and shall be non-discriminatory as between communities receiving service from the Grantee.
403.5 Construction And Maintenance Of Company Facilities. Any pavements, sidewalks or curbing taken up and any and all excavations made shall be done in such a manner as to cause only such inconvenience to the inhabitants of Grantor and to the general public as is reasonably necessary; and repairs and replacements shall be made promptly by Grantee at its sole expense, leaving such properties in as good as condition as existed immediately prior to excavation.
Grantee agrees that for the term of this grant, it will use its best efforts to maintain facilities and equipment sufficient to meet the current and future energy requirements of Grantor, its inhabitants and industries. While maintaining its facilities and equipment, Grantee shall obtain permits as required by ordinance, except that in emergency situations, Grantee shall take immediate unilateral actions as it determines are necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; in which case, Grantee shall notify Grantor as soon as reasonably possible.
Grantor will give Grantee reasonable notice of plans for street improvements where paving or resurfacing of a permanent nature is involved that affect Grantee’s facilities. The notice shall contain the nature and character of the improvements, the rights-of-way upon which the improvements are to be made, the extent of the improvements and the time when the Grantor will start the work, and, if more than
4-23
one right-of-way is involved, the order in which this work is to proceed. The notice shall be given to the Grantee a sufficient length of time, considering seasonable working conditions, in advance of the actual commencement of the work to permit the Grantee to make any additions, alterations, or repairs to its facilities.
403.6 Extension Of Company Facilities. Upon receipt and acceptance of a valid application for service, Grantee shall, subject to its own economic feasibility criteria, make reasonable extensions of its distribution facilities to serve customers located within the current or future corporate limits of Grantor.
403.7 Relocation Of Company Facilities. If Grantor elects to change the grade of or otherwise alter any street, alley, avenue, bridge, public right-of-way or public place for a public purpose, Grantee, upon reasonable notice from Grantor, shall remove and relocate its facilities or equipment situated in the public rights-of-way, if such removal is necessary to prevent interference and not merely for the convenience of the Grantor, at the cost and expense of Grantee. If Grantor orders or requests Grantee to relocate its facilities or equipment for the primary benefit of a commercial or private project, or as a result of the initial request of a commercial or private developer or other non-public entity, and such removal is necessary to prevent interference and not merely for the convenience of the Grantor or other right-of-way user, Grantee shall receive payment for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocating its facilities or equipment. Grantor shall consider reasonable alternatives in designing its public works projects so as not arbitrarily to cause Grantee unreasonable additional expense in exercising its authority under this section. Grantor shall also provide a reasonable alternative location for Grantee’s facilities. Grantor shall give Grantee written notice of vacating of a public right-of-way. Vacating of a public right-of-way shall not deprive the Grantee of its right to operate and maintain existing facilities, until the reasonable cost of relocating the same are first paid to the Grantee.
Any person or corporation desiring to move a building or other structure along, or to make any unusual use of any street, alley, avenue, bridge, public right-of-way or public place which shall interfere with the facilities or equipment of the Grantee, shall first give notice to the Grantor and the Grantee and a pay a sum sufficient to cover the expense and damage incident to the moving of Grantee’s facilities and equipment.
403.8 Confidential Information. Grantor acknowledges that certain information it might request pursuant to this franchise may be of a proprietary and confidential nature. If Grantee requests that any information provided by Grantee to Grantor be kept confidential due to such proprietary or commercial value, Grantor and its employees, agents, and representatives shall maintain the confidentiality of that information, to the extent allowed by law. If Grantor is requested or required by legal or administrative process to disclose any such confidential information, Grantor shall promptly notify Grantee of such request or requirement so that Grantee may seek an appropriate protective order or other relief. Grantor shall use all reasonable efforts to ensure that the confidentiality of Grantee’s confidential information is maintained.
403.9 Force Majeure. It shall not be a breach or default under this franchise if either party fails to perform its obligations hereunder due to Force Majeure. Force Majeure shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 1) physical events such as acts of God, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, freezing, storms, floods, washouts, explosions, breakage or accident or necessity of repairs to machinery, equipment or distribution or transmission lines; 2) acts of others such as strikes, work-force stoppages, riots, sabotage, insurrections or wars; 3) governmental actions such as necessity for compliance with any court order, law, statute, ordinance, executive order, or regulation promulgated by a governmental authority having jurisdiction; and any other causes, whether of the kind herein enumerated or otherwise not reasonably within the control of the affected party to prevent or overcome. Each party shall make reasonable efforts to avoid Force Majeure and to resolve such event as promptly as reasonably possible
4-24
once it occurs in order to resume performance; provided, however, that this provision shall not obligate a party to settle any labor strike.
403.10 Hold Harmless. Grantee, during the term of this Ordinance, agrees to save harmless Grantor from and against all claims, demands, losses and expenses arising directly out of the negligence of Grantee, its employees or agents, in the constructing, operating, and maintaining of distribution and transmission facilities or appliances of Grantee; provided, however, that Grantee need not save harmless Grantor from claims, demands, losses and expenses arising out of the negligence of Grantor, its employees or agents.
403.11 Severability. If any clause, sentence or section of this Ordinance is deemed invalid by any judicial, regulatory or legislative body having proper jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected.
403.12 Non Waiver. Any waiver of any obligation or default under this franchise shall not be construed as a waiver of any future defaults, whether of like or different character.
403.13 Repeal Conflicting Ordinances. This ordinance, when accepted by Grantee as provided below, shall constitute the entire agreement between the Grantor and the Grantee relating to this franchise and the same shall supersede all prior ordinances pertaining to this franchise agreement, and any terms and conditions of such prior ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. Ordinance No 183 of the City of Plainview, Minnesota is hereby repealed as of the effective date hereof.
403.14 Effect And Interpretation Of Ordinance. The captions which precede each section of this ordinance are for convenience in reference only and shall not be taken into consideration in the interpretation of any of the provisions of this ordinance.
403.15 Effective Date And Acceptance. This Ordinance shall become effective and be a binding contract between the Grantor and Grantee, upon its final passage and approval by Grantor, in accordance with applicable laws and regulations, and upon acceptance by Grantee by written instrument of passage by the governing body effective January 1, 2004, and filed with the City Clerk of the City of Plainview Minnesota The City Clerk shall sign and affix the community seal to acknowledge receipt of such acceptance, and return one copy to Grantee. If Grantee does not, within sixty (60) days following passage of this Ordinance express in writing its objections to any terms or provisions contained therein, or reject this ordinance in its entirety, Grantee shall be deemed to have accepted this ordinance and all of its terms and conditions.
4-25
404 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS. The City Council of Plainview, Minnesota ordains that a cable communications franchise for the installation, operation, and maintenance of a cable communications system within the city as specified in the cable service territory previously established and approved by the Board is granted to US Cable provided, however, that said franchise shall be subject to the following terms and performance conditions. Definitions:
1. “Franchisor” is the City of Plainview. Franchisor is sometimes referred to as “Franchising Authority”.
2. “Franchisee” is US Cable of Coastal- Texas, L.P., hereinafter “US Cable”.
3. “FCC” is the Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
4. “FCC Regulations” are all laws, rules, and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission including but not limited to the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. Section 546), the Cable T.V. Consumer Protection Act of 1992, and Sub-part K of Part 76 of FCC’s rules and regulations, Title 47, Sections 76.601 to 76.617.
5. “Class IV Channel” means a signaling path provided by a cable communications system to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point in the cable communication system.
6. “Gross annual subscriber revenues” shall mean revenues derived from monthly subscriber receipts from basic cable service, tier service and pay cable services.
7. “Non-voice return communications” means the provision of appropriate system design techniques with the installation of cable and amplifiers suitable for the subsequent insertion of necessary non-voice communications electronic modules.
8. The word “shall” is mandatory.
9. The word “may” is permissive.
10. Other words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them by federal law.
404.1 Compliance With FCC’s Regulations And Minnesota Statues. The franchise shall at all times be in compliance with the regulations of the FCC and to the extent not preempted by FCC regulation, Minnesota Statues Chapter 238. Both the franchisee and franchising authority shall conform to Minnesota State Law rules and regulations regarding cable communications not later than one year after they become effective and to federal laws and regulations pertaining to cable communications as they become effective.
404.2 Compliance With State And Federal Laws. The franchisee and the franchising authority shall conform to all state laws and rules regarding cable communications not later than one (1) year after they become effective unless otherwise stated and to all federal laws and regulations regarding cable as they become effective.
404.3 Previous Franchises. This franchise shall supersede and replace any previous ordinance or agreement granting a franchise to franchisee or to Mark Twain Cablevision which was assigned to franchisee.
404.4 Franchise Terms. The franchise shall have a franchise term of seven (7) years.
404.5 Renegotiation Of Franchise Terms. Renegotiation between the franchisor and franchisee shall occur pursuant to FCC regulations.
404.6 Franchise Exclusivity. This franchise agreement is non-exclusive; provided, however, that a franchise or license shall be required for every provider of cable service and shall include substantially similar terms and conditions as this franchise
4-26
404.7 Sale Or Transfer Of The Franchise, Sale Or Transfer Of Stock. Sale or transfer of this franchise or sale or transfer of stock so as to create a new controlling interest is prohibited (other than to an entity controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the Franchisee), except at the approval of the franchising authority which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, and that such sale or transfer is completed pursuant to FCC regulations and Minnesota Statue Section 238.083.
404.8 Access To Financial Records. The franchising authority is granted the authority to audit the franchisee’s accounting and financial records upon reasonable notice. The franchisee shall file with the franchising authority annually reports of gross subscriber revenues and other information, as the franchising authority deems appropriate.
404.9 Rates And Rate Change Procedure. To the extent allowable by FCC regulations, the franchisor hereby reserves the right to approve any and all proposed rate increases. Rate change procedures shall be governed in all instances by FCC regulations including but not limited to C.R.F. Part 76 Sub. N. The franchisor reserves its right to adopt a rate regulation plan and establish cable service rates at such time as such city rate regulation is permitted under federal law. The franchisee shall make available to the City all current subscriber charges which shall then be made available for public inspection at Plainview City Hall. Franchisee shall also make available the length and terms of residential subscriber contracts and they shall then be available for public inspection at Plainview City Hall.
404.10 Franchise Administrator. The mayor and City Council shall be responsible for the continuing administration of this franchise as advised by the Plainview-Elgin Cable Communications Board.
404.11 Liability Insurance. Upon being granted a franchise, and upon the filing of the acceptance, the franchisee shall file with the city clerk and shall thereafter during the entire term of such franchise maintain in full force and effect at its own cost and expense each of the following policies of insurance: Comprehensive general liability insurance with bodily injury liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 resulting from any one occurrence, and property damage liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 resulting from any one occurrence. All insurance provided for above shall be with a company or companies with an A+:AAAAA or B rating authorized to do business in the state. Policies or certificates of insurance shall be endorsed by a local insurance agency licensed by the state.
404.12 Bond Required By Franchisee; Indemnification of City By Franchisee
a. Performance Bond to City. Upon being granted a franchise, and upon the
filing of the acceptance required, the franchisee shall file with the city clerk and shall thereafter, annually, during the entire term of such franchise, maintain in full force and effect a corporate surety bond or other adequate surety agreement in an amount approved by the council and not to exceed $10,000. The bond or agreement shall be so conditioned that in the event that the franchisee shall fail to comply with any one or more of the provisions of this ordinance or of such franchise, then there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety any damages or loss, or costs suffered or incurred by the city as a result thereof, including attorney’s fees and costs of any action or proceeding, and including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, cost of removal or abandonment of any property or other costs which may be default, up to the full principal amount of such bond. Such condition shall be a continuing obligation during the entire term of such franchise and thereafter until the franchisee shall have satisfied in full any and all obligations to the city, which arise out of or pertain to said franchise. Neither the provisions of this section, nor any bond accepted by the city pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the city thereunder shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the franchisee, or limit the liability of the franchisee under a franchise issued hereunder or for damages either to the full amount of bond or otherwise. The amount of the bond or agreement shall be fixed by the city council by
4-27
resolution; the amount may be changed by the council from time to time on its own initiative or upon application by the franchisee.
b. Hold Harmless Agreement. The franchisee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city,
its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees, against and from any and all claims, demands, causes of action, suits, proceedings, damages (including but not limited to, damages to city property and damages arising out of copyright infringements, and damages arising out of any failure by the franchisee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by the franchisee’s cable television system), costs or liabilities (including costs or liabilities of the city with respect to its employees), of any kind and nature whatsoever, including, but not limited to, damages for injury or death or damage to person or property, and regardless of the merit of any of the same, and against all liability to others, and against any loss, cost and expenses resulting or arising out of any of the same, including any attorney’s fees, accountant’s fees, expert witness’ fees or consultant’s fees, court cost, per diem expense, traveling and transportation expense, or other costs or expense arising out of or pertaining to the exercise or the enjoyment of any franchise hereunder by the franchisee, or the granting thereof by the city. Policies of liability insurance, or certificates of insurance above required shall contain a clause acknowledging the existence of this agreement and extending coverage therefor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Franchisee will not indemnify the Franchisor for any damages which are attributable solely to Franchisor’s own negligence or for PEG access programming.
c. Defense of Litigation. In order for City to assert is rights to be indemnified, defended, and held
harmless pursuant to Section 12b and c, City must with respect to each claim promptly notify Franchisee in writing of any claim or legal proceeding which gives rise to such right. The franchisee at the sole risk and expense of the franchisee, upon timely written demand of the city, made by and through the city attorney, shall appear in and defend any and all suits, actions, or other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative, legislative, or otherwise brought or instituted or had by third persons or duly constituted authorities, against or affecting the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, or employees, and arising out of or pertaining to the exercise of or the enjoyment of such franchise, or the granting thereof by the city. The franchisee shall pay and satisfy and shall cause to be paid and satisfied any judgment, decree, order directive, or demand rendered, made or issued against the franchisee, the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, or employees in any of these premises, and such indemnity
shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by the amount of any bond, policy or insurance, deposit, undertaking, or other assurance required here-under or otherwise. Franchisee shall fully control any compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of any claim or proceeding; and City shall fully cooperate with reasonable requests of Franchisee; provided Franchisee shall consult with City prior to entering into any settlement, compromise or disposition.
404.13 Liability For Injury To Franchisee’s Facilities. Nothing in this franchise shall relieve any person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring the franchisee’s facilities while performing any work connected with grading, regarding, or changing the line of any street or public place or with the construction or reconstruction of any sewer or water system.
404.14 Public Hearing Re: Franchisee’s Credentials. The franchisee’s technical ability,
financial condition, and legal qualification were considered and approved by the franchising authority in a full public hearing proceeding affording reasonable notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard pursuant FCC regulations.
404.15 Channel Capacity. The franchisee shall operate a cable system with a channel capacity available for immediate or potential use equal to the equivalent of two hundred thirty (230) television channels. The franchisee also agrees to provide cable based Internet access for subscribers who wish to pay for this service if it is economically and technically feasible to do so in franchisee’s discretion;
4-28
provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to authorize City to regulate Internet services of any kind provided by franchisee unless authorized by federal law.
404.16 Emergency Use Of Facilities. Franchisee shall provide an audio emergency alert over-ride on Channels 2 through 13 to allow the Franchisor’s police department to break into normal programming in the event of an emergency. The audio emergency alert over-ride system shall be operational on the effective date of this franchise.
404.17 Authorization To Commence Construction. The franchisee shall obtain building and use permits from the proper municipal authority before commencing construction of any communications system, including the opening or disturbance of any street, sidewalk, driveway, or public place. If the franchisee fails to meet the conditions of the permits, the franchising authority may proceed with both civil and criminal remedies provided for in Plainview’s Municipal Code, Land Management Ordinance, the State Building Code, Minnesota State Statutes and applicable federal law or standards.
Franchisee is hereby granted access to the public rights-of-way and easements that have been dedicated for compatible uses. The franchisee and subscribers must assume the cost of the use of the rights-of-way. This means that if franchisee disturbs any street, sidewalk, driveway, or other public place in order to install or maintain cable television related equipment, it must restore the disturbed area to the condition it was in before the work commenced at its sole expense.
404.18 Compliance With Applicable Codes. All wires, conduits, cable, and other property and facilities of the franchisee shall be located, constructed, installed, and maintained in compliance with applicable codes. The franchisee shall keep and maintain all of its property so as not to unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary trade, traffic or travel upon the streets and public places of the franchise area or endanger the lives or property of any person.
404.19 Relocation Of Wires, Etc. The following procedure shall be used by the franchisee and franchising authority for the relocation or removal of the franchisee’s wires, conduits, cables, and other property located in said street, right-of-way, or public place whenever the franchising authority undertakes public improvements which affect the cable equipment. The franchisee shall be solely responsible for the relocation or removal of the franchisee’s wires, conduits, cables, and other property located in said street, right-of-way, or public place whenever the franchising authority undertakes public improvements which affect the cable equipment. Any and all expenses incurred hereunder shall be borne by the franchisee.
404.20 Technical Standards. The rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission relating to cable communications systems are incorporated by reference. The results of any tests required by the Federal Communications Commission shall be filed within 30 days of the conduct of such tests with the franchising authority.
404.21 Special Testing. In the event that special testing is required to determine the source of technical difficulties, the Franchisee shall be responsible for all of the costs of said special testing and the Franchising Authority shall bear no responsibility for said costs.
404.22 Non-Voice Return Capability. The franchisee shall provide a cable communications system having the technical capacity for non-voice return communications.
404.23 Subscriber Policy. No signals of a Class IV cable communications channel may be transmitted from a subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual viewing patterns of practices without the express written permission of the subscriber. The request for such permission shall be contained in a separate document with a prominent statement that the subscriber is authorizing the
4-29
permission in full knowledge of its provisions. Such written permission shall be for a limited period of time not to exceed one year which shall be renewed at the option of the subscriber. No penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber’s failure to provide or renew such authorization. The authorization shall be revocable at any time by the subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever. Such permission shall be required for each type of classification of Class IV cable communications activity planned for the purpose.
1. No information or data obtained by monitoring transmission of a signal
from a subscriber terminal, including but not limited to lists of the names and addresses of such subscribers or any lists that identify the viewing habits of subscribers shall be sold or otherwise made available to any party other than to the company and its employees for internal business use, and also to the subscriber subject of that information, unless the company has received specific written authorization from the subscriber to make such data available.
2. Written permissions from the subscriber shall not be required for the systems conducting system wide or individually addressed electronic sweeps for the purpose of verifying system integrity or monitoring for the purpose of billing. Confidentiality of such information shall be subject to the provision set forth in 4 MCAR Section 4.202 W. 1.
404.24 Subscriber Complaints. All complaints by the franchisor, subscribers, or other citizens regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunction, billing disputes, and any other matters relative to the cable communications system shall be investigated by the franchisee. The franchisee shall adhere to and follow its service and maintenance policy outlined in the proposal previously submitted to the City Council, which proposal was a determining factor in the granting of the franchise. In addition, the franchisee shall adhere to the most current FCC Customer Service Standards.
404.25 Repairs And Complaints. The franchisee shall provide at least a toll-free or collect telephone number for the reception of subscriber complaints and shall maintain a repair service capable of responding to subscriber complaints or requests for service with 24 hours after receipt of the complaint or request. Costs included in making repairs, adjustments and installations shall be borne by the Franchisee unless caused by the malice or negligence of the subscriber. In addition, the franchisee shall adhere to the most current FCC Customer Service Standards.
404.26 Termination, Forfeiture, Or Expiration Of Franchise. The city shall have the right to terminate and cancel any franchise granted pursuant to this ordinance and all rights and privileges of the franchisee of such franchise in the event that the franchisee substantially violates any material provision of the franchise ordinance, which generally includes but is not limited to uncured violations within franchisee’s control which result in serious disruptions of service to multiple customers. To the extent allowed by FCC regulations, such termination procedure shall be conducted as follows:
1 The city council shall make written demand that the franchisee do or comply with any such provision. If the failure, refusal, or neglect of the franchisee continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such written demand, the city council shall place its request for termination of the franchise upon the next regular council meeting agenda at which meeting the council shall set a date, time and place for a public hearing on the request of the city council for the termination of the franchise. The franchisee shall be given notice of said public hearing in writing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of said hearing. Notice of the date, time and place of said hearing shall be published by the city clerk at least one ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing in the newspaper of general circulation within the city.
4-30
2 The city council shall consider the request for termination and shall hear any persons interested therein including the franchisee and shall determine in its discretion whether or not any failure, refusal, or neglect by the franchisee was with just cause.
3. If such failure, refusal, or neglect by the franchisee was with just cause, the council shall direct the
franchisee to comply with such time and manner and upon such terms as reasonable.
4 If the council shall determine such failure, refusal, or neglect by the franchisee was without just
cause, then the council may by resolution declare that the franchise of such franchisee shall be terminated
and forfeited unless there be compliance by the franchisee within such period as the council may fix,
which period shall not be less than ninety days.
404.27 Abandonment. The franchisee may not abandon any portion of the cable communications service provided hereunder without having given one (1) year prior notice to the franchising authority. No cable communications company may abandon any cable communications service or any portion thereof without compensating the franchising authority for damages resulting to it from such abandonment.
404.28 Removal Of Cable Equipment Upon Termination Of Forfeiture. Upon termination or forfeiture of a franchise, the franchisee shall remove its cable, wires, and appliances from the streets, alleys, and other public places within the franchise area if the franchising authority so requests at its sole expense. The franchisee shall restore personal and real property to the original condition existing prior to the time of location of the franchisee’s cable, wires, and appliances in the city. Any failure therein shall allow the franchising authority to forfeit the bond of franchisee.
404.29 The Municipal Right To Purchase System. If the franchise or cable system is offered for sale, the franchising authority shall have the right to purchase the system. The franchisee shall give the franchising authority the first privilege of purchasing the system at the price and on the terms of any bona fide offer so made to the franchisee. This privilege shall be given by a notice sent to the franchising authority at City Hall by registered or certified mail, requiring the franchising authority to accept the offer in writing and to sign a suitable contract to purchase the system within a period of sixty (60) days after the mailing of the notice.
404.30 Access Channels
A) The franchisee shall provide to each of its subscribers who receive all, or any part of, the total services offered on the system, reception on specially designated access channels. Franchisee shall provide up to two (2) as specially designated access channels for public, educational and government use based on demonstrated need. “Demonstrated Need” shall be defined pursuant to Minnesota Statutes §238. Only one specially designated access channel shall be required to be placed on the VHS frequencies of Channels 2 through 13. Franchisees providing subscribers only alarm services or only data transmission services for computer operated functions shall be exempt from this requirement. The specially designated access channels may be used by the public, local educational authorities and local government on a first come, nondiscriminatory basis at no cost or charge. During those hours that the specially designated access channels are not being used by the public, local educational authorities or local government, to the extent allowed by FCC regulations, the franchisee shall lease time to commercial or noncommercial users on a first come, nondiscriminatory basis if the demand for such time arises. The franchisee may also use the specially designated access channels for local origination during those hours when the channels are not in use by the public, local educational authorities, local government, or commercial or noncommercial users who have leased time on the specially designated access channels.
B) The franchisee shall establish rules pertaining to the administration of the specially designated access channel.
4-31
C) Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to preclude the installation of converters by the system on a voluntary basis, or as a result of an agreement arrived at through negotiations between the parties to a franchise.
D) The franchisee shall operate and make readily available for public use, at least the minimum equipment necessary to perform good quality playback and prerecorded programming, and to make it possible to record programs at remote locations with battery operated portable equipment.
404.31 Franchise Payments. In consideration of the granting and exercise of a franchise to use the streets of the city for the operation of a cable television system, the franchisee shall pay to the city, during the terms of its franchise an amount of money computed by the city for the reasonable value of the time spent by city employees, their agents or consultants, and the city’s out-of-pocket expenses incurred in enforcing the regulatory provisions of this franchise.
The reasonable value of this time shall be deemed to equal three (3) per cent of the franchisee’s gross annual revenues within their franchise area and shall be paid quarterly to the Franchisor. In the event the City of Plainview shall pass a resolution so requesting, this payment shall increase to five (5) per cent of the franchisee’s gross annual revenues within their franchise area upon ninety (90) days written notice to franchisee.
Payments shall be made quarterly to the city treasurer from the date of acceptance of the franchise.
The city shall notify the franchisee in writing of the annexation of any areas to the city and services furnished by the franchisee to such areas shall be included in the franchisee’s annual revenues from the first day of the second month following such notification.
The city shall have the right to audit the franchisee’s accounting and financial records upon reasonable notice; and the franchisee shall file annually with the city a report setting forth gross revenues from the franchised area and such other information as the city may deem appropriate.
404.32 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. The council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, and phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional. The invalidity of any portion of this ordinance shall not abate, reduce, or otherwise affect any consideration or other obligation required of the franchisee hereunder. This franchise in intended to comply with the franchise standards of the FCC. To the extent that the provisions of this ordinance should conflict with the franchise standards of the FCC, the franchise standards of the FCC shall take precedence.
404.33 Duties Of Service. In addition to other service regulations adopted by the council, and excepting circumstances beyond the franchisee’s control, such as acts of God, riots, war, and civil disturbances, and in providing the foregoing services, the franchisee shall:
A) Limit system failures to minimum time duration by locating and correcting malfunctions promptly, but in no event longer than twenty-four (24) hours after occurrence, irrespective of holidays or other non-business hours.
B) Render efficient service throughout the term of the franchise, making repairs promptly and interrupting service only for good cause for the shortest time possible. Planned interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice given to subscribers twenty-four (24) hours in advance and shall occur during the period of minimum use of the system.
4-32
C) Maintain a toll free number for the purpose of operating and maintaining the cable television system and receiving complaints. The phone number shall be listed in directories of the telephone company serving the city. The franchisee shall be prepared to receive and shall receive complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments at any time, day or night, seven (7) days a week.
D) Unless otherwise authorized by the mayor, maintain a written record or log, listing dates of customer complaints, identifying the subscriber, and describing the nature of the complaint, and when and what action was taken by the franchisee in response thereto: such record shall be kept at the franchisee’s local office for a period of five (5) years from the date of the complaint. The log shall be available for inspection during regular business hours, without further notice or demand, by the mayor.
E) Not charge a subscriber for each day no service is provided. A day is
defined as a period of time exceeding twelve (12) hours in a twenty-four (24) hour period, commencing twenty-four (24) hours after an occurrence resulting in no service. “No Service” is defined as failure to provide one (1) or more channels to a customer, which channel or channels has been requested by the customer as a part of his service. “No Service” also is defined as any period of time during which the system does not produce a picture upon any subscriber’s television screen in black and white or color (provided the subscriber’s television set is producing a colored picture) that is free from distortion and free from ghost images without material degradation of color fidelity and intelligence and includes any period of time that the system does not distribute signals of adequate strength to produce good pictures with good sound to all television receivers (provided that they are in good repair and properly adjusted) of all subscribers without causing cross-modulation in the cables or interfering with other electrical or electronic systems or the reception of other television or radio receivers in the area not connected to the system.
F) Pay all costs incurred in making repairs, adjustments, or activations
unless otherwise provided in this ordinance or the subscriber contract.
G) In all instances, franchisee shall comply with customer service standards as adopted and described in Section 24 above.
H) The franchisee shall not deny access to cable service because of the
income of the residents of the local area.
404.34 Acceptance Of Franchise By Franchisee
A) No franchise granted under this chapter shall be become effective for any purpose unless and until written acceptance thereof shall have been filed with the city clerk. Written acceptance, which shall be approved by the city attorney as to form and substance, shall also be and operate as an acceptance of each and every term and condition and limitation contained in this ordinance, or in such franchise or otherwise specified as herein provided.
B) The written acceptance shall be filed by the franchisee not later that 12:01 p.m. of the twentieth day next following the effective date of this ordinance.
C) In default of filing of such written acceptance as herein provided, the franchisee shall be deemed to have rejected and repudiated the franchise. Thereafter, subject to federal law, the acceptance of the franchisee shall have no rights, remedies, or redress in the premises, unless and until the council, by resolution, shall determine that such acceptance be received or filed, and then upon such terms and conditions as the council may impose.
D) In any case, and in any instance, all rights, remedies, and redress in these premises which may or shall be available to the city, shall at all times be available to the city and shall be preserved and maintained and shall continuously exist in and to the city and shall not be in any manner or means modified, abridged, altered, restricted, or impaired by reason of any of these premises or otherwise.
404.35 Amendments. There is hereby reserved to the city and the franchisee the power to amend at any time and from time to time any section of this ordinance upon mutual written agreement so as to require additional or greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance, or otherwise, on the part of the franchisee to reflect technical and economic changes occurring during the franchise term, and
4-33
to enable the city and the franchisee to take advantage of new developments in the cable television industry so as to more effectively, efficiently, and economically serve the public.
404.36 Construction The franchise shall:
A) Obtain permission from the proper municipal authority before commencing any
construction of cable communications system.
B) Give the city reasonable notice or proposed construction so as to coordinate all work
between the municipality and the franchise.
C) First, obtain a permit from the city before opening or disturbing the surface of any street,
sidewalk, driveway, or public place for any purpose.
D) Place lines, conduits, cables, and other property in the streets and public places pursuant
to such permit as may be determined by the proper municipal authority.
E) Upon completion of any work requiring the opening of any street or public place, restore
the same including the paving and its foundations to as good a condition as formerly and in a manner and quality approved by the proper municipal authority and exercise reasonable care to maintain the same thereafter in good condition.
F) Perform all work with due diligence.
G) Locate, construct, install, and maintain all wires, conduits, cables, and other property and
facilities as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary trade, traffic, and travel upon the streets and public places of the municipality and to keep and maintain all of its property in good condition, order, and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life and property of any person.
H) Construct and install all wires, cables, amplifiers, and other property of the franchisee in
an orderly and workmanlike manner.
I) Install cables and wires parallel with existing telephone and electric wires whenever
possible and arrange multiple cable configuration in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations.
J) Construct, install, maintain, and operate any cable communication system or any facility
employed in connection therewith in compliance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code as prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National Electrical Code, the Bell Telephone System Code of Pole Line Construction, and any standards issued by the Federal Communications Commission or other Federal or State regulatory agencies in relation thereto and in accordance with local zoning regulations, subdivisions and building regulations.
K) Design construct, install, maintain, and operate the cable communication system so as not
to endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the city.
L) Keep accurate maps and records of all its facilities and furnish copies of such maps and
records as requested by the municipality.
404.37 Right Of Inspection. The city shall have the right to inspect and examine at any reasonable time and upon reasonable notice the property owned or used in part or in whole by the franchisee.
404.38 City Of Elgin Extension. The parties acknowledge that the City of Elgin, Minnesota, granted an extension permit to franchisee’s predecessor to provide cable services to the City of Elgin by resolution of the Elgin City Council dated July 11, 1983. Franchisee covenants and agrees that said permit shall have no effect on this ordinance and that the City of Plainview shall have no duty or obligation or liability to franchisee for anything arising outside of the terms of this ordinance, or for the furnishing or failure to furnish cable television services to properties outside the corporate limits of the City of Plainview.
4-34
404.39 Lockout Device. Upon request of a subscriber, franchisee shall provide by sale a lockout device capable of preventing the viewing of a premium channel by a keyed lock system.
404.40 Work Performed By Others. Franchisee must inform the franchising authority in writing of the names and addresses of any entity other than the franchisee which performs substantial service pursuant to the franchise.
404.41 Costs Of Establishing This Ordinance. The franchisee shall assume the costs of publication of this franchise as such publication is required by law and for all reasonable legal expenses of the franchisor necessary to establish the franchise up to a maximum amount of Four Thousand Five Hundred Dollars and no cents ($4500). A bill for such cost shall be presented to the franchisee by the city clerk upon the filing of acceptance by franchisee and franchisee shall pay said bill at that time.
404.42 Company Will Not Contest Validity Of Franchise. The franchisee agrees by the acceptance of this franchise that it will not at any time set up against the city in any claim or proceeding, any condition or term of this franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary, or void, or that the City had no power of authority to make such term or condition, but shall be required to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of this franchise in their entirety.
404.43 Worker’s Compensation Insurance. No acceptance of the franchise by the franchisee under Section 34 of this ordinance shall be effective until the franchisee has provided proof of compliance with Minnesota Statues Section 176.182 (Worker’s Compensation) to the City Council in a form and substance approved by the City Attorney. Such proof of compliance shall be submitted to the City Council at the time of acceptance as provided under Section 34.
404.44 Effective Date. The effective date shall be February 25, 2004.
5-1
500 REGULATION AND LICENSING
501 LICENSING AND PERMIT PROVISIONS. Except as otherwise provided in this code, all licenses and permits granted by the City shall be governed by the provisions of this part.
501.1 Requirements. No person shall conduct any activity or use any property for which a license or permit is required by law or this code without a currently valid license or permit for such activity or use.
501.2 Application. Every application for a license shall be made to the City Clerk on a form provided by the City Clerk. It shall be accompanied by payment to the City Clerk of the prescribed fee. If, after investigation, the City Clerk is satisfied that all requirements of law and this code have been met, the City Clerk shall present the application to the Council for action, or if the license or permit does not require Council approval, the City Clerk shall issue the license or permit.
501.3 Bond. Where a bond is required for a license or permit, the bond shall be a corporate surety bond executed on a form approved by the City Attorney and shall be filed with the City Clerk before the license or permit is issued. Except where otherwise provided, a bond, as established by the City Council, or by Statute, shall be conditioned that the licensee or permittee shall comply with the applicable Ordinance and laws pertaining to the licensed or permitted activity and that the licensee or permittee will indemnify the City and hold it harmless from all loss or damage by reason of inadequate work performed by him or by reason of accident caused by the negligence of the licensee or permittee, his agents or employees.
501.4 Insurance. When a licensee or permittee is required to have in force a policy of insurance, the policy shall be approved as to substance and form by the City Attorney. The policy shall provide that it is non-cancelable without fifteen (15) day notice to the City, and the coverage shall be for the term of the license or permit. Satisfactory evidence of coverage by insurance shall be filed with the City Clerk before the license or permit is issued. Each license or permit shall terminate upon termination of the required insurance coverage. Unless otherwise provided, a required policy of liability insurance shall provide for coverage consistent with the maximum liability limits for municipalities as set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 466.04. or any successor to that statute. For injuries including death therefrom sustained by any one person, Five Hundred Thousand and no/100 Dollars ($500,000.00). For injuries including death resulting therefrom sustained by two or more persons as the result of any one occurrence, One Million and no/100 Dollars ($1,000,000.00). For property damage involving one claimant, Five Hundred Thousand and no/100Dollars ($500,000.00). For property damage involving multiple claimants as a result of any one occurrence, One Million and no/100 Dollars ($1,000,000.00). Where required by State and Federal law, proof of workers compensation insurance shall be provided to the City.
501.5 Fees. License fees are in the amounts established as provided in this code. The compilation of all fees in Appendix A is maintained for convenience and reference only. The license and permit fees are set forth in the various Sections of this code are the official and controlling provisions. License fees shall not be prorated unless otherwise specified by this code or by law. License fees shall not be refunded in whole or in part unless otherwise specified by this code or by law.
501.6 Duration and Transfers of License. Unless otherwise specified, a license shall be valid for a calendar year or the part of the year for which it is issued and shall expire on December 31. No license issued under this code may be transferred to any other person. Where a license relates to specific premises, the license shall not be changed to another location without approval of the Council or other licensing authority.
5-2
501.7 Inspections. Any City official or employee having a duty to perform with
reference to a license under this code and any police officer may inspect and examine any licensee, his business, or premises to enforce compliance with applicable provisions of this code. Subject to the provision of Subdivision 2, he may, at any reasonable time enter any licensed premises or premises for which a license is required, in order to enforce compliance with this code. - If the licensee objects to the inspection of his premises, the City official or employee charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this code shall procure a valid search warrant before conducting the inspection.
501.8 Duties of Licensee. Every licensee and permittee shall have the duties set forth
in this Section. He/she shall permit at reasonable times inspections of his business and examination of his books and records by authorized officers or employees. He/she shall comply with laws, Ordinances and regulations applicable to the licensed business, activity or property. He/she shall display the license or other insignia given him as evidence of the license in a conspicuous place on the premises, vehicle, or device to which the license relates. If the license is not so related, the license shall be carried on the licensee's person whenever he is carrying on the licensed activity. The licensee shall not lend or give to any other person his license or license insignia.
501.9 Suspension or Revocation. The Council may suspend for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days or revoke any license or permit for violation of any provision of law, Ordinance or regulation applicable to the licensed or permitted activity or property. Except where mandatory revocation is provided by law without notice and hearing and except where suspension may be made without a hearing, the holder of the license or permit shall be granted a hearing upon at least ten (10) days notice before revocation or suspension is ordered. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the nature of the charges against the licensee.
502 GARBAGE AND RUBBISIH
502.1 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Garbage. Organic refuse resulting from the preparation of food, and decayed and spoiled food from any source.
Recyclables. Includes paper, plastic, tin cans, aluminum, motor oil, glass and other metal goods, each separated or otherwise prepared so as to be acceptable to the recycling center where they are to be deposited.
Recycling Center. Means premises used for the receipt, storage or processing of recyclables and approved as such by the Council when the premises are in the City or by the governing body of the local government unit having jurisdiction when the premises are outside the City.
Refuse. Includes garbage and rubbish.
Rubbish. All inorganic refuse matter such as tin cans, glass, paper, ashes and the like.
502.2 Sanitation Collection Service Required. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises or any place where garbage or rubbish accumulates shall subscribe to a sanitation collection service.
5-3
502.3 Container Required; Placement.
502.3.1 Container. It shall be the duty of every person whose garbage and refuse is collected by the sanitation collection service to provide a container or containers for garbage and refuse, sufficient in size and number to accommodate and securely keep all garbage and refuse that may accumulate between collections. Garbage containers shall be watertight and constructed of a solid and durable grade of metal, plastic, or paper material.
502.3.2 Placement of Container. It shall be the duty of every person whose garbage and refuse is collected by the sanitation collection service to place their garbage containers directly behind the curbline of the street abutting their property or in the absence of a curb directly behind the ditch line abutting their property. In no event shall containers be placed in the street or on the sidewalk or in any manner placed where the containers will interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
502.4 Meddling or Tampering With Trash Receptacles Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to meddle or tamper with garbage cans, trash or rubbish receptacles or in any way pilfer, search or scatter contents of garbage cans or rubbish receptacles in or upon any street or alley within the city limits. This section shall not apply to persons authorized by the city or persons authorized by state or federal law to search or otherwise meddle with trash receptacles.
502.5 Containers to Be Kept Sanitary and Secure. All containers shall be kept clean and free from accumulation of any substance remaining attached to the inside of the container which would attract or breed flies, mosquitoes, or other insects. The area surrounding garbage containers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. The contents of all receptacles shall be protected so that the wind cannot scatter the contents over the streets, alleys or other property within the city. All containers shall be securely closed in a manner as to prevent the scattering of the contents and to make them inaccessible to insects, rodents and other animals.
502.6 Unauthorized Private Collections Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport garbage or refuse for hire which has been collected from any premises within the city over any public street within the city. This section shall not apply to any person who at the time of the activity is operating under a valid contract or franchise granted by the city which authorizes that person to use the public streets to conduct that activity.
502.7 Sanitation Service: City Options. The City Council may provide for sanitation collection services within the city by use of city employees and vehicles, or it may grant licenses, or it may contract with one or more contractors for the provision of these services under the terms and conditions negotiated with the contractors.
502.8 Removal of Building Materials. Waste from building operations, rock waste, building materials or other refuse resulting from building or remodeling operations or resulting from a general cleanup of vacant or improved property shall be removed by the building contractor, owner or occupant of the building at his or her own expense. It shall be unlawful for any person to place those materials in any dumpster or other trash receptacle for disposal by the city or any agent or contractor of the city.
502.9 Prohibited Acts.
502.9.1 Depositing Debris on Public and Private Property. It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw or deposit any garbage, trash, debris, stagnant water, industrial/commercial waste or byproduct, or dead animal into, upon or along any public property or private property of another, except as may be specifically provided by this chapter.
502.9.2 Depositing Debris in Waterways. It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw or deposit any garbage, trash, debris, stagnant water, industrial/commercial waste or byproduct, or dead
5-4
animal into, upon or along any stream or body of water, except as may be specifically provided by this chapter.
502.9.3 Permitting Conditions Not Allowed. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or otherwise in control of any premises within the city to permit any of the conditions described in 502.9.1 to exist upon property owned or controlled by him or her after having actual or constructive notice thereof.
502.9.4 Not Using Approved Containers. It shall be unlawful for any person to place in any container any material other than as specifically provided in this chapter.
502.9.5 Unapproved Actions. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or maintain garbage or trash except as provided for by this chapter.
502.9.6 Smoldering Material. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any burning or smoldering match, charcoal, ember, or other material in any container used for the disposal of garbage.
502.9.7 Burning Debris. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any garbage, trash, debris, industrial/commercial waste or byproduct, or dead animal, except as may be specifically provided by this chapter. This section does not apply to wood, corn, or similar items burned in an furnace or fireplace for the primary purpose of generating heat for a residence.
502.9.8 Burying Debris and Composting. No person shall bury any refuse, trees, stumps, or brush in the City except in an approved sanitary landfill, but leaves, grass clippings and easily bio-degradable, non-poisonous garbage may be composted on the premises where such refuse has been accumulated. Garbage may be composted only in a rodent-proof structure and in an otherwise sanitary manner and only after the Council (or designated health officer) gives its approval to such composting following a finding that the composting will be done in accordance with the standards.
502.10 Nonresidential Customers; Container Types; Collection Schedules.
502.10.1 Multi-Family, Intuitional, or Industrial Premises. It shall be the duty of the owner or person otherwise in charge of multi-family, institutional or industrial premises within the city to cause all garbage and trash accumulated on the premises to be placed in disposal containers, or commercial-type containers. Commercial-type containers may be used and may be placed at a location on the premises as arranged between the customer and the collector, but subject to review by the city at any time.
502.10.2 Readily Accessible. Disposal containers shall be placed at a location on the premises which is readily accessible to the collector.
502.10.3 Size of Container and Frequency of Pickup. The amount and character of garbage shall be considered in establishing size of commercial containers and frequency of pickup. The city shall have final authority to establish the size and frequency based on the history of amount and type of garbage generated by the customer. The collection and removal of garbage and trash from premises used for commercial, institutional, or industrial purposes shall be made as often as necessary in order to maintain the premises free of accumulations. Garbage, except dry trash in contractor-supplied containers, shall be collected not less than one time each week, except for roll-off containers which shall not be subject to this provision so long as they are used solely for brush and dry trash.
502.11 Manner of Collection and Transportation. The collection, removal and disposal of all garbage, trash and brush shall be carried on in a systematic, efficient manner to keep the city in a clean and sanitary condition. All vehicles used for the collection and transportation of garbage and trash shall be equipped with suitable covers which shall be used to prevent blowing or scattering of refuse while garbage and trash are being transported for disposal.
502.12 Licensing for Collection.
502.12.1 Purpose. In order to provide for a continuous system of refuse collection and disposal in a manner which meets the needs and conveniences of the residents of the city and in order to protect the area from the problems of uncoordinated, unsanitary and improper solid waste disposal, the City Council may determine that it is in the best interests of the residents of the city to require licenses of persons
5-5
collecting or hauling garbage and rubbish for hire, reserving to the city the right and authority to contract with one or more operators to provide these services.
502.12.2 Licensing. No person may collect or haul garbage or rubbish within the city without first obtaining a written license from the City Council. An application for a license shall be submitted in writing to the City Clerk, and shall contain the following information:
A Name and address of the applicant;
B Description of the equipment which will be used within the city by the applicant;
C A schedule of the rate that will be charged by the applicant for the various categories of customers within the city;
D Evidence of compliance with the other applicable sections of this chapter; and
E Insurance.
502.12.3 Franchise. The City Council may exercise its reserved right to contract with one or more operators for the collection of garbage and rubbish within the city. The City may, upon resolution, impose a franchise fee to be collected from licensed garbage collectors and haulers.
502.12.4 Suspension of License or Contract. A contract or license issued under the provisions of this section may be revoked or suspended for a violation of this chapter or other applicable regulations of law upon a showing that the contractor or licensee has failed to comply with that regulation.
502.12.5 Financial Responsibility. The licensee or contractor shall show financial responsibility or a certificate of insurance coverage prior to obtaining the license or franchise whereby each vehicle to be used by the licensee or contractor shall be covered against loss or injury in the following amounts: $300,000 when the claim is one for death by wrongful act or omission and $300,000 to any claimant in any other case; $1,000,000 for any number of claims arising out of a single occurrence. The licensee or contractor shall hold the city harmless and agrees to defend and indemnify the city, and the city's employees and agents, for any claims, damages, losses, and expenses related to the work under the license or contract. The city shall be named as an additional insured under that insurance for the services provided under the license or contract. The licensee's or contractor's insurance shall be the primary insurance for the city and the licensee or contractor shall provide a certificate of insurance on the city's approved form which verifies the existence of the insurance required, including provisions to hold the city harmless and defend and indemnify the city. The licensee or contractor shall also provide evidence of workers compensation insurance for employees. These insurance policies shall be for the full term of the license or franchise and shall provide for the giving of ten days prior notice to the city of the termination or cancellation of these policies. In case any policies are terminated or cancelled, the license or contract shall be automatically revoked upon receipt by the City Clerk of the termination or cancellation.
502.12.6 Design of Equipment. All trucks or motor vehicles used by the licensee or contractor shall be water-tight so as not to allow the leakage of liquids or refuse while hauling the same and shall be covered with a covering to prevent the scattering of its contents upon the public streets or private properties in the city.
502.12.7 Inspections. All vehicles used for garbage or rubbish shall be made available for inspection within the city at the times and places as the City Council may designate.
502.12.8 Insurance. The contractor or licensee may be required to furnish proof of insurance in an amount as the City Council deems necessary running to and approved by the City Council, guaranteeing the franchisee's or licensee's faithful and continuous performance of the terms of the franchise, license or contract and of this chapter.
502.13 Collection of Leaves, Trees, or Tree Limbs. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the collection for hire by other persons of leaves, trees or tree limbs.
503 ANIMALS
503.1 Definitions For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
5-6
ANIMAL. Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all fowl and poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal kingdom. Animals shall be classified as follows:
DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Those animals commonly accepted as domesticated household pets. Unless otherwise defined, domestic animals shall include dogs, cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits, fish, non-poisonous, non-venomous and non-constricting reptiles or amphibians, and other similar animals.
FARM ANIMALS. Those animals commonly associated with a farm or performing work in an agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined, farm animals shall include members of the equine family (horses, mules), bovine family (cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl (ducks, geese), swine (including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees, and other animals associated with a farm, ranch, or stable.
NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Those animals commonly considered to be naturally wild and not naturally trained or domesticated, or which are commonly considered to be inherently dangerous to the health, safety, and welfare of people. Unless otherwise defined, non-domestic animals shall include:
A Any member of the large cat family (family felidae) including lions, tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly accepted domesticated house cats.
B Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family canidae) including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but excluding commonly accepted domesticated dogs.
C Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog, unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet.
D Any member or relative of the rodent family including any skunk (whether or not descented), raccoon, squirrel, or ferret, but excluding those members otherwise defined or commonly accepted as domesticated pets.
E Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or inherently dangerous member of the reptile or amphibian families including rattlesnakes, boa constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators.
F Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above but which can be reasonably defined by the terms of this section, including but not limited to bears, deer, monkeys and game fish.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The person responsible for capturing, seizing and delivering to any designated pound any animal running at large or considered a nuisance to the general public. All Plainview Police Officers are to be considered Animal Control Officers.
AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner and not under the custody and control of the owner or other person, either by leash, cord, chain, or otherwise restrained or confined.
CAT. Both the male and female of the felidae species commonly accepted as domesticated household pets.
DOG. Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly accepted as domesticated household pets, and other domesticated animals of a dog kind.
5-7
OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping, or harboring an animal.
RELEASE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer or other person in charge of the pound for the release of any animal that has been taken to the pound. A release permit may be obtained upon payment of a fee to the City Clerk in accordance with the regular license requirement if the animal is unlicensed, payment of a release fee, and any maintenance costs incurred in capturing and impounding the animal.
503.2 Domestic Animals
503.2.1 Running At Large Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat, or any other domestic animal, of any person who owns, harbors, or keeps such an animal, to run at large. A person, who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat, or other domestic animal, which runs at large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
503.2.2 Dogs on Leash. Dogs on a leash and accompanied by a responsible person or accompanied by and under the control and direction of a responsible person, so as to be effectively restrained by command as by leash, shall be permitted on streets or on public land unless the city has posted an area with signs reading “Dogs Prohibited”
503.2.3 License Required, Dogs.
A All dogs over the age of six months kept, harbored, or maintained by their owners in the city, shall be licensed and registered with the city. Dog licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk upon payment of the license, as established by the City Council. The owner shall state, at the time application is made for the license and upon forms provided, his or her name and address and the name, breed, color, and sex of each dog owned or kept by him or her. No license shall be granted for a dog that has not been vaccinated against distemper and rabies, as evidenced by a certificate by a veterinarian qualified to practice in the state in which the dog is vaccinated. Upon issuance of a dog license, City staff shall also distribute a copy of the Animal Control Ordinance to the dog license applicant.
B It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog subject to this section to pay to the City Clerk the license fee established
C Upon payment of the license fee, the Clerk shall issue to the owner a license certificate and metallic tag for each dog licensed. The tag number shall correspond with the number on the certificate. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar to which the license tag must be affixed, and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued by the City Clerk. A charge shall be made for each duplicate tag. Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another and no refunds shall be made on any dog license fee or tag because of death of the dog or the owners leaving the city before the expiration of the license period.
D The licensing provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs whose owners are nonresidents temporarily (30 days) within the city, nor to dogs brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any dog show. If the animal owned is a service animal which is capable of being properly identified as from a recognized school for seeing eye, hearing ear, service or guide animals, and the owner is a blind or deaf person, or a person with physical or sensory disabilities, then no license shall be required.
E The funds received by the City Clerk from all dog licenses and metallic tags shall first be used to defray any costs incidental to the enforcement of this section; including, but not restricted to, the costs of licenses, metallic tags, and impounding and maintenance of the dogs.
5-8
503.2.4 Cats and other Domestic Animals. Cats and other Domestic Animals shall be included as controlled by this division insofar as running-at-large, pickup, impounding, boarding, licensing and proof of anti-rabies vaccine is concerned. All other provisions of this section shall also apply to cats and other Domestic Animals unless otherwise provided.
503.2.5 Vaccination. All dogs and cats kept harbored, maintained, or transported within the city shall be vaccinated at least once every two years by a licensed veterinarian for:
A Rabies - with a live modified vaccine; and
B Distemper.
A certificate of vaccination must be kept on which is stated the date of vaccination, owner's name and address, the animal's name (if applicable), sex, description and weight, the type of vaccine, and the veterinarian's signature. Upon demand made by the City Clerk, the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer or a police officer, the owner shall present for examination the required certificate(s) of vaccination for the animal(s). In cases where certificates are not presented, the owner or keeper of the animal(s) shall have seven days in which to present the certificate(s) to the City Clerk or officer. Failure to do so shall be deemed a violation of this section.
503.3 Non Domestic Animals. It shall be illegal for any person to own, possess, harbor, or offer for sale, any non-domestic animal within the city. Any owner of a non-domestic animal at the time of adoption of this code shall have 30 days in which to remove the animal from the city after which time the city may impound the animal as provided for in this section. An exception shall be made to this prohibition for animals specifically trained for and actually providing assistance to the handicapped or disabled, and for those animals brought into the city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research laboratory, or a licensed show or exhibition.
503.4 Farm Animals. Farm animals shall only be kept in an agricultural district of the city, or on a residential lot of at least ten acres in size provided that no animal shelter, such as a barn or shed, shall be within 300 feet of an adjoining piece of property. An exception shall be made to this section for those animals brought into the city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research laboratory, or a licensed show or exhibition.
503.5 Impounding.
503.5.1 Running at large. Any unlicensed animal running at large is hereby declared a public nuisance. Any Animal Control Officer or Police Officer may impound any dog or other animal found unlicensed or any animal found running at large and shall give notice of the impounding to the owner of the dog or other animal, if known. The Animal Control Officer or Police Officer shall not enter the property of the owner of an animal found running at large or the owner of an unlicensed animal unless the officer has first obtained the permission of the owner to do so or has obtained a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction to search for and seize the animal.
In case the owner is unknown, the officer shall post notice at the City Hall that if the dog or other animal is not claimed within the time specified, it will be sold or otherwise disposed of. The notice shall set forth: (1) where and when the animal was seized, (2) the animal’s gender, color, breed, and approximate age, (3) the name of owner (if known), and (4) the date and approximate time that the animal will be sold or destroyed unless claimed and redeemed. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to kill, destroy, or otherwise cause injury to any animal, including dogs and cats running at large.
503.5.2 Biting animals. Any animal that has not been inoculated by a live modified rabies vaccine and which has bitten any person, wherein the skin has been punctured or the services of a doctor are required, shall be confined in the city pound for a period of not less than ten days, at the expense of the owner. The animal may be released at the end of the time if healthy and free from symptoms of rabies, and by the payment of all costs by the owner. However, if the owner of the animal shall elect immediately upon receipt of notice of need for the confinement by the officer to voluntarily and
5-9
immediately confine the animal for the required period of time in a veterinary hospital of the owner's choosing, not outside of the county in which this city is located, and provide immediate proof of confinement in the manner as may be required, the owner may do so. If, however, the animal has been inoculated with a live modified rabies vaccine and the owner has proof of the vaccination by a certificate from a licensed veterinarian, the owner may confine the dog or other animal to the owner's property.
503.5.3 Reclaiming. All animals conveyed to the pound shall be kept, with humane treatment and sufficient food and water for their comfort, at least five regular business days, unless the animal is a dangerous animal, in which case it shall be kept for seven regular business days, and except if the animal is a cruelly-treated animal in which case it shall be kept for ten regular business days, unless sooner reclaimed by their owners or keepers as provided by this section. In case the owner or keeper shall desire to reclaim the animal from the pound, the following shall be required, unless otherwise provided for in this code or established from time to time by resolution of the City Council:
A Payment of the release fee and receipt of a release permit as established by the City Council
B Payment of maintenance costs, as provided by the pound, per day or any part of day while animal is in the pound; and
C If a dog is unlicensed, payment of a regular license fee and valid certificate of vaccination for rabies and distemper shots is required.
503.5.4 Unclaimed animals. If an animal has not been reclaimed within the time allotted in accordance with the provisions of this section, the officer appointed to enforce this section may let any person claim the animal by complying with all provisions in this section, or the officer may sell the animal to the University of Minnesota, or cause the animal to be destroyed in a proper and humane manner and shall properly dispose of the remains thereof. Any money collected under this section shall be payable to the City Clerk.
503.6 Nuisances
503.6.1 Habitual barking. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog which habitually barks or cries. Habitual barking shall be defined as barking for repeated intervals of at least five minutes with less than one minute of interruption. The barking must also be audible off of the owner's or caretaker's premises.
503.6.2 Damage to property. It shall be unlawful for any person's dog or other animal to damage any lawn, garden, or other property, whether or not the owner has knowledge of the damage.
503.6.3 Cleaning up litter. The owner of any animal or person having the custody or control of any animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces of the animal and disposing of the feces in a sanitary manner whether on their own property, on the property of others or on public property.
503.6.4 Entering Premises. An Animal Control Officer or Police Officer may enter a property of the owner of an animal described in this section if it is deemed necessary to search for and seize the animal.
503.6.5 Other. Any animals kept contrary to this section are subject to impoundment.
503.7 Seizure of Animals. Any police officer or Animal Control Officer or Police Officer may enter upon private property and seize any animal with or without the permission of the owner of the property, if that person is also the owner of the animal, provided that the following exist:
A There is an identified complainant other than the police officer or Animal Control Officer or Police Officer making a contemporaneous complaint about the animal.
B The officer reasonably believes that the animal meets either the barking dog criteria or the criteria for an at large animal.
C The officer can demonstrate that there has been at least one previous complaint of a barking dog; inhumane treatment of the animal; or that the animal was at large at this address on a prior date.
5-10
D The officer has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of the animal and the property to be entered and those attempts have either failed or have been ignored.
E Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place if personal contact with the owner of the animal is not possible.
503.8 Animals Presenting a Danger to Health and Safety of City. If, in the reasonable belief of any person or the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer or police officer, an animal presents an immediate danger to the health and safety of any person, or the animal is threatening imminent harm to any person, or the animal is in the process of attacking any person, the person or officer may destroy the animal in a proper and humane manner whether or not the animal is on the property of its owner. Otherwise, the person or officer may apprehend the animal and deliver it to the pound for confinement. If the animal is destroyed, the owner or keeper of the animal destroyed shall be liable to the city for the cost of maintaining and disposing of the animal, plus the costs of any veterinarian examination. If the animal is found not to be a danger to the health and safety of the city, it may be released to the owner or keeper.
503.9 Diseased Animals.
503.9.1 Running at large. No person shall keep or allow to be kept on his or her premises, or on premises occupied by them, nor permit to run at large in the city, any animal which is diseased so as to be a danger to the health and safety of the city, even though the animal be properly licensed under this section, and a warrant to search for and seize the animal is not required.
503.9.2 Confinement. Any animal reasonably suspected of being diseased and presenting a threat to the health and safety of the public, may be apprehended and confined in the pound by any person, the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer. The officer shall have a qualified veterinarian examine the animal. If the animal is found to be diseased in a manner so as to be a danger to the health and safety of the city, the officer shall cause the animal to be painlessly killed and shall properly dispose of the remains. The owner or keeper of the animal killed under this section shall be liable to the city for the cost of maintaining and disposing of the animal, plus the costs of any veterinarian examinations.
503.9.3 Release. If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be diseased the animal shall be released to the owner or keeper free of charge.
503.10 Dangerous Animals.
503.10.1 Attack by an Animal. It shall be unlawful for any person's animal to inflict or attempt to inflict bodily injury to any person or other animal whether or not the owner is present. This section shall not apply to an attack by a dog under the control of an on-duty law enforcement officer or to an attack upon an uninvited intruder who has entered the owner’s home with criminal intent.
503.10.2 Destruction of Dangerous Animal. The Animal Control Officer or Police Officer shall have the authority to order the destruction of dangerous animals in accordance with the terms established by this chapter.
503.10.3 Definitions. For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL. An animal which has:
A Caused bodily injury or disfigurement to any person on public or private property;
B Engaged in any attack on any person under circumstances which would indicate danger to personal safety;
C Exhibited unusually aggressive behavior, such as an attack on another animal;
D Bitten one or more persons on two or more occasions; or
E Been found to be potentially dangerous and/or the owner has personal knowledge of the same, the animal aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
5-11
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL. An animal which has:
A Bitten a human or a domestic animal on public or private property;
B When unprovoked, chased or approached a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public property in an apparent attitude of attack; or
C Has engaged in unprovoked attacks causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic animals.
PROPER ENCLOSURE. A structure with securely confined indoors or in a securely locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the animal from escaping and to provide protection for the animal from the elements. A proper enclosure does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or other structure that would allow the animal to exit of its own volition, or any house or structure in which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the only barriers which prevent the animal from exiting. The enclosure shall not allow the egress of the animal in any manner without human assistance. A pen or kennel shall meet the following minimum specifications:
A Have a minimum overall floor size of 32 square feet.
B Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five feet and be constructed of 11 gauge or heavier wire. Openings in the wire shall not exceed two inches, support posts shall be 13-inch or larger steel pipe buried in the ground 18 inches or more. When a concrete floor is not provided, the sidewalls shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches in the ground.
C A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be provided. The cover shall be constructed of the same gauge wire or heavier as the sidewalls and shall also have no openings in the wire greater than two inches.
D An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be constructed of the same material as the sidewalls and shall also have no openings in the wire greater than two inches. The gate shall be equipped with a device capable of being locked and shall be locked at all times when the animal is in the pen or kennel.
UNPROVOKED. The condition in which the animal is not purposely excited, stimulated, agitated or disturbed.
503.10.4 Designation as potentially dangerous animal. The Animal Control Officer or Police Officer shall designate any animal as a potentially dangerous animal upon receiving evidence that the potentially dangerous animal has, when unprovoked, bitten, attacked, or seriously threatened the safety of a person or a domestic animal. When an animal is declared potentially dangerous, the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer shall cause one owner of the potentially dangerous animal to be notified in writing that the animal is potentially dangerous.
503.10.5 Evidence justifying designation. The Animal Control Officer or Police Officer shall have the authority to designate any animal as a dangerous animal upon receiving evidence of the following:
A That the animal has, when unprovoked, bitten, attacked, or threatened the safety of a person or domestic animal.
B That the animal has been declared potentially dangerous and the animal has then bitten, attacked, or seriously threatened the safety of a person or domestic animal.
503.10.6 Authority to order destruction. The Animal Control Officer, upon finding that an animal is dangerous hereunder, is authorized to order, as part of the disposition of the case, that the animal be destroyed based on a written order containing one or more of the following findings of fact:
A The animal is dangerous as demonstrated by a vicious attack, an unprovoked attack, an attack without warning or multiple attacks; or
5-12
B The owner of the animal has demonstrated an inability or unwillingness to control the animal in order to prevent injury to persons or other animals.
503.10.7 Procedure. The Animal Control Officer, after having determined that an animal is dangerous, may proceed in the following manner: the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer shall cause one owner of the animal to be notified in writing or in person that the animal is dangerous and may order the animal seized or make orders as deemed proper. This owner shall be notified as to dates, times, places and parties bitten, and shall be given 14 days to appeal this order by requesting a hearing before the City Council for a review of this determination.
If no appeal is filed, the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer shall obtain an order or warrant authorizing the seizure and the destruction of the animal from a court of competent jurisdiction, unless the animal is already in custody or the owner consents to the seizure and destruction of the animal.
If an owner requests a hearing for determination as to the dangerous nature of the animal, the hearing shall be held before the City Council, which shall set a date for hearing not more than three weeks after demand for the hearing. The records of the Animal Control or City Clerk’s office shall be admissible for consideration by the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer without further foundation. After considering all evidence pertaining to the temperament of the animal, the City Council shall make an order as it deems proper. The City Council may order that the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer take the animal into custody for destruction, if the animal is not currently in custody. If the animal is ordered into custody for destruction, the owner shall immediately make the animal available to the Animal Control Officer. If the owner does not immediately make the animal available, the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer shall obtain an order or warrant authorizing the seizure and the destruction of the animal from a court of competent jurisdiction.
No person shall harbor an animal after it has been found by to be dangerous and ordered into custody for destruction.
503.10.8 Stopping an attack. If any police officer or Animal Control Officer or Police Officer is witness to an attack by an animal upon a person or another animal, the officer may take whatever means the officer deems appropriate to bring the attack to an end and prevent further injury to the victim.
503.10.9 Notification of new address. The owner of an animal which has been identified as dangerous or potentially dangerous shall notify the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer in writing if the animal is to be relocated from its current address or given or sold to another person. The notification shall be given in writing at least 14 days prior to the relocation or transfer of ownership. The notification shall include the current owner's name and address, the relocation address, and the name of the new owner, if any.
503.11 Dangerous Animal Requirements
503.11.1 Requirements. If the City Council does not order the destruction of an animal that has been declared dangerous, the City Council may, as an alternative, order any or all of the following:
A That the owner provide and maintain a proper enclosure for the dangerous animal
B Post the front and the rear of the premises with clearly visible warning signs, including a warning symbol to inform children, that there is a dangerous animal on the property as specified in Minnesota State Statue 347.51 as may be amended from time to time;
C Provide and show proof annually of public liability insurance in the minimum amount of $300,000;
D If the animal is a dog and is outside the proper enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash (not to exceed six feet in length) and under the physical restraint of a person 16 years of age or older. The muzzle must be of a design as to prevent the dog from biting any person or animal, but will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration;
E If the animal is a dog, it must have an easily identifiable, standardized tag identifying the dog as dangerous affixed to its collar at all times as specified in M.S. 347.51 as it may be
5-13
amended from time to time, and shall have a microchip implant as provided by M.S. 347.151, as it may be amended from time to time;
F All animals deemed dangerous by the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer shall be registered with the county in which this city is located within 14 days after the date the animal was so deemed and provide satisfactory proof thereof to the Animal Control Officer.
G If the animal is a dog, the dog must be licensed and up to date on rabies vaccination. If the animal is a cat or ferret, it must be up to date with rabies vaccination.
503.11.2 Seizure. As authorized by M.S. 347.54, as it may be amended from time to time, the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer shall immediately seize any dangerous animal if the owner does not meet each of the above requirements within 14 days after the date notice is sent to the owner that the animal is dangerous. Seizure may be appealed to district court by serving a summons and petition upon the city and filing it with the district court.
503.11.3 Reclaiming animals. A dangerous animal seized may be reclaimed by the owner of the animal upon payment of impounding and boarding fees and presenting proof to animal control that each of the requirements under 503.11.1 is fulfilled. An animal not reclaimed under this section within 14 days may be disposed of as provided, and the owner is liable to the city for costs incurred in confining and impounding the animal.
503.11.4 Subsequent offenses. If an owner of an animal has subsequently violated the provisions with the same animal, the animal must be seized by animal control. The owner may request a hearing. If the owner is found to have violated the provisions for which the animal was seized, the Animal Control Officer or Police Officer shall order the animal destroyed in a proper and humane manner and the owner shall pay the costs of confining the animal. If the person is found not to have violated the provisions for which the animal was seized, the owner may reclaim the animal under the provisions of 503.11.3 If the animal is not yet reclaimed by the owner within 14 days after the date the owner is notified that the animal may be reclaimed, the animal may be disposed of and the owner is liable to the animal control for the costs incurred in confining, impounding and disposing of the animal.
503.12 Basic Care. All animals shall receive from their owners or keepers kind treatment, housing in the winter, and sufficient food and water for their comfort. Any person not treating their pet in a humane manner will be subject to the penalties provided in this section.
503.13 Breeding Moratorium. Every female dog or female cat in heat shall be confined in a building or other enclosure in a manner that it cannot come in contact with another dog or cat except for planned breeding. Upon capture and failure to reclaim the animal, every dog or cat shall be neutered or spayed prior to being transferred to a new owner.
503.14 Enforcing Officer. The Council is hereby authorized to appoint an animal control officer(s) to enforce the provisions of this section. In the officer's duty of enforcing the provisions of this section, he or she may from time to time, with the consent of the City Council, designate assistants.
503.15 Pound. Every year the Council shall designate an official pound to which animals found in violation of this chapter shall be taken for safe treatment, and if necessary, for destruction.
503.16 Interference with Officers. No person shall in any manner molest, hinder, or interfere with any person authorized by the City Council to capture dogs, cats or other animals and convey them to the pound while engaged in that operation. Nor shall any unauthorized person break open the pound, or attempt to do so, or take or attempt to take from any agent any animal taken up by him or her in compliance with this chapter, or in any other manner to interfere with or hinder the officer in the discharge of his or her duties under this chapter.
5-14
503.17 Multiple Pets. In order to own three or more of any one species, a multiple pet permit is required. In addition to the Multiple Pet Permit, the owner must obtain a regular license for each animal as required by other City Code Provisions. Applications for Multiple Pet Permits shall be processed and approved through the City Clerk.
503.17.1 Issuance Of Multiple Pet Permits. An annual Multiple Pet Permit shall be issued at a fee as determined by the City Council pursuant to resolution. Permits shall be pro-rated monthly. If an owner acquires a new pet, which would require obtaining a Permit, then the owner will only be charged for the number of months remaining in the year including the month within which the Permit is being obtained.
503.17.2 Stipulations. All premises with Multiple Pet Permits shall be maintained areas where animals are kept free of all contamination and diseases, shall provide sufficient enclosures and housing, so as to keep the pets on the owner's premises, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary manner, devoid of rodents and vermin and free from objectionable odors, noises and other nuisances effecting the public.
503.17.3 Maximum Number of Animals. Because the keeping of four or more dogs on the same premises is subject to great abuse, causing discomfort to persons in the area by way of smell, noise, hazard, and general aesthetic depreciation, the keeping of four or more dogs on the premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance. The exception to the maximum number of animals allowed is that a fresh litter of pups may be kept for a period of up to four months.
503.17.4 Revocation. The City Council may revoke a Multiple Pet Permit for violation of any of the requirements contained in section 503 or the violation of any other City Code Provision pertaining thereto. Before revoking any such permit, the City shall notify the owner of its intention to do so stating the grounds upon which the permit is being revoked and giving the permit holder the right to a hearing before the City Council. Any request for hearing by a permit holder must be submitted in writing to the City Clerk no later than ten days following receipt of the Notice of Revocation. If the permit holder within said ten days requests a hearing in compliance with the provisions established herein, a hearing shall be held before the City Council to determine whether the Permit should be revoked. Following said hearing, the City Council shall, by resolution, make a determination whether the revocation should occur and the basis for it. If no request for hearing is received by the City Clerk within the ten days as set forth above, then the revocation shall be effective on the tenth day following receipt of the Revocation Notice.
503.18 Penalty. Separate offenses. Each day a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable under this section.
503.18.1 Misdemeanor. Unless otherwise provided, violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Minnesota State Statute 10.99.
503.18.2 Petty misdemeanor. Violations of 503.2, 503.7, 503.12 and 503.13 are petty misdemeanors punishable as provided in Minnesota State Statute 10.99.
504 GARAGE AND RUMMAGE SALES
504.1 Definitions. The following term, as used in this chapter, shall have the meaning stated:
GARAGE OR RUMMAGE SALE. Any display and sale of personal property, conducted on premises located in any Residentially-Zoned District by the occupant and which garage or rummage sale does not require a business license or make taxable sales, leases or services.
504.2 Restrictions and Prohibitions. The following restrictions apply to all garage and rummage sales:
A None of the items offered for sale shall have been obtained for resale or received on consignment for sale.
5-15
B Any garage or rummage sale (community or neighborhood sale) shall be conducted solely within the boundaries of the property owned or occupied by the occupant who is conducting the sale.
C There shall be no more than six garage or rummage sales conducted at any one premises during any period of 12 calendar months.
D No garage or rummage sale shall be conducted during any part of more than four consecutive days.
E No garage or rummage sale may be conducted before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.
F Any related signage shall be limited to the premises and to other residential property, provided permission from the property owner is obtained, and shall be removed at the termination of the sale. Signs shall be limited to four square feet. All signs shall be kept off of the public right of way.
504.3 Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to any sale under court order, nor to any bona fide auction sale, nor to a sale of farm or garden products by the person producing same.
505 TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING SERVICES
505.1 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BOARD OF HEALTH. A Board of Health established under the provisions of M.S. ' 145A.03, as it may be amended from time to time. If the city does not have a Board of Health, then this term means the authority having the duties of a Board of Health in the city, including but not limited to the County Board of Health.
BODY PIERCING. Includes ear piercing except when the ear piercing procedure is performed with an ear piercing gun.
BUSINESS. Any entity that provides services for compensation.
EAR PIERCING GUN. A mechanical device that pierces the ear by forcing a disposable single-use stud or solid needle through the ear.
PARENT or GUARDIAN. Parent, guardian or other adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.
TATTOO. Has the same meaning given in M.S. 609.2246, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time.
505.2 Prohibitions. No person shall do any of the following:
A Operate a business that offers tattooing or body piercing services unless the City Council issues it a license to do so;
B Perform a tattooing or body piercing procedure in a manner that does not meet the safety and sanitation standards established by this chapter and any federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations;
C Perform a tattooing procedure, body piercing procedure, or ear piercing procedure with an ear piercing gun in a manner that does not meet the standards for appropriate disinfection and sterilization of invasive equipment or parts of equipment used in performing the procedures established by this chapter and any federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations.
5-16
505.3 Application for License; Fees; Insurance
505.3.1 Application. A person seeking approval to operate a business that offers tattooing or body piercing services shall apply to the city on forms the city or the Board of Health shall prescribe and provide. The applicant shall submit all information the city and the Board of Health determines is necessary to process the application. The applicant shall include the fee established by resolution of the City Council.
505.3.2 Demonstrate Ability to Meet Requirements. To receive approval to offer tattooing or body piercing services, a business must demonstrate to the Board of Health the ability to meet the requirements established by this chapter and any federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations for safe performance of the tattooing or body piercing procedures, training of the individuals who perform the procedures, and maintenance of records.
505.3.3 Approval Following an Inspection. If the Board of Health determines, following an inspection that a business meets the requirements for approval, it shall so advise the city. The City Council may either approve or deny the license, or it may delay action for a reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the City Council shall approve the license, the City Clerk shall issue the license to the applicant. If the City Council denies the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant's right to appeal the City Council's decision. Approval remains valid for one year unless earlier suspended or revoked. A business's approval may be renewed. Approval is not transferable.
505.4 Inspection of Facilities. The Board of Health, or a person or another body designed by the city, shall conduct at least one inspection of a business prior to approving the business to offer tattooing or body piercing services. The Board may conduct additional inspections as necessary for the approval process. The Board of Health may inspect an approved business at any time the Board considers necessary. In an inspection, the Board of Health shall be given access to the business's premises and to all records relevant to the inspection.
505.5 Suspension or Revocation of License. The City Council may suspend or revoke the approval of a business to offer tattooing or body piercing services at any time it determines that the business is being operated in violation of this chapter or any federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations. Proceedings for suspensions and revocations shall be conducted in accordance with rules adopted in Section 501 for the suspension or revocation of business licenses.
505.6 Procedures on Persons Under 18
505.6.1 Consent Required. No person shall perform a tattooing procedure, body piercing procedure, or ear piercing procedure with an ear piercing gun on an individual who is under 18 years of age unless consent has been given by the individual's parent, guardian, or custodian in accordance with 505.6.2 of this section. The consent must include both the custodial and non-custodial parents, where applicable.
505.6.2 Additional Requirements. A parent, guardian or custodian of an individual under age 18 who desires to give consent to a business to perform on the individual under age 18 a tattooing procedure, body piercing procedure, or ear piercing procedure performed with an ear piercing gun shall do both of the following: appear in person at the business at the time the procedure is performed; and sign a document provided by the business that explains the manner in which the procedure will be performed and methods for proper care of the affected body area following performance of the procedure.
505.6.3 Prohibitions Relating to Persons Under 18.
A Unless consent has been given, no individual who is under age 18 shall obtain or attempt to obtain a tattooing service, body piercing service, or ear piercing service performed with an ear piercing gun.
5-17
B No individual who is under age 18 shall knowingly show or give false information concerning the individual's name, age, or other identification for the purpose of obtaining a tattooing service, body piercing service, or ear piercing service performed with an ear piercing gun.
C No individual shall knowingly show or give any false information as to the name, age, or other identification of an individual who is under age 18 for the purpose of obtaining for the individual under age 18 a tattooing service, body piercing service, or ear piercing service performed with an ear piercing gun.
D No individual shall impersonate the parent, guardian or custodian of an individual who is under age 18 for the purpose of obtaining for the individual under age 18 a tattooing service, body piercing service, or ear piercing service performed with an ear piercing gun.
505.7 Defenses to Violations. An operator or employee of a business that performs tattooing services, body piercing services, or ear piercing services performed with an ear piercing gun may not be found guilty of a violation of 505.6.1 or any federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations in which age is an element of the provisions if:
A The individual obtaining a tattooing service, body piercing service, or ear piercing service performed with an ear piercing gun, at the time of so doing, exhibited to the operator or employee of the tattooing, body piercing, or ear piercing business a driver's or commercial driver's license or an identification card issued under state law showing that the individual was then at least age 18;
B The operator or employee made a bona fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual obtaining a tattooing, body piercing, or ear piercing service by checking the identification presented, at the time of the service, to ascertain that the description on the identification compared with the appearance of the individual and that the identification had not been altered in any way; and
C The operator or employee had reason to believe that the individual obtaining a tattooing, body piercing, or ear piercing service was at least age 18.
In any action or proceeding before a court of record in which a defense is raised under this section, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the Registrar's Deputy who issued a driver's or commercial driver's license or an identification card shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar's or Deputy's possession, of the issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles at the hearing, action or proceeding.
505.8 Training Standards; Records; Safety and Sanitation; Equipment. Each operator of a business that offers tattooing or body piercing services shall do all of the following:
A Maintain procedures for ensuring that the individuals who perform tattooing or body piercing procedures are adequately trained to perform the procedures properly;
B With respect to tattooing services, maintain written records that include the color, manufacturer and lot number of each pigment used for each tattoo performed;
C Comply with the safety and sanitation requirements for preventing transmission of infectious diseases, as established in any federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations;
D Require the individuals who perform tattooing and body piercing procedures to disinfect and sterilize all invasive equipment or parts of equipment used in performing the procedures by using methods that meet the disinfection and sterilization requirements established in any federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations;
E Ensure that weekly tests of the business's heat sterilization devices are performed to determine whether the devices are functioning properly. In having the devices tested, the operator of the business shall use a biological monitoring system that indicates whether the devices are killing microorganisms. If a test indicates that a device is not functioning properly, the operator shall take immediate remedial action to ensure that heat sterilization is being accomplished. The
5-18
operator shall maintain documentation that the weekly tests are being performed. To comply with the documentation requirement, the documents must consist of a log that indicates the date on which each test is performed and the name of the person who performed the test or, if a test was conducted by an independent testing entity, a copy of the entity's testing report. The operator shall maintain records of each test performed for at least two years.
F Each operator of a business that offers ear piercing services performed with an ear piercing gun shall require the individuals who perform the ear piercing services to disinfect and sterilize the ear piercing gun by using chemical solutions that meet the disinfection and sterilization requirements established in any federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations.
506 LAWFUL GAMBLING
506.1 Adoption of State Law By Reference The provisions of M.S. Ch. 349, as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, provisions relating to sales, and all other matters pertaining to lawful gambling, are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this chapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of the Council that all future amendments of M.S. Ch. 349 are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this chapter was adopted.
506.2 City May Be More Restrictive Than State Law. The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. ' 349.213, as it may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter, additional restrictions on gambling within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time.
506.3 Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate lawful gambling within the city, to prevent its commercialization, to ensure the integrity of operations, and to provide for the use of net profits only for lawful purposes.
506.4 Definitions. In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. ' 349.12, as it may be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this chapter:
BOARD. The State of Minnesota Gambling Control Board.
LICENSED ORGANIZATION. An organization licensed by the Board.
LOCAL PERMIT. A permit issued by the city.
TRADE AREA. This city and each city and township contiguous to this city.
506.5 Applicability. This chapter shall be construed to regulate all forms of lawful gambling within the city except:
A Bingo conducted within a nursing home or a senior citizen housing project or by a senior citizen organization if: the prizes for a single bingo game do not exceed $10; total prizes awarded at a single bingo occasion do not exceed $200; no more than two bingo occasions are held by the organization or at the facility each week; only members of the organization or residents of the nursing home or housing project are allowed to play in a bingo game; no compensation is paid for any persons who conduct the bingo; and a manager is appointed to supervise the bingo.
B Raffles, if the value of all prizes awarded by the organization in a calendar year does not exceed $750.
5-19
506.6 Lawful Gambling Permitted. Lawful gambling is permitted within the city if the Council, by resolution adopted by a majority of its members authorizes lawful gambling to occur, provided it is conducted in accordance with M.S. ' 609.75 to 609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time; M.S. ''349.11 to 349.23, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time, and this chapter.
506.7 City Council Approval. Lawful gambling authorized by M.S. 349.11 to 349.23, inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time, shall not be conducted unless approved by the Council, subject to the provisions of this chapter and state law.
506.8 Application and Local Approval of Premises Permits. Any organization seeking to obtain a premises permit or bingo hall license or renewal of a premises permit or bingo hall license from the Board shall file with the City Clerk an executed, complete duplicate application together with all exhibits and documents accompanying the application as filed with the Board.
506.8.1 Approval or Disapproval. The Council shall, by resolution, approve or disapprove the application within 60 days of receipt of the application
506.8.2 Disapproval. The City Council shall disapprove an application for issuance or renewal of a premises permit for any of the following reasons. Otherwise the Council shall pass a resolution approving the application.
A Violation by the gambling organization of any state statute, state rule or city ordinance relating to gambling within the last three years.
B Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization leasing its premises for gambling of any state statute, state rule or city ordinance relating to the operation of the establishment, including, but not limited to, laws relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled substances, suppression of vice, and protection of public safety within the last three years.
C Lawful gambling would be conducted at premises other than those for which an on-sale liquor license has been issued.
D Lawful gambling would be conducted at more than one premises within the city. The city may limit the number of premises where lawful gambling may be conducted.
E An organization would be permitted to conduct lawful gambling activities at more than one premises in the city.
F More than one licensed organization would be permitted to conduct lawful gambling activities at one premises.
G Failure of the applicant to pay any investigation fee provided by division (D) of this section within the prescribed time limit.
H Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental to health, safety, and welfare of the community.
506.9 Local Permits.
506.9.1 Permit Required. No organization shall conduct lawful gambling excluded or exempted from state licensure requirements by M.S. 349.166, as it may be amended from time to time, without a valid local permit. This section shall not apply to lawful gambling exempted from local regulation.
506.9.2 Application. Applications for issuance or renewal of a local permit shall be on a form prescribed by the city. The application shall contain the following information:
A Name and address of the organization requesting the permit.
B Name and address of the officers and person accounting for receipts, expenses, and profits for the event.
C Dates of gambling occasion for which permit is requested.
D Address of premises where event will occur.
E Copy of rental or leasing arrangement, if any, connected with the event, including rental to be charged to organization.
5-20
F Estimated value of prizes to be awarded.
506.9.3 Fee. The fee for a local permit shall be $50. The fee shall be submitted with the application for a local permit. This fee shall be refunded if the application is withdrawn before the investigation is commenced.
506.9.4 Disapproval. The Council shall disapprove an application for issuance or renewal of a premises permit for any of the following reasons:
A Violation by the gambling organization of any state statute, state rule or city ordinance relating to gambling within the last three years.
B Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization leasing its premises for gambling of any state statute, state rule or city ordinance relating to the operation of the establishment, including, but not limited to, laws relating to the operation of the establishment, laws relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled substances, suppression of vice, and protection of public safety within the last three years.
C The organization has not been in existence in the city for at least three consecutive years prior to the date of application.
D The organization does not have at least 20 active members.
E Exempted or excluded lawful gambling will not take place at a premises the organization owns or rents.
F Exempted or excluded lawful gambling will not be limited to a premises for which an on-sale liquor license has been issued.
G An organization will have a permit to conduct exempted or excluded lawful gambling activities on more than one premises in the city.
H More than one licensed, qualified organization will be conducting exempted or excluded lawful gambling activities at any one premises.
I Failure of the applicant to pay permit fee provided by division (C) of this section within the prescribed time limit.
J Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental to health, safety, and welfare of the community.
506.9.5 Approval. Local permits shall be valid for one year after the date of issuance unless suspended or revoked.
506.10 Revocation and Suspension of Local Permit. A local permit may be revoked or temporarily suspended for a violation by the gambling organization of any state statute, state rule or city ordinance relating to gambling. However, a license shall not be revoked or suspended until notice and an opportunity for a hearing have first been given to the permitted person. The notice shall be personally served and shall state the provision reasonably believed to be violated. The notice shall also state that the permitted person may demand a hearing on the matter, in which case the permit will not be suspended until after the hearing is held. If the permitted person requests a hearing, the Council shall hold a hearing on the matter at least one week after the date on which the request is made. If, as a result of the hearing, the Council finds that an ordinance violation exists, then the Council may suspend or revoke the permit.
506.11 License and Permit Display. All permits issued under state law or this chapter shall be prominently displayed during the permit year at the premises where gambling is conducted.
506.12 Notification of Material Changes to Application. An organization holding a state-issued premises permit or a local permit shall notify the city in writing whenever any material change in the information submitted in the application occurs within ten days of the change.
506.13 Contribution of Net Profits to Fund Administered by City. Each organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling within the city pursuant to M.S. 349.16, as it may be amended from time to
5-21
time, shall contribute 10% of its net profits derived from lawful gambling in the city to a fund administered and regulated by the city without cost to the fund. The city shall disburse the funds for lawful purposes as defined by M.S. 349.12, Subd. 25, as it may be amended from time to time. Payment under this section shall be made quarterly. The city's use of these funds shall be determined at the time of adoption of the city's annual budget or when the budget is amended.
506.14 Designated Trade Area. Each organization licensed to conduct gambling within the city shall expend 100% of its lawful purpose expenditures on lawful purposes conducted within the city's trade area. This section applies only to lawful purpose expenditures of gross profits derived from gambling conducted at a premises within the city's jurisdiction.
506.15 Records and Reporting. Organizations conducting lawful gambling shall file with the City Clerk one copy of all records and reports required to be filed with the Board, pursuant to M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time, and rules adopted pursuant thereto, as they may be amended from time to time. The records and reports shall be filed on or before the day they are required to be filed with the Board. Organizations licensed by the Board shall file a report with the city proving compliance with the trade area spending requirements. Such report shall be made on a form prescribed by the city and shall be submitted annually and in advance of application for renewal.
506.16 Hours of Operation. Lawful gambling shall not be conducted between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
507 TOBACCO
507.1 Purpose. Because the City recognizes that many persons under the age of eighteen (18) years purchase or otherwise obtain, possess, and use tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices, and such sales, possession and use are violations of both State and Federal laws; and because smoking has been shown to be the cause of several serious health problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of government; this ordinance shall be intended to regulate the sale, possession, and use of tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the serious effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices, and to further the official public policy of the State of Minnesota in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke as stated in Minnesota Statute § 144.39 1.
507.2 Definitions and Interpretations. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. The singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular. The masculine shall include the feminine and neuter, and vice-versa. The term "shall" means mandatory and the term "may" means permissive. The following terms shall have the definitions given to them:
"Tobacco" or tobacco products" shall mean any substance or item containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to, cigarettes; cigars; pipe tobacco; snuff; fine cut or other chewing tobacco; cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff flowers; cavendish; shorts; plug and twist tobaccos; dipping tobaccos; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco leaf prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing, or smoking.
"Tobacco related devices" shall mean any tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling papers, or other device intentionally designed or intended to be used in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing, or smoking of tobacco or tobacco products.
5-22
"Self-service merchandising" shall mean open displays of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices in any manner where any person shall have access to the tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices, without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee. The assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device between the customer and the licensee or employee. Self-service merchandising shall not include vending machines.
"Vending Machine" shall mean any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices upon the insertion of money, tokens, or other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device.
"Individually packaged" shall mean the practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco product wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco products shall include, but not be limited to, single cigarette packs, single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing more than a single pack or other container as described in this subdivision shall not be considered individually packaged.
"Loosies" shall mean the common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged cigarette.
"Minor" shall mean any natural person who has not yet reached the age of eighteen (18) years.
"Retail establishment” shall mean any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices are available for sale to the general public. Retail establishments shall include, but not be limited to, grocery stores, convenience stores, and restaurants.
"Moveable place of business" shall refer to any form of business operated out of a truck, van, automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure authorized for sales transactions.
A "sale" shall mean any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other consideration.
"Compliance checks" shall mean the system the City uses to investigate and ensure that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices are following and complying with the requirements of this ordinance. Compliance checks shall involve the use of minors as authorized by this ordinance. Compliance checks shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices for educational, research and training purposes as authorized by State and Federal laws. Compliance checks may also be conducted by other units of government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate Federal, State, or local laws and regulations relating to tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices.
507.3 License No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related device without first having obtained a license to do so from the city.
507.3.1 Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices shall be made on a form provided by the City. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the applicant's residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the name of the
5-23
business for which the license is sought, and any additional information the City deems necessary. Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Clerk shall forward the application to the council for action at its next regularly scheduled council meeting. If the clerk shall determine that an application is incomplete, he or she shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete.
507.3.2 Action. The council may either approve or deny the license, or it may delay action for such reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary.
507.3.3 Term. All licenses issued under this ordinance shall be valid for one calendar year from the date of issue.
507.3.4 Revocation or Suspension. Any license issued under this ordinance may be revoked or suspended as provided in the Violations and Penalties section of this ordinance.
507.3.5 Transfers. All licenses issued under this ordinance shall be valid only on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license to another location or person shall be valid without the prior approval of the council.
507.3.6 Moveable Place of Business. No license shall be issued to a moveable place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this ordinance.
507.3.7 Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on the licensed premises.
507.3.8 Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be handled in the same manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days but no more than sixty (60) days before the expiration of the current license.
507.4 Fees. No license shall be issued under this ordinance until the appropriate license fee shall be paid in full. The fee for a license under this ordinance shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
507.5 Basis for Denial of License. If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a
person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under this Section The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this ordinance; however, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular ground for denial does not mean that the City must deny the license: 1) The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years, 2) The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any violation of a Federal, State, or local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products, or tobacco related devices, 3) The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices revoked within the preceding twelve months of the date of application, 4) The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application, or provides false or misleading information, and 5) The applicant is prohibited by Federal, State, or other local law, ordinance, or other regulation, from holding such a license.
507.6 Prohibited Sales. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to sell or
offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device: 1) to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, 2) by means of any type of vending machine, except as may otherwise be provided in this ordinance, 3) by means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed premises in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device between the licensee or the licensee's employee, and the customer, except cartons and multipack units may be offered and sold through open displays accessible to the public, 4) by means of loosies as defined in Section 507, 5) containing opium, morphine, jirnson weed, bella donna, strychnine, cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic, or controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in tobacco or added as part of an
5-24
otherwise lawful manufacturing process, and 6) by any other means, to any other person, or in any other manner or form prohibited by Federal, State, or other local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation.
507.7 Vending Machines. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this ordinance to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices by the means of a vending machine unless minors are at all times prohibited from entering the licensed establishment.
507.8 Self-Service Sales. It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this ordinance to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices by any means whereby the customer may have access to such items without having to request the item from the licensee or the licensee's employee and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, or the tobacco related device between the licensee or his or her clerk and the customer, except cartons and multipack units may be offered and sold through open displays accessible to the public. All tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices shall either be stored behind a counter or other area not freely accessible to customers, or in a case or other storage unit not left open and accessible to the general public, except cartons and multipack units may be offered and sold through open displays accessible to the public..
507.9 Responsibility. All licensees under this ordinance shall be responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of such an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the City from also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under this ordinance, State or Federal law, or other applicable law or regulation.
507.10 Compliance Checks and Inspections. All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the City police or other authorized City official during regular business hours. From time to time, but at least once, per year, the City shall conduct compliance checks by engaging, with the written consent of their parents or guardians, minors over the age of fifteen (15) years but less than eighteen (18) years, to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices. Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised by City designated law enforcement officers or other designated City personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices when such items are obtained as a part of the compliance check. No minor used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor's age, and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the minor's age asked by the licensee or his or her employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by State or Federal laws for educational, research, or training purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular State or Federal law.
507.11 Other Illegal Acts. Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this ordinance.
507.11.1 Illegal Sales. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device to any minor.
507.11.2 Illegal Possession. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any minor to have in his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device. This subdivision shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
507.11.3 Illegal Use. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any minor to smoke, chew, sniff, or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device.
507.11.4 Illegal Procurement . It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device, and it shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain such items on behalf
5-25
of a minor. It shall further be a violation for any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device. This subdivision shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
507.11.5 Use of False Identification. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any minor to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
507.12 Violations
507.12.1 Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of his or her right to be heard on the accusation.
507.12.2 Hearings. If a person accused of violating this ordinance so requests, a hearing shall be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be published and provided to the accused violator.
507.12.3 Hearing Officer. The City Council of Plainview shall serve as the hearing officer.
507.12.4 Decision. If the hearing officer determines that a violation of this ordinance did occur, that decision, along with the hearing officer's reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under Section 507.13 it shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the accused violator. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, such findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted accused violator.
507.12.5 Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall be filed in the District Court for the City in which the alleged violation occurred.
507.12.6 Misdemeanor Prosecution. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the City from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this ordinance. If the City elects to seek misdemeanor prosecution, no administrative penalty shall be imposed.
507.12.7 Continued Violation. Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
507.13 Penalties
507.13.1 Licensees and Employees. Any licensee, and any employee of a licensee, found to have violated this ordinance shall be charged an administrative fine of $75 for a first violation of this ordinance; $200 for a second offense at the same licensed premises within a twenty-four month period; and $250 for a third or subsequent offense at the same location within a twenty-four month period. In addition, after the third offense, the license shall be suspended for not less than seven days.
507.13.2 Other Individuals. Other individuals, other than minors regulated by this ordinance, found to be in violation of this ordinance shall be charged an administrative fee of $50.
507.13.3 Minors. It shall be unlawful for any minor to be in possession of, purchase, or attempt to purchase, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices.
507.13.4 Misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the City from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this ordinance.
507.14 Exceptions and Defense. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices to a minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony. It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this ordinance for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described by State law.
508 PUBLIC DANCES
508.1 Regulation of Public Dances. All public dances held in this city shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
5-26
508.2 Definitions. The terms stated below shall have the following meanings:
PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance where the general public may participate, whether or not a charge for admission for dancing is made.
PUBLIC DANCING PLACE. Any room or space or other area, whether indoors or outside, which is open to the general public for the purpose of participating in public dancing.
508.3 Permit Required. No person shall conduct a public dance in this city unless a permit has been obtained from the City Clerk prior to the holding of the dance. The fees for a permit shall be as established by the Ordinance Establishing Fees and Charges, adopted pursuant to this code, as that ordinance may be amended from time to time. In addition to this fee, the applicant shall pay the cost to the city of providing a licensed peace officer or officers to be present at the dance. The Chief of Police shall establish criteria for determining the number of licensed peace officers required to be present at any dance. No permit shall be issued until the fee and the cost for providing the peace officer or officers has been paid.
508.4 Application for Permit. Any person desiring a permit to hold a public dance in this city shall submit an application for a permit on the form provided by the City Clerk, submitted to the City Clerk at least three weeks before the date of the proposed dance. The application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, who shall be the person responsible for conducting the public dance, and any business, committee or organization sponsoring the dance, the place where the dance is to be held, the date of the dance and the time of its beginning and end. Proof of all insurance required by this chapter shall be submitted with the application and no permit shall be issued until proof of insurance has been received. A request for any use of a city building or other city property shall be included with the permit application, and no permit shall be issued until the fees for the use of the city building or other city property have also been paid.
508.5 Insurance. All insurance policies required for the event, including any insurance required by law for the sale of alcoholic beverages, shall list the city as a named insured and provide a provision to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city and any of its employees from any claims arising from the event.
508.6 Location. The applicant shall make sure that adequate parking is available for the persons wishing to attend the dance and make sure that the location is safe and accessible. This information shall also be provided to the City Clerk before a permit shall be issued.
508.7 Permit to Be Posted. When a permit is issued, the holder of the permit shall post the permit in a prominent location on the premises on which the dance is to be held during the time the dance is occurring. The applicant shall be present at all times while the dance is occurring.
508.8 Liquor License Required. No person shall give, hold, conduct or permit any public dance where liquor will be served, as defined in M.S. Ch. 340A, without obtaining a license from the city.
508.9 Licensed Peace Officer Presence. No public dance shall occur without at least one licensed peace officer or more, if more are required under the criteria established by the Chief of Police, who shall be present at the public dancing place during the duration of the dance and after the dance, until all of the participants have left the public dancing place.
508.10 Hours. No public dance shall occur between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
5-27
508.11 Minors Prohibited. No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed to be present by the permit holder or any peace officer at a public dance where alcohol is sold or consumed, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
508.12 Certain Behavior Prohibited. No person present at any public dance shall engage in any disorderly conduct, as defined by M.S. 609.72, as it may be amended from time to time, and any disorderly person shall be immediately removed from the dance by the peace officer present at the public dancing place. Should a substantial number of persons at the public dance engage in disorderly conduct, the peace officer present shall terminate the dance and remove all persons from the public dancing place.
508.13 Lighting. In order to protect the safety of persons attending a public dance, public dancing places shall be adequately illuminated and dancing therein while lights are extinguished, dimmed or turned low so as to give inadequate or imperfect illumination is hereby prohibited. All exit areas shall be illuminated at all times during the public dance with light having intensity of not less than one footcandle at floor level. Illumination of less than 0.5 foot-candles in any area where dancing is occurring, permitted or encouraged is prohibited.
508.14 Noise. All public dances shall be subject to the provisions of this code regulating noise.
508.15 Enforcement. Any permit holder violating any of the provisions of this chapter relating
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in, and their permit is suspended immediately at the time of any arrest or citation for violating this chapter. Enforcement of this division may, at the Council's discretion, take any of the following forms:
A Citation/criminal prosecution;
B Injunctions, declaratory judgments or other civil remedies;
C Permit revocation;
D Disbursement of persons gathered.
509 SPECIAL EVENTS
509.1 Purpose and Findings. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of this city by regulating the time, place and manner of conduct of special events and by establishing permit requirements for conducting special events as such are herein defined. The City Council finds that special events often exceed the city's capacity to provide usual city services. These city services include, but are not limited to sanitary, fire, police and utility services. The City Council also finds these regulations necessary to ensure that such events are conducted with sufficient consideration given to public safety issues, including, among other things, the impact of these events on parking and vehicular traffic within the city.
509.2 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PERSON. A natural person, association, organization, club, group formed for a common purpose, partnership of any kind, limited liability company, corporation or any other legal entity.
SPECIAL EVENTS. An outdoor gathering of at least 25 individuals, whether on public or private property, assembled with a common purpose for a period of one hour or longer. Special events include, but are not limited to concerts, fairs, carnivals, circuses, parades, flea markets, marathons, walkathons, festivals, races, bicycle events, celebrations or any other gathering or events of similar
5-28
nature. Special events do not include noncommercial events held on private property, such as graduation parties or social parties.
509.3 Permit Required. No person shall hold, conduct or participate in a special event within the city, unless a permit has been issued for such event upon timely written application made to the city.
509.4 Application for Permit. Written application for special event permits must be made at least 30 days in advance of the event's proposed date in a form prescribed by the City Council. This application period shall not begin to run until a complete application has been filed with the city. Application forms shall be made available in the office of the City Clerk. A fee, in the amount specified in the Ordinance Establishing Fees and Charges, shall be paid to the city along with the completed application form. In addition to the fee, the applicant shall pay all additional costs incurred by the city as a direct result of the special event. Failure to provide a complete application or to pay the fee, as herein required, is sufficient reason to deny the special event permit.
509.5 Issuance of Permit, Conditions and Posting. Special event permits will be issued upon City Council approval. The Council may attach reasonable conditions to the permit as are deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare. Such conditions may pertain to any of the following:
A Location and hours during which the event may be held;
B Sanitation/availability of potable water;
C Security/crowd management;
D Parking and traffic issues;
E Emergency and medical services;
F Clean-up of premises and surrounding area/trash disposal;
G Insurance;
H Lighting;
I Fire service/safety;
J Temporary construction, barricades/fencing;
K Removal of advertising/promotional materials;
L Noise levels;
M Alcohol consumption;
N Any other conditions which the Council deems necessary.
Upon Council approval, the City Clerk shall issue a permit to the person(s) named in the permit application. The permit shall clearly state the conditions, if any, imposed by the Council. Copies of the permit shall be posted in three prominent locations during the special event.
509.6 Exceptions to the Permit. The permit requirement contained in this chapter does not apply to the following:
A Special events sponsored and managed by the city;
B Funerals and funeral processions;
C The grounds of any school, playground, place of worship, hotel conference center, stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium or similar permanent place of assembly when used for regularly established assembly purposes.
509.7 Enforcement. Any permit holder violating any of the provisions of this chapter relating shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in, and their permit is suspended immediately at the time of any arrest or citation for violating this chapter. Enforcement of this division may, at the Council's discretion, take any of the following forms:
A Citation/criminal prosecution;
B Injunctions, declaratory judgments or other civil remedies;
5-29
C Permit revocation;
D Disbursement of persons gathered.
510 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANISENT MERCHANTS
510.1 Definitions. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property that the person is carrying or otherwise transporting. The term PEDDLER shall mean the same as the term “hawker”.
PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation, partnership or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations, partnerships and associations, the term shall include each member, officer, partner, associate, agent or employee.
REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the city hall is normally open for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law shall not be counted as regular business days.
SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall mean the same as the term “canvasser”.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location for more than 14 consecutive days.
510.2 Exceptions to Definitions.
510.2.1 Wholesalers and Retailers; Delivery Routes. For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms peddler, solicitor, and transient merchant shall not apply to any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by the wholesaler. The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes initial contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers on his or her established regular delivery route.
510.2.2 Garage Sales, Estate Sales, and Flea Markets. In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market, shall be exempt from the definitions of peddler, solicitor, and transient merchant, as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed
5-30
auctioneer, or any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse any person from complying with any other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance.
510.2.3 Door to Door Advocacy. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict door to door advocacy. Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not be required to register as solicitors. The term door to door advocacy includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering as vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political and other ideas.
510.3 Licensing; Exemptions.
510.3.1 City License Required. Except as otherwise provided for by this chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler or a transient merchant without first having obtained a license from the city. Solicitors need not be licensed, but are still required to register.
510.3.2 Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting business. Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the City Council and available from the office of the City Clerk. All applications shall be signed by the applicant. All applications shall include the following information:
A Applicant's full legal name.
B All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to which applicant officially answers.
C A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color, height, weight, distinguishing marks and features, and the like).
D Full address of applicant's permanent residence.
E Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence.
F Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent.
G Full address of applicant's regular place of business (if any).
H Any and all business related telephone numbers of the applicant.
I The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a license.
J Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license.
K The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business, and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days he or she will be conducting business in the city (maximum 14 consecutive days).
L Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant can be reached while conducting business within the city, including the location where a transient merchant intends to set up business.
M A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than traffic offenses.
N A list of the three most recent locations where the applicant has conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant.
O Proof of any requested county license.
P Written permission of the property owner or the property owner's agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant.
Q A general description of the items to be sold or services to be provided.
R All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council.
S The applicant's driver's license number or other acceptable form of identification.
T The license plate number, registration information and vehicle identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the licensed business and a description of the vehicle.
510.3.3 Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by the fee established in the Ordinance Establishing Fees and Charges, as it may be amended from time to time.
5-31
510.3.4 Procedure. Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of the license fee, the City Clerk, within two regular business days, must determine if the application is complete. An application is determined to be complete only if all required information is provided. If the City Clerk determines that the application is incomplete, the City Clerk must inform the applicant of the required necessary information that is missing. If the application is complete, the City Clerk must order any investigation, including background checks, necessary to verify the information provided with the application. Within ten regular business days of receiving a complete application the City Clerk must issue the license unless there exist grounds for denying the license, in which case the Clerk must deny the license. If the City Clerk denies the license, the applicant must be notified in writing of the decision, the reason for denial, and of the applicant's right to appeal the denial by requesting, within 20 days of receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing before the City Council. The City Council shall hear the appeal within 20 days of the date of the request. The decision of the City Council following the public hearing can be appealed by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of certiorari.
510.3.5 Duration. An annual license granted under this chapter shall be valid for one calendar year from the date of issue. All other licenses granted under this chapter shall be valid only during the time period indicated on the license.
510.3.6 City License exemptions.
A No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced, cultivated, or raised on any farm. Any person selling or attempting so sell or take orders from produce may not do so on public right of way or public property without the consent of the City Council.
B No license shall be required for a farmers markets, however, farmers markets are still required to obtain a permit from the County.
C No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose of exercising that person's State or Federal Constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, press, religion and the like, except that this exemption may be lost if the person's exercise of Constitutional rights is merely incidental to a commercial activity.
D No license shall be required for an authorized school or youth program fundraisers.
E Professional fund raisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt person or group shall not be exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter.
510.4 License Ineligibility. The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:
A The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having obtained any required county license.
B The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the failure to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at the time of application.
C The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an honest and legal manner. Those violations shall include but not be limited to burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person.
D The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant.
E The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence of more than three complaints against the applicant with the Better Business Bureau, the Attorney General's Office, or other similar
5-32
business or consumer rights office or agency, within the preceding 12 months, or three complaints filed against the applicant within the preceding five years.
510.5 License Suspension and Revocation.
510.5.1 Generally. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the following:
A Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the application form.
B Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course of the licensed activity.
C Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could have been denied.
D Violation of any provision of this chapter.
510.5.2 Multiple Persons Under One License. The suspension or revocation of any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person's authority to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee whose license is suspended or revoked.
510.5.3 Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this chapter, the city shall provide the license holder with written notice of the alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license application.
510.5.4 Public Hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If no request for a hearing is received by the City Clerk within ten regular business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service shall be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a public hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within three regular business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its decision.
510.5.5 Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a peddler or transient merchant licensed under this chapter, the City Council may immediately suspend the person's license and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed.
510.5.6 Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.
510.6 License Transferability. No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person other than the person to whom the license was issued.
510.7 Registration. All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter under 510.3, shall be required to register with the city. Persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy shall not be required to register. The term door to door advocacy includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering as vehicles for the dissemination of religious, political and other ideas. Registration shall be made on the same form required for a license application, but no fee shall be required. Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the City Clerk shall issue to the registrant a Certificate of Registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of Registration shall be non-transferable.
510.8 Prohibited Activities. No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of the following manners:
A Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
5-33
B Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way.
C Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health, safety and welfare of any individual or the general public.
D Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
E Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of another person.
F Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the city solely based on the city having issued a license or certificate of registration to that person.
G Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.
510.9 Exclusion by Placard. No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long and four inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating “No Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient Merchants”, or “Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited” or other comparable statement. No person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section.
511 SIGNS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING. The purpose and intent of this section is to protect and promote the public health, safety, and welfare by setting reasonable standards and regulations for signs and outdoor advertising devices, symbols, markings, and similar items intended for visual communication. The type of message contained on the sign or outdoor advertising device or who is stating the message shall not be a factor when granting or denying a permit.
511.1 Size of Signs Permitted. No sign, billboard, or exterior graphic display shall be permitted in any zoning district except as herein provided.
a. In any zoning district a sign not exceeding eight (8) square feet in surface size is permitted which announces the name, address, or professional activity of the occupant of the premises on which said sign is located.
b. A bulletin board not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet is permitted in connection with any church, school, or similar public-use structure.
c. A temporary real estate or construction sign, not exceeding eight (8) square feet is permitted on the property being sold, leased, or developed. Such sign shall be removed within ten (10) days after it has fulfilled its function. Temporary political campaign or special promotional signs, not exceeding thirty six (36) square feet in total area per lot, is permitted, and must be removed within ten (10) days after the event or election.
511.2 Business Signs. Business signs shall be permitted in connection with a legal business or industry when located on the same premises, and if they meet the requirements hereinafter provided.
a. Signs shall not contain information or advertising for any product not sold on the premises.
b. Signs shall not have a combined aggregate surface size greater than five (5) square feet for each foot of width of the principal structure on the premises. If building mounted, these signs shall not project above the roof line.
c. No sign shall project beyond the property line, except in the C-1 Downtown
Zoning District. In C-1 Districts, signs shall be allowed to overhang public sidewalks, provided that there is at least 10 feet of separation between the sidewalk and the lowest
5-34
part of the sign. No sign shall be permitted that obstructs the vision of a driver or pedestrian to see any crossroad, crosswalk, road sign, or road signal. No sign shall be distract the driver or pedestrian in an unsafe manner nor cause any confusion with any road signs or signals. No sign shall be allowed on a public sidewalk unless it allows at least six (6) feet of uninterrupted access for pedestrian travel. During snow emergency operations, public sidewalks must be kept clear of signs or other potential obstructions.
d. Signs and structures shall not be illuminated in any manner which causes unsafe distraction, confusion, or hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Signs, if illuminated, shall have the lights covered or designed so as to not shine light into the sky. Signs with blinking or flashing lights shall be prohibited.
e. Any sign in excess of fifty (50) square feet shall require City Council approval before installation is permitted. No signs shall exceed 250 square feet in size.
f All signs must be securely fashioned and attached.
511.3 Existing Non-Conforming Signs. Any non-conforming sign lawfully existing upon the effective date of this ordinance may be continued at the size and in the manner existing upon such date except as hereinafter provided.
a. A non-conforming sign may not be changed to another non-conforming sign or structurally altered or expanded except to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
b. A non-conforming sign may not be re-established after removal or after damage of more than fifty percent (50%) of sign replacement cost.
511.4 Maintenance. All signs shall be constructed to be safe and substantial and must be maintained in good repair. Signs deemed to be unsafe, in poor repair, or a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or a nuisance as determined by the city council, shall be improved so as to comply with theses provisions within thirty (30) days of notification from the council or they will be removed at the owner’s expense.
511.5 Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation is committed or permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of any fine or sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this section, and the city may pursue, by appropriate actions or proceedings, any or all additional other remedies.
512 SEXUALLY OREINTED BUSINESSES
512.1 Background. The State Attorney General has prepared a report entitled “Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses”, dated June 6, 1989, prepared by Hubert H. Humphrey III, Attorney General of the State of Minnesota. Other reports include the Olmsted County Planning Department “Adult Entertainment Report” dated March 2, 1988, “A 40-Acre Study” prepared by the St. Paul Division of Planning in 1987, a City of Ramsey Adult Uses Planning Report, and “The Impact of Pornography: A Decade of Literature”, prepared for the Department of Justice Canada, all of which are hereafter collectively referred to as “Reports”. The Reports considered evidence from studies conducted in Minneapolis and St. Paul and in other cities throughout the country relating to sexually oriented businesses.
512.1.1 Impact of Sexually Orientated Businesses. The Reports, based upon the above referenced studies and the testimony presented to it has concluded “that sexually oriented businesses are associated with high crime rates and depression of property values”. In addition, the Attorney General’s Working Group “…heard testimony that the character of a neighborhood can dramatically change when there is a
5-35
concentration of sexually oriented businesses adjacent to residential property.” The Reports conclude that:
A Adult uses have an impact on neighborhoods surrounding them which is distinct from the impact caused by other commercial uses;
B Residential neighborhoods located within close proximity to adult theaters, bookstores and other adult uses experience increased crime rates (sex-related crimes in particular), lowered property values, increased transiency, and decreased stability of ownership;
C The adverse impacts which adult uses have on surrounding areas diminish as the distance from the adult uses increases;
D Studies of other cities have shown that among the crimes which tend to increase either within or in the near vicinity of adult uses are rapes, prostitution, child molestation, indecent exposure, and other lewd and lascivious behavior;
E The City of Phoenix, AZ study confirmed that the sex crime rate was on the average 500 percent higher in areas with sexually oriented businesses;
F Many members of the public perceive areas within which adult uses are located as less safe than other areas which do not have such uses;
G Studies of other cities have shown that the values of both commercial and residential properties either are diminished or fail to appreciate at the rate of other comparable properties when located in proximity to adult uses; and
H The Indianapolis, Indiana study established that professional real estate appraisers believe that an adult bookstore would have a negative effect on the value of both residential and commercial properties within a one to three block area of the store.
512.1.2 City of Plainview Findings. The City Council finds the characteristics of the City of Plainview are similar to those of the cities cited by the Reports when considering the effects of adult uses. The City Council finds, based upon the Reports and the studies cited therein, that adult uses will have secondary effects upon certain pre-existing land uses within the City.
512.2 Definitions
Adult Establishments. An adult establishment is any establishment in which an adult use comprises more than 10 percent of the floor area of the establishment in which it is located or which comprises more than 20 percent of the gross receipts of the entire business operation. Any business that derives a substantial or significant portion of its gross revenues from services, items, merchandise, devices or other materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on materials depicting, exposing, simulating, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Use. An adult use is any of the activities and businesses described below:
Adult Use – Bookstore - an establishment or business or portion of a building used for the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape, or motion picture film if such a building or portion of a building is not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age, and if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
Adult Use – Cabaret - an establishment which provides dancing or other live entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis: (1) the depiction of nudity, specified sexual
5-36
activities or specified anatomical areas; or (2) the presentation, display, or depiction of matter that seeks to evoke, arouse, or excite sexual or erotic feelings or desire.
Adult Use - Dance Club - an establishment which provides dancing or other live entertainment, if such establishment excludes minors by virtue of age (including any business licensed under Section 600) or if such dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the performance, depiction, or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Conversation/Rap Parlor. A business or establishment that provides the services of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Health/Sport Club. A health/sport club that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Hotel or Motel. A hotel or motel that presents material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Massage Parlor/Health Club. A massage parlor or health club that provides massage services distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Modeling Studio. A business or establishment that provides live models who, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification, engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted.
Adult Motion Picture Arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited where coin or slug-operated ors electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are used to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Motion Picture Theater. A motion picture theater that as a prevailing practice presents material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
Adult Novelty Business. An establishment or business that devotes a substantial or significant portion of its inventory, stock in trade, or publicly display merchandise or devotes a substantial or significant portion of its floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business not open to the public) to, or derives a substantial or significant portion of its gross revenues from items, merchandise, or devices that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or items, merchandise or devices that simulate specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or are designed for sexual stimulation.
5-37
Adult Sauna. A sauna that provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility. A building or portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation or reducing if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Erotic Dancer - a person who dances or otherwise performs for or in a licensed premises or an adult cabaret and who seeks to arouse or excite the patrons' sexual desires.
Fondle or Caress - an affectionate touching, rubbing, or stroking with the intent to sexually arouse or excite.
Licensed Premises - any premises, for which a license to sell intoxicating liquor or wine, or non-intoxicating liquor has been issued, which provides dancing or other live entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the performance, depiction, or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Nudity - the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic areas, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
Patron shall mean a customer of an adult establishment, such as an adult use – bookstore, adult use – dance club or an adult use - cabaret.
Specified anatomical areas - anatomical areas consisting of: a)Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and b) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified sexual activities” - activities consisting of the following:
a) Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphis, zooerasty; or
b) Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
c) Clothed or unclothed use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or
d) Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the clothed or unclothed pubic areas or buttocks of a human male or female, or breasts of a female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
e) Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such persons; or
5-38
f) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or
g) Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
h) Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing costume or condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restricted on the part of one so clothed.
Adult Body Painting Studio. An establishment or business that provides the service of applying paint, ink, or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to the body of a patron when the person is nude.
512.3 Prohibited Conduct in Adult Use – Dance Clubs. It is declared to be the purpose and intent of this ordinance to protect the public health, safety, welfare, and morals of the community at establishments featuring total nudity by curtailing the varied criminal offenses which are associated with total nudity and to protect societal order and morality.
512.3.1 Prohibited Conduct in Dance Club. No person, in an adult use - dance club, shall knowingly or intentionally engage in sexual intercourse, engage in specified sexual activities, appear in a state of nudity, or fondle the genitals of himself/herself or another person.
512.3.2 Prohibited Conduct, Other Places. No person, in a place other than an adult use - dance club, with the intent to be seen by persons other than invitees and occupants of that place, shall engage in sexual intercourse, appear in a state of nudity, engage in specified sexual activities, or fondle the genitals of himself/herself or another person.
512.3.3 Violations. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. The City may enforce any provision of this ordinance by mandamus, injunction, or any other appropriate civil or criminal remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction.
512.3.4 Conflict With Any Law. If any term or provision of this ordinance is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be illegal or in conflict with any law, the validity of the remaining terms or provisions shall not be affected and the ordinance shall be construed and enforced as if the ordinance did not contain the particular term or provision held to be invalid.
512.4 Prohibited Conduct in Adult Use – Dance Clubs and Cabarets. It is declared to be the purpose and intent of this ordinance to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community at establishments featuring erotic dancing by curtailing the varied criminal offenses, which are associated with erotic dancing. The Plainview City Council has determined that erotic dancing may lead to an increase in prostitution, sexually-transmitted diseases, drug and alcohol offenses, and other criminal activity. However, in recognition of the protections afforded to the citizens under the First and Fourteenth Amendments, it is not the intent of this section to inhibit the freedom of speech component of erotic dancing. Instead, this section represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity through the regulation of erotic dancing versus the protected rights of erotic dancers and their patrons. Thus, this section is designed to alleviate undesirable social problems that accompany erotic dancing without curtailing the constitutionally-protected expression (i.e., dancing).
A All dancing at an adult use – dance club or an adult use - cabaret shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor.
B No dancing at an adult use – dance club or an adult use - cabaret shall occur closer than six feet to any patron.
C No erotic dancer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any erotic dancer.
D No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any erotic dancer and no erotic dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
5-39
512.4.1 Violations. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. The City may enforce any provision of this ordinance by mandamus, injunction, or any other appropriate civil or criminal remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction.
512.4.2 Conflict With Any Law. If any term or provision of this ordinance is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be illegal or in conflict with any law, the validity of the remaining terms or provisions shall not be affected and the ordinance shall be construed and enforced as if the ordinance did not contain the particular term or provision held to be invalid.
512.5 Prohibited Conduct in Adult Use - Bookstores. It is declared to be the purpose and intent of this ordinance to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community at adult use - bookstores by curtailing the varied criminal offenses, which are associated with sexual activity in and around these establishments. The Plainview City Council has determined that adult use - bookstores may lead to an increase in prostitution, sexually-transmitted diseases, indecent exposure and other criminal activity. However, in recognition of the protections afforded to the citizens under the First and Fourteenth Amendments, it is not the intent of this section to inhibit the freedom of speech component of adult media. Instead, this section represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity through the regulation of conduct by patrons within adult use - bookstores versus the protected rights of owners of these establishments and their patrons. Thus, this section is designed to alleviate undesirable social problems that accompany sexual activity within adult use - bookstores without curtailing constitutionally-protected expression within these establishments.
512.5.1 Prohibited Conduct in Bookstore. No person, in an adult use - bookstore, shall knowingly or intentionally engage in sexual intercourse, engage in specified sexual activities, appear in a state of nudity, or fondle the genitals of himself/herself or another person.
512.5.2 Prohibited Conduct, Other Places. No person, in a place other than an adult use - bookstore, with the intent to be seen by persons other than invitees and occupants of that place, shall engage in sexual intercourse, appear in a state of nudity, engage in specified sexual activities, or fondle the genitals of himself/herself or another person.
512.5.3 Violations. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. The City may enforce any provision of this ordinance by mandamus, injunction, or any other appropriate civil or criminal remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction.
512.5.4 Conflict With Any Law. If any term or provision of this ordinance is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be illegal or in conflict with any law, the validity of the remaining terms or provisions shall not be affected and the ordinance shall be construed and enforced as if the ordinance did not contain the particular term or provision held to be invalid.
512.6 Additional Requirements. In addition to any other requirements which may be specified by the City Council, adult establishments shall be subject to the following conditions:
512.6.1 Location. Adult establishments are permitted in the City, but must be located at least 700 feet from any residence, daycare, park, church, or another adult establishment. For purposes of this ordinance, this 700 foot distance shall be a measurement as the crow flies from the property line or lot line of any property in the City being used as a residence, park, daycare, church or adult establishment to the nearest point of the proposed adult establishment structure.
512.6.2 Display. No adult establishment shall depict any product or service on any display intended to be viewed by the public outside the establishment which constitutes “specified sexual activities” as defined in Section 512.
512.6.3 Hours of operation. No adult establishment shall be open to the public from the hours of 1200 p.m. to 10:00 a.m. weekdays and Saturdays, nor at any time on Sundays or national holidays.
512.6.4 Operations.
5-40
a. Off-site Viewing: Any business operating as an adult establishment shall prevent off-site viewing of its merchandise, which if viewed by a minor, would be in violation of Minnesota Statues Chapter 617 or other applicable federal or state statutes or local ordinances.
b. Entrances: All entrances to the business, with the exception of emergency fire exists that are not useable by patrons to enter the business, shall be visible from the public right-of-way.
c. Layout: The layout of all service and display areas shall be designed so that the management of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel inside the establishment can observe all patrons while they have access to any service or merchandise offered for sale or viewing including but not limited to books, magazines, photographs, video tapes, or any other material, or any live dancers or entertainers.
d. Illumination: Illumination of the premise’s exterior shall be adequate to observe the location and activities of all persons on the exterior premises.
e. Signs: Signs for adult establishments shall not contain representational depiction of an adult nature or graphic descriptions of the adult theme of the operations. Signs located on the exterior of the establishment (not necessarily on the premises) shall not be located within 700 feet from any residence, daycare, park, church, or another adult establishment.
f. Access by Minors: No minor shall be permitted on the premises of any adult establishment. Adult goods or materials may not be offered, sold, transferred, conveyed, given or bartered to a minor, or displayed in a fashion that allows them to be viewed by a minor, whether or not the minor is on the establishment’s premises.
g. Additional Conditions for Adult Cabarets: The following additional conditions apply to adult cabarets:
i. No dancer or performer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer of performer.
ii. No patron shall pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or performer.
iii. No dancer or performer shall solicit or receive any pay or gratuity from any patron.
h. The provisions of this ordinance do not prohibit adult establishments from having a reasonable opportunity to locate in the city. This ordinance is not for the purpose of, nor is it intended to, impose a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of adult oriented entertainment to their intended market.
513 LIQUOR LICENSES
513.1 Adoption of State Law by Reference. The provisions of M. S. Chapter 340A, as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this ordinance as if set out in full. It is the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to M. S. Chapter 340A are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this ordinance is adopted.
513.2 City May Be More Restrictive Than State Law. The Council is authorized by the provisions of M. S. § 340A.509, as it may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this ordinance, additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages within its limits beyond those contained in M. S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time.
513.3 Definitions. In addition to the definitions contained in M. S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this ordinance:
5-41
LIQUOR, as used in this ordinance, without modification by the words "intoxicating" or "3.2 percent malt", includes both intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor.
BAR/RESTAURANT means a facility for which a primary purpose is the sale of food, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises, where full waitress/waiter table service is provided, where a customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is served and consumed while seated at a single location. In order to be a bar/restaurant as defined by this term in this ordinance, an establishment shall also have a license from the state as required by M. S. § 157.16, as it may be amended from time to time, and it shall have facilities for seating at least 25 guests at one time.
513.4 Consumption in Public Places. No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in a public park, on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any public place other than on the premises of an establishment licensed under this ordinance, in a municipal liquor dispensary if one exists in the city, or where the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted. The City Council may allow temporary exceptions to this section for special events, such as the annual Corn on the Cob Celebration, if it is deemed by the City Council to be in the best interests of the City and will not unduly impact the safety and welfare of the general public.
513.5 Number of Licenses Which May Be Issued. With respect to on sale intoxicating liquor licenses as defined in Section 513, the City shall have the right to issue one (l) such license for each 1,500 residents in the City’s population. Therefore, once the City reaches 1,500 residents, it shall have the right to issue 1 license; once it reaches 3,000 residents, it shall have the right to issue 2 licenses and so on.
With respect to the following licenses: 3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale licenses; 3.2 percent malt liquor off-sale license; temporary 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses; Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses; temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses; and on-sale wine licenses as defined in Section 513, the City shall have the right to issue one (l) such license for each 1,000 residents in the City’s population. Therefore, once the City reaches 1,000 residents, it shall have the right to issue 1 license; once it reaches 2,000 residents, it shall have the right to issue 2 licenses and so on.
However, issuance of these licenses is discretionary and the City shall not be obligated to issue all of the licenses authorized under this section.
513.6 Term and Expiration of Licenses. Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses, except temporary licenses, shall expire on December 31 of each year unless another date is provided by ordinance. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms. Consumption and display permits issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety, and the accompanying city consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year.
513.7 Kinds of Liquor Licenses. The City of Plainview became a “split liquor” city following an affirmative vote in a referendum held on November 2, 2004. The City is authorized to issue the following licenses and permits, up to the number specified in Section 513.5 of this ordinance.
A 3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued only to bar/restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers and establishments used exclusively for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks. Licenses shall run from April 6th to April 6th.
B 3.2 percent malt liquor off-sale license. Licenses shall run from April 6th to April 6th.
5-42
C Temporary 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses which may be issued only to a club, charitable, religious or nonprofit organization.
D On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to the following establishments as defined by this ordinance: bar/restaurants, bowling centers, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations. As to bar/restaurants, bowling centers, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations, any of these organizations issued an on-sale intoxicating liquor shall derive at least 35 % of their gross sales revenue from the sale of food. Club licenses may be issued only with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety (club licenses shall run from July 1st to July 1st as per State statute). The fee for club licenses established by the Council under Section 513.3of this ordinance shall not exceed the amounts provided for in M. S. § 340A.408, subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at a community festival held within the city under the provisions of M. S. § 340A.404, subd. 4b, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any convention, banquet, conference, meeting or social affair conducted on the premises of a sports, convention, or cultural facility owned by the city, under the provisions of 340A.404, subd. 4a, as it may be amended from time to time; however, the licensee is prohibited from dispensing intoxicating liquor to any person attending or participating in an amateur athletic event being held on the premises.
E Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, only after authorization to do so by voter approval at a general or special election as provided by M. S. § 340A.504, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time. Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to bar/restaurants, as defined in Section 513.3 of this ordinance, bowling centers, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations, which hold an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, which serve liquor only in conjunction with the service of food, and which derive 35% of its annual gross sales revenues from the sale of food. The maximum fee for this license which shall be established by the Council, shall not exceed $200, or the maximum amount provided by M. S. § 340A.504, subd 3(c) as it may be amended from time to time.
F Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, which may be issued only in connection with a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious or other nonprofit corporation that has existed for at least three years. No license shall be for longer than four consecutive days, and the city shall issue no more than 12 days worth of temporary licenses to any one organization in one calendar year.
G On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety to: restaurants that meet the criteria of M. S. 340A.404, subd 5, as it may be amended from time to time, which meet the definition of bar/restaurant in Section 513.3 of this ordinance, and which derive at least 60% of its annual gross sales revenue from the sale of food; and to licensed bed and breakfast facilities which meet the criteria in M. S. § 340A.401, subd 1 as it may be amended from time to time. The fee for an on-sale wine license established by the Council under the provisions of this ordinance shall not exceed one-half of the license fee charged for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license. The holder of an on-sale wine license who also holds an on sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license is authorized to sell malt liquor
5-43
with a content over 3.2 percent (strong beer) without an additional license. Licenses shall run from July 1st to July 1st.
H One day consumption and display permits with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety to a nonprofit organization in conjunction with a social activity in the city sponsored by the organization.
I Approval of the issuance of a consumption and display permit by the Commissioner of Public Safety. The maximum amount of the additional fee which may be imposed by the Council on a person who has been issued a consumption and display permit under the provisions of this ordinance shall not exceed $300, or the maximum amount permitted by M. S. §340A.14, subd 6, as it may be amended from time to time. Consumption and display permits shall expire on March 31 of each year.
513.8 License Fees; Pro Rata
513.8.1 License or Fee Limit. No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed any limit established by M. S. § 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, for a liquor license.
513.8.2 Costs Associated With License. The Council may establish from time to time by ordinance or resolution the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is authorized to issue. The license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the license and other costs directly related to the enforcement of the liquor laws and this ordinance. No liquor license fee shall be increased without providing mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed increase to all affected licensees at least 30 days before the hearing.
513.8.3 Prorated Fees. The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis. A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may occur only if authorized by M. S. § 340A.408, subd. 5.
513.8.4 Application Denied. All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is filed with the city. If the application is denied, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
513.9 Council Discretion to Grant or Deny a License. The Council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the application for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No applicant has a right to a license under this ordinance.
513.10 Application for License. Every application for a license issued under this ordinance shall be on a form provided by the city. Every application shall state the name of the applicant, the applicant's age, representations as to the applicant's character, with references as the Council may require, the type of license applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will operate and its location, a description of the premises, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has been in that business at that place, and other information as the Council may require from time to time. An application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall also contain the information required in this section. The form shall be verified and filed with the city. No person shall make a false statement in an application.
Prior to the issuance of any license under this ordinance, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility as defined in M. S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time, with regard to liability under M. S. § 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to time. This proof will be filed with the city and the Commissioner of Public Safety. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of financial responsibility under this section shall conform to M. S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. Operation of a business which is required to be licensed by this ordinance without having on
5-44
file with the city at all times effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause for revocation of the license.
513.11 Description of Premises. The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed. The description may not include any parking lot or sidewalk.
513.12 Applications for Renewal. At least 90 days before a license issued under this ordinance is to be renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the city. The decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion of the Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.
513.13 Transfer of License. No license issued under this ordinance may be transferred without the approval of the Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior Council approval is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer a license shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and all of the provisions of this code applying to applications for a license shall apply.
513.14 Investigation. On an initial application for a license, on an application for transfer of a license and, in the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public interest to do so, on an application for renewal of a license, the city shall conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant or it may contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The applicant shall pay with the application an investigation fee of to be set by resolution of the City Council which shall be in addition to any license fee. If the cost of the preliminary investigation is less than the investigation fee, the unused balance shall be returned to the applicant. At the earliest practicable time after application is made for renewal of an on-sale license or on-sale wine license, and in any event prior to the time that the application is approved by the Council, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk copies of State of Minnesota sales tax returns that show the total gross sales revenues and the total gross food sales revenues of the restaurant for the 12 month period immediately preceding the date of filing of the application. A foreign corporation shall file a current certificate of authority. The results of the preliminary investigation shall be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license.
If the results of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of the Council, a comprehensive background and financial investigation, the Council may either conduct the investigation itself or contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee for this comprehensive background and financial investigation to be paid by the applicant shall be set by resolution of the City Council, less any amount paid for the initial investigation if the investigation is to be conducted within the state, and $10,000, if the investigation is required outside the state, the amount shall be set by resolution of the City Council less any amount paid for the initial investigation,. The unused balance of the fee shall be returned to the applicant whether or not the application is denied. The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation and the amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be refundable in the event the application is denied. The results of the comprehensive investigation shall be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on sale intoxicating liquor license or an on sale wine license.
513.15 Hearing and Issuance. The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and not investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the Council shall in its sound discretion grant or deny the application. No
5-45
license shall become effective until the proof of financial security has been approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
513.16 Restrictions on Issuance. Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises described in the application. Not more than one license shall be directly or indirectly issued within the city to any one person or business, other than the City of Plainview. No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges or other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid. No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible for a license under state law. No license shall be issued to any person who is not a resident of the state; if the applicant is a corporation, all of the shareholders shall be residents of the state (this provision shall not apply to any existing license existing on the effective date of this chapter or to the renewal of an existing license). No license shall be granted within 500 feet of any school or church; the distance is to be measured from the closest side of the school or church to the closest side of the structure on the premises within which liquor is to be sold.
513.17 Conditions of License. The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the condition is met.
A Within 90 days after employment, every person selling or serving liquor in an establishment which has an "on-sale" license shall receive training regarding the selling or serving of liquor to customers. The training shall be provided by an organization approved by the Council. Proof of training shall be provided by the licensee.
B Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this ordinance and the law equally with the employee.
C Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, city employee, or any other person designated by the Council to conduct compliance checks and to otherwise enter, inspect and search the premises of the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the time when customers remain on the premises without a warrant.
D No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
E Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and of this ordinance is a continuing condition of any license.
513.18 Hours and Days of Sale. The hours of operation and days of sale shall be
those set by M. S. § 340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, with the exception that all establishments that serve intoxicating liquor within the City shall not serve liquor Monday through Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. or at any time on Sundays, except for temporary licensees.
A No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in an on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
B No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle or other container containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor to remain upon any table, bar, stool or other
5-46
place where customers are served, more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
C No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on the on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
D Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for revocation or suspension of the license.
513.19 Minors on Premises. No person under the age of 18 years employed in any
rooms where intoxicating liquors, wine or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on sale shall handle any such products containing alcohol, except that persons under the age of 18 may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person or dishwashing services or wait staff in places defined as a bar/restaurant, restaurant, hotel, motel or other multipurpose building serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors, wine or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on sale.
No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a restaurant, or attend social functions that are held in a portion of the premises where liquor is not sold.
513.20 Restrictions on Purchases and Consumption. No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place of business unless it has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit from the Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M. S. § 3401.414, as it may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the Council, and no person shall consume liquor in any such place.
513.21 Suspension and Revocation.
513.21.1 Failure to Comply. The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days or revoke any liquor license upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, regulation or provision of this ordinance relating to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial responsibility, no suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act, M. S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may act as the hearing body under that act, or it may contract with the Office of Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.
513.21.2 Minimum Periods of Suspension or Revocation. The following are the minimum periods of suspension or revocation which shall be imposed by the Council for violations of the provisions of this chapter or M. S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that Chapter as they may be amended from time to time. Revocations shall occur within 60 days following a violation for which the revocation is imposed. The council shall select the day or days during which the license will be suspended.
A For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension, sale of intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2 percent malt liquor, or violation of § 112.04, the license shall be revoked.
B The license shall be suspended by the Council after a finding under (A) that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, rule, or provision of this chapter for at least the minimum periods as follows:
5-47
C For the first violation within any three year period, at least one day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.
D For a second violation within any three year period, at least three consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.
E For the third violation within any three year period, at least seven consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.
F For a fourth violation within any three year period, the license shall be revoked.
513.21.3 Lapse of Insurance. Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall effect an immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this ordinance or state law without further action of the Council. Notice of cancellation or lapse of a current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to the licensee of the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has received notice of lapse of required insurance or of suspension or revocation of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a request is made in writing to the Clerk, a hearing before the Council shall be granted within ten days. Any suspension under this paragraph shall continue until the Council determines that the financial responsibility requirements of state law and this ordinance have again been met.
513.21.4 Cumulative Penalties. The provisions of Section 513 pertaining to administrative penalties may be imposed in addition to or in lieu of any suspension or revocation under this ordinance.
513.22 Existing Municipal Stores Continued. The existing municipal liquor store for the sale of intoxicating liquor which the city has in existence on the effective date of this ordinance is continued. The conditions of operation of the municipal liquor store shall be governed by Sections 513.23-513.25 as set forth below, but except for the requirements set forth in those sections and any other requirements mandated by state law, the municipal liquor store shall be exempt from all other requirements set forth in these ordinances.
513.23 Municipal Liquor Store Location. The municipal liquor store shall be located at a suitable place in the city as the Council determines by motion. However, no premises upon which taxes, assessments or other public charges are delinquent shall be leased for municipal liquor store purposes. The Council shall have the right to establish additional off-sale and on-sale stores at other locations as it may, from time to time, by motion, determine.
513.24 Municipal Liquor Store Operation.
513.24.1 Manager. The municipal liquor store shall be in the immediate charge of a Liquor Store Manager selected by the Council and paid compensation as is fixed by the council. The Manager shall not be a person who would be prohibited by law or any provision of this ordinance from being eligible for an intoxicating liquor license. The Council may require the Manager to furnish a surety bond to the city, conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the duties of the office, in a sum as specified by the Council. The bond premium may be paid by the city or the Manager, in the discretion of the Council. The Manager shall operate the municipal liquor store under the Council's direction and shall perform those duties in connection with the store as may be established by the Council. The Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the conduct of the store in full compliance with this ordinance and with the laws relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor.
513.24.2 Other Employees. The Council may also appoint additional employees as may be required and shall fix their compensation. All employees, including the Manager, shall hold their positions at the pleasure of the Council. No person under the age of 18 shall be employed in the store. The Council may require the employees to furnish surety bonds conditioned for the faithful discharge of their
5-48
duties in a sum as specified by the Council. The premium on the bond may be paid by the city or the employees, as the Council determines.
513.24.3 Liquor Store Funds. All of the revenues received from the operation of a municipal liquor store shall be deposited in a municipal liquor store fund from which all ordinary operating expenses, including compensation of the Manager and employees, shall be paid. Surpluses accumulating in the fund may be transferred to the general fund of the city or to any other appropriate fund of the city by resolution of the Council, and may be expended for any municipal purpose. The handling of municipal liquor store receipts and disbursements shall comply with the procedure prescribed by law for the receipts and disbursements of city funds generally.
513.24.4 Financial Statements. The Council shall provide within 90 days following the end of the calendar year for publication a balance sheet using generally accepted accounting procedures and a statement of operations of the municipal liquor store for that year. The balance sheet and statement shall be published in accordance with the provisions of M. S. § 471.6985, as it may be amended from time to time.
513.24.5 Hours of Operation. The hours during which the sale of intoxicating liquor may be sold shall be as provided in Section .513.18 No person, other than the Manager or a store employee, may remain in the municipal liquor store longer than one half hour after the time when the sale of intoxicating liquor must cease.
513.25 Proof of Financial Responsibility. The city shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility required by licensees of retail intoxicating liquor establishments under the provisions of M. S. 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time.
513.26 Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or M. S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law.
513.26.1 Civil Penalties. The Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation of M. S. Chapter 340A and of this ordinance as provided by the minimum schedule of presumptive civil penalties. These civil penalties shall be in addition to any criminal penalties imposed under (A) or any suspension or revocation imposed under Section 513. Conviction of a violation in a court of law is not required in order for the Council to impose the civil penalty. A hearing under the Administrative Procedures Act, M. S. § § 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended from time to time, is not required before the penalty is imposed, but the Council shall hold a hearing on the proposed violation and the proposed penalty and hear any person who wishes to speak. Non-payment of the penalty is grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. The following is the minimum schedule of presumptive civil penalties in addition to any suspensions which must be imposed unless the license is revoked:
A For the first violation within any three year period, $500.
B For the second violation within any three year period, $1,000.
C For the third and subsequent violations within any three year period, $2,000 for each violation.
513.26.2 Terms. The term “violation” as used in this section and in Section 513.21 includes any
and all violations of the provisions of this chapter, or of M. S. Chapter 340A, as it
may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that Chapter as they may be
amended from time to time. The number of violations shall be determined on the basis of the
history of violations for the preceding three year period.
6-1
600 CONSTRUCTION, PLANNING, ZONING, AND LAND USE
601 BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION
601.1 International Building Code.
601.1.1 Codes adopted by a reference. The Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the Commissioner of Administration pursuant to Minnesota Statutes chapter 16B.59 to 16B75, including all of the amendments, rules and regulations established, adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Administration, through the Building Codes and Standards Division is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this ordinance. The Minnesota State Building Code is hereby incorporated in this ordinance as if fully set out herein.
601.1.2 Application, Administration and Enforcement. The application, administration, and enforcement of the code shall be in accordance with Minnesota State Building Code. The code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by Minnesota Statutes, 16B.62, subdivision 1, when so established by this ordinance. This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified Building Official designated by this Municipality to administer the code (Minnesota statute 16B.65) subdivision 1. No construction project shall being without first paying for and acquiring a building permit.
601.1.3 Permits and Fees. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in Minnesota Statutes, 16B.62, subdivision 1 and 16B.70. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City.
601.1.4 Violations and Penalties. A violation of the code is a misdemeanor.
601.1.5 Permits. All building permits issued by the City of Plainview shall state that as a condition of approval of such permit, the applicant for such permit shall complete construction of the project within one hundred and eighty (180) days after the permit is issued. For purposes of this paragraph, the term “completed" shall include, but not be limited to the following:
1. Removal of all construction materials, equipment, debris, and excess earth.
2. Placement of top soil on all lawn areas.
3. Finish grading any swales within established drainage easements necessary to accommodate natural drainage of adjacent properties.
Any person, firm, or corporation unable, because of hardship, to complete the work required under the terms of this section, shall make an application to the City Council for an extension of time. The application for the extension shall state the reasons for the request which demonstrate that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant being prevented from completion of the work for which the permit was authorized.
A violation of any portion of this section of the City Code shall cause suspension of the building permit and/or shall subject any person, firm, or corporation so found to be violating the ordinance to a fine of not more than One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars for each day that the violation continues or is not corrected
601.1.6 Duties of Building Inspectors. Upon conducting an inspection, the City Building Inspector shall verify that each project has a valid building permit on-site. The City Building Inspector shall notify the City of any project found to be without a permit. Upon final completion of the project and inspection by the City Building Inspector, the Inspector will issue a project completion certificate and/or a Certificate of Occupancy. No project shall be issued a completion certificate until the fee for the permit has been paid, and the permit applicant has complied with the provisions of this section.
6-2
601.2 Demolition of Buildings
601.2.1 Permit. It shall be unlawful to wreck or demolish any building or structure in the City of Plainview consisting of 5,000 cubic feet or more without a basement, or any size with a basement, without first securing a permit therefor pursuant to the procedures set forth below. No permit shall be required for buildings not exceeding 5,000 cubic feet without a basement.
601.2.2 Application. An application for a permit to wreck or demolish any building or structure in the City shall be made in writing to the City Clerk, and a copy shall be delivered to the building inspector and to any utility company serving the premises and to the owners or agents of the adjoining or neighboring property. Such application shall give the location of the building or structure, the date when the wrecking or demolition is to commence and the approximate time which such wrecking or demolition shall take.
601.2.3 Insurance. A certificate showing that public liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 has been obtained by the applicant, shall accompany the application.
601.2.4 Inspection. Before any such permit shall be approved, the building inspector shall inspect the premises where the wrecking and demolition work is to take place, and ascertain the provision for proper care has been made so as not to endanger any sewer or water connections with the City sewer and water systems, or any electrical wires or installations or any gas piping or installations.
601.2.5 Approval. If the building inspector finds that the terms of this ordinance are being complied with by the applicant, he shall approve the applicant and issue a permit for such wrecking or demolition.
601.2.6 Fees. The applicant shall pay the fee to the applicable City Clerk at the time of issuance of the permit. Said fee shall be used to pay for 2 inspections of the premises and other administrative expenses of the City.
601.2.7 Regulations. All work of such wrecking or demolition shall be performed in a workman-like manner and with the least amount of noise possible. Care shall be taken to protect neighboring structures with adequate shoring and whatever else is needful to protect such structures. Signs stating "Demolition in Progress-No Trespassing" shall be erected on each side of the building that faces a public street or alley. Adequate protection shall be provided to prevent injury to any City or public utility. It shall be the duty of all persons working on or responsible for such wrecking or demolition to see to it that children are warned away from the premises, and are not permitted to play in or on or frequent such structures.
601.2.8 Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
601.3 Moving of Houses, Buildings and Other Structures
601.3.1 Permit Required - No person shall move, haul or transport, any house, building, derrick or other structure of the height of sixteen (16) feet or more, of a width of fifteen (15) feet or more, or which cannot be moved at a speed of four (4) miles per hour or more, upon, across or over any street or alley without first obtaining a permit therefor as hereinafter provided.
601.3.2 Manner of Obtaining Permits - All applications for permits to move houses, buildings, derricks or other similar structures shall be made in writing to the City Clerk, specifying the date and hour said moving is to commence, and the street route over which said building or structure shall be moved. If it shall be necessary to cut down, move, raise or in any other way interfere with any wires or poles, the application shall state the name of the owner of said wires and poles, the time and place when and where removal of said and/or cutting, raising or other interference with said wires will be necessary. A permit to move, shall in all cases issue upon an appropriate Resolution of the City Council; provided, however, that in all cases involving the moving of newly constructed houses or buildings, the City Clerk shall be authorized to issue
6-3
the necessary permit when the City Council theretofore by Resolution shall have approved the manufacturer, contractor or mover thereof,
601.3.3 Fee for Permit - Before a permit to move any house, building, derrick or either structure is granted under the provisions hereof, the applicant for said permit shall pay the applicable fee to the City Clerk.
601.3.4 Surety Bond Required - Every person at the time of making application for a permit as provided in Subd. 2, hereof, shall execute in favor of the City a good and sufficient surety bond to be approved by the Building Inspector, indemnifying the City against any loss by reason of damage to streets or other City property, and holding the City harmless from any damage to private property or damage suit resulting from the failure of such person to comply with the provisions hereof, or from their negligence.
601.3.5 Notice to Owners of Wires and Poles - The applicant shall, upon filing of each application, give not less than five (5) days written notice to the person owning or operating such wires and poles or to their agents, of the time when, and the place where the removal of said poles, or the cutting, raising or otherwise interfering with said wires shall be necessary.
601.3.6 Duty of Owners of Wires and Poles - Every person owning or operating said poles or wires after service of notice, as required in Subd. 3, hereof, shall furnish competent workmen or linemen to remove such poles, or raise or cut wires, as may be necessary to facilitate the moving of such house, building, derrick, or structure. The necessary expense which is incurred thereby shall be paid by the holder of the moving permit.
601.3.7 Duty of House Movers - No person engaged in moving any house, building derrick or other structure shall raise, cut or in any way interfere with any such poles or wires unless the persons or authorities owning or having control of the same shall neglect or refuse to do so after having been notified as required in Subd. 5, hereof, thereupon, the person or persons engaged in such moving may employ competent and experienced workmen or linemen to perform the necessary work, which shall be done in a careful and workmanlike manner, and the poles and wires shall be promptly replaced, and the damage thereto promptly repaired
601.3.8 Violations, Penalty - Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than One Hundred and no/100 Dollars ($100.00) and not more than One Thousand and no/100 Dollars ($1,000.00) besides the costs, and in default of payment, shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until payment is made, not exceeding ninety (90) days in all. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense, and be punished accordingly. The penalty imposed by this Subdivision shall be in addition to the remedies contained in Subd. 5, 6 and 7, hereof.
601.3.9 Duty of the Public Works Director - The Public Works Director shall from time to time inspect the progress of the moving of any building, house or other structure and see that said house, building or other structure is being moved in accordance with the provisions of the Ordinance.
601.3.10 Lights to be Displayed - Any person moving any structures upon, across or over any street, alley or other public place, shall display lights thereon in such a manner as to show the extreme height and width thereof from thirty (30) minutes after sunset to thirty (30) minutes before sunrise.
602 WELLHEAD PROTECTION. The City has created a Wellhead Protection Plan. The purpose of Wellhead Protection Plan is to prevent the contamination of groundwater used for drinking water. A Wellhead Protection Area (WHPA) is the surface and subsurface area surrounding a public water supply well from which water and contaminants are likely to reach the well. The goals of the Wellhead Protection Plan are to maintain current drinking water quality, increase public awareness of groundwater issues, protect the aquifer, and continue to collect data to support future efforts in wellhead protection planning.
6-4
603 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The City has created a Comprehensive Plan. The purpose of the Comprehensive Plan is to shape growth in ways that make Plainview a better place to live and work. The Comprehensive Plan is to be reviewed every few years in order to ensure that it is still accurate. The goals of the comprehensive plan, which are general in nature, are:
A Promote and protect the health, safety, general welfare and fiscal strength of the city of Plainview.
B Encourage diversity in community development as measured by diversity of land uses businesses types, housing types & densities and life styles.
C Recognize the importance of the Plainview area farm economy, local value-added agriculture, and related agri-businesses.
D Encourage the growth of businesses that serve the growing markets of medical services, housing, construction and recreation.
E Maintain Plainview’s small town character
F Maintain strong levels of municipal and educational services
G Maintain city policies, codes and improvement programs which are efficient and cost-effective in nature and fair in their application.
H Strengthen the city tax base through prudent growth and city management
I Provide job growth and stability and overall city growth according to standards which maintain small town quality of life, and which protects the natural environment, and which diversify local employment.
J To plan city growth which avoids land use sprawl; which minimizes the development of prime farm land; and which is as compatible as possible with the county and township units of government.
604 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
604.1 Statutory Authorization. This section of the city code is authorized and adopted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 462.351.
604.2 Findings. The City of Plainview hereby finds that uncontrolled and inadequately planned use of wetlands, woodlands, natural habitat areas, areas subject to soil erosion and areas containing restrictive soils adversely affects the public health, safety, and general welfare by impacting water quality and contributing to other environmental problems, creating nuisances, impairing other beneficial uses of environmental resources and hindering the ability of the City of Plainview to provide adequate water, sewage, flood control, and other community services. In addition, extraordinary public expenditures may be required for the protection of persons and property in such areas and in areas which may be affected by unplanned land usage.
604.3 Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to promote, preserve and enhance the natural resources within the City of Plainview and protect them from adverse effects occasioned by poorly sited development or incompatible activities by regulating land disturbing or development activities that would have an adverse and potentially irreversible impact on water quality and unique and fragile environmentally sensitive land; by minimizing conflicts and encouraging compatibility between land disturbing and development activities and water quality and environmentally sensitive lands; and by requiring detailed review standards and procedures for land disturbing or development activities proposed for such areas, thereby achieving a balance between urban growth and development and protection of water quality and natural areas.
604.4 Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the meaning stated below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number
6-5
include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” and “must” are always mandatory and not merely directive.
Applicant. Any person or entities that applies for a building permit, subdivision approval, or a permit to allow land-disturbing activities. Applicant also means that person’s agents, employees, and others acting under this person’s direction.
Best Management Practices (BMP’s). Erosion and sediment control and water quality management practices that are the most effective and practicable means of controlling, preventing, and minimizing degradation of surface water, including construction-phasing, minimizing the length of time soil areas are exposed, prohibitions, and other management practices published by state or designated area-wide planning agencies. (Examples of BMP’s can be found in the current versions of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s publications, “Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas,” and, “Storm-Water and Wetlands: Planning and Evaluation Guidelines for Addressing Potential Impacts of Urban Storm-Water and Snow-Melt Run-offs on Wetlands,” the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s, “Storm Water Management for Construction Activities: Developing Pollution Prevention Plans and Best Management Practices,”) as a reference for BMP’s) and the Minnesota Department of Transportation’s, “Erosion Control Design Manual.”)
Detention Facility. A permanent natural or man-made structure, including wetlands, for the temporary storage of run-off.
Developer. A person, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, state agency, or political subdivision thereof engaged in a land disturbance activity.
Discharge. The conveyance, channeling, run-off, or drainage of storm water, including snow melts from a construction site.
Energy Dissipation. This refers to methods employed at pipe outlets to prevent erosion. Examples include, but are not limited to aprons, riprap, splash pads, and gabions that are designed to prevent erosion.
Erosion. Any process that wears away the surface of the land by the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity. Erosion can be accelerated by the activities of people and nature.
Erosion Control. Refers to methods employed to prevent erosion. Examples include soil stabilization practices, horizontal slope grading, temporary or permanent cover, and construction phasing.
Erosion and Sediment Practice Specifications or Practice. The management procedures, techniques, and methods to control soil erosion and sedimentation as officially adopted by either the city, county, or local watershed group, whichever is more stringent.
Exposed Soil Areas. All areas of the construction site where the vegetation (trees, shrubs, brush, etc.) has been removed. This includes topsoil stockpile
6-6
areas, borrow areas, and disposal areas within the construction site. It does not include stockpiles or surcharge areas of sand, gravel, concrete, or bituminous.
Final Stabilization. Means that all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of seventy five percent (75%) of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures has been established or equivalent permanent stabilization measures have been employed. Simply sowing grass seed is not considered stabilization.
Flood Plain. The areas adjoining a water course or water basin that have been or may be covered by a regional flood.
Hydric Soils. Soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.
Hydrophytic Vegetation. Macrophytic plant life growing in water, soil, or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content.
Impervious Surface. A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than existed prior to development. Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, and concrete, asphalt, or gravel roads.
Land Disturbance Activities. Any land change that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into or upon waters or lands within this government’s jurisdiction, including clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land.
Paved Surface. A constructed hard, smooth, surface made of asphalt, concrete, or other pavement material. Examples include, but are not limited to roads, sidewalks, driveways, and parking lots.
Permanent Cover. Means “final stabilization”. Examples include grass, gravel, asphalt, and concrete.
Person. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchisee, association, or governmental entity.
Regional Flood. A flood that is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in the State and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of a 100-year recurrence interval.
Retention Facility. A permanent natural or man-made structure that provides for the storage of storm water run-off by means of a permanent pool of water.
Run-off Coefficient. The average annual fraction of total precipitation that is not infiltrated into, or otherwise retained by the soil, concrete, asphalt, or other surface upon which it falls that will appear at the conveyance as run-off.
6-7
Sediment. The product of an erosion process; solid material both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved by water, air, or ice, and has come to rest on the earth's’ surface either above or below water level.
Sediment Control. The methods employed to prevent sediment from leaving the development site. Sediment control practices include silt fences, sediment traps, earth dikes, drainage swales, check dams, subsurface drains, pipe slope drains, storm drain inlet protection, and temporary or permanent sedimentation basins.
Sedimentation. Sedimentation means the process or action of depositing sediment caused by erosion. The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the immediate surface of the earth. For the purposes of this document stockpiles of sand, gravel, aggregate, concrete, or bituminous materials are not considered “soil” stockpiles.
Stabilized. Is exposed ground surface after it has been covered by sod, erosion control blanket, riprap, or other material that prevents erosion from occurring. Simply sowing grass seed is not considered stabilization.
Storm Water. Under Minnesota Rule 7077.0105, subparts 41b, storm water,
“means precipitation run-off, storm water run-off, snow melt run-off, and any
other surface run-off and drainage”. (According to the Federal Code of
Regulations under 40 CFR 122.26 [b][13], “Storm water means storm water run-
off, snow melt run-off, and surface and drainage”).
Storm Water Pollution Control Plan. A joint storm water and erosion and sediment control plan that is a document containing the requirements of Section 7.0, that when implemented, will decrease soil erosion on a parcel of land and off-site non-point pollution and sediment damages.
Structure. Anything manufactured, constructed, or erected which is normally
attached to or positioned on land, including portable buildings, earthen structures,
roads, parking lots, and paved storage areas.
Subdivision. Any tract of land divided into building lots for private, public,
commercial, industrial, etc. development. Minnesota Rule 6120.2500, subpart
17, defines a subdivision as, “. . . land that is divided for the purpose of sale, rent,
or lease, including planned unit development”.
Temporary Protection. Short-term methods employed to prevent erosion. Examples of such protection include straw, mulch, erosion control blankets, wood chips, and erosion netting.
Urban. Of, relating to, characteristics of, constituting a city.
Vegetated or Grassed Swales. A vegetated earthen channel that conveys storm water, while treating the storm water by biofiltration. Such swales remove pollutants by both filtration and infiltration.
6-8
Waters of the State. As defined in Minnesota Statutes Section 115.01,
Subdivision 22, the term “. . . “waters of the state” means all streams, lakes,
ponds, marshes, water courses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.”
Wetlands. As defined in Minnesota Rules 7050.0130, subpart F “. . . “wetlands”
are those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at
a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs,
and similar areas. Constructed wetlands designed for wastewater treatment are
not waters of the state. Wetlands must have the following attributes:
a) A predominance of hydric soils;
b) Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and
c) Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation.
604.5 Scope and Effect
604.5.1 Applicability. Every applicant for a building permit, subdivision approval, or a permit to allow land-disturbing activities must submit a storm water pollution control plan to the City Clerk. No building permit, subdivision approval, or permit to allow land disturbing activities shall be issued until approval of the storm water pollution control plan or a waiver and/or exemption of the approval requirement has been obtained in strict conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. The provisions of Section 604.11 of this ordinance apply to all land, public or private, located within the City of Plainview.
604.5.2 Exemptions. The provisions of this ordinance, except Section 12.0 do not apply to:
A Any part of a subdivision if a final plat for the subdivision has been approved by the City Council on or before the effective date of this ordinance;
B A lot for which a building permit has been approved on or before the effective date of this ordinance;
C Any lot for a subdivision if a final plat and storm water pollution control plan for that subdivision have been approved by the City Council;
D Minor land disturbance activities such as home gardens and an individual’s home landscaping, repairs, and maintenance work;
E Construction, installation, and maintenance of electric, telephone, and cable television, utility lines or individual service connection to these utilities, which result in creating under five thousand (5,000) square feet of exposed soil;
F Tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or silvicultural crops;
G Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles which result in creating under five thousand (5,000) square feet of exposed soil; or
H Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property and emergency repairs, unless the land disturbing activity would have required an approved erosion and sediment control plan, except for the emergency. If such a plan would have been required, then the disturbed land area shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the City’s requirements as soon as possible.
6-9
604.5.3 Waiver. The City Council, upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, may waive any requirement of this ordinance upon making a finding that compliance with the requirement will involve an unnecessary hardship and the waiver of such requirement will not adversely affect the standards and requirements set forth in Section 604.7. The City Council may require as a condition of the waiver, such dedication or construction, or agreement to dedicate or construct as may be necessary to adequately meet said standards and requirements.
604.6 Storm Water Pollution Control Plan Approval Procedures
604.6.1 Application. A written application for storm water pollution control plan approval, along with the proposed storm water pollution control plan, shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall include a statement indicating the grounds upon which the approval is requested, that the proposed use is permitted by right or as an exception in the underlying zoning district, and adequate evidence showing that the proposed use will conform to the standards set forth in this ordinance. No building permit, subdivision approval, or permit to allow land-disturbing activities shall be issued until approval of the storm water pollution control plan or a waiver and/or exemption of the approval requirement has been obtained in strict conformance with the provisions of this ordinance.
604.6.2 Submittal. Two sets of clearly legible blue or black lined copies of drawings and required information shall be submitted to the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by a receipt from the City Treasurer evidencing the payment of all required fees for processing and approval as set forth in Section 604.10.2, and a bond when required by Section 604.10.1 in the amount to be calculated in accordance with that section. Drawings shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the site of the project and suitable for the review to be performed. At a minimum, the scale shall be, 1-inch equals 100-feet, or larger.
604.7 Storm Water Pollution Control Plan. Every applicant for subdivision approval or a permit to allow land disturbing activities must submit a storm water pollution control plan to the City engineer. No building permit, subdivision approval, or permit to allow land disturbing activities shall be issued until the City approves this plan. At a minimum, these pollution abatement control practices must conform to those in the current version of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s publication, “Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas.”
604.7.1 General Policy on Storm Water Run-off Rates. Storm water run-off rates must not increase over the predevelopment two (2) year, ten (10) year, and one hundred (100) year peak storm discharge rates, based on the last ten (10) years of how that land was used. Also accelerated channel erosion must not occur as a result of the proposed activity.
604.7.2 The Storm Water Pollution Control Plan and the Grading Plan. The storm water pollution control plan’s measures, the limit of disturbed surface, and the location of buffer areas shall be marked on the approved grading plan and identified with flags, stakes, signs, etc. on the development site before work begins.
604.7.3 Inspections of the Storm Water Pollution Control Plan Measures. During construction, at a minimum such inspections shall be done weekly and after every storm event that is large enough to result in run off from the site by either the developer or the developer’s designated representative.
604.7.4 Minimum Requirements of the Storm Water Pollution Control Plan.
A The name and address of the applicant and the location of the activity, including the section, township, and range, north point, date, scale of drawing, and number of sheets.
B Project description: the nature and purpose of the land disturbing activity and the amount of grading, utilities, and building construction involved.
6-10
C Phasing of construction: time frames and schedules for the project’s various aspects.
D A map of the existing site conditions: existing topography with contour interval not greater than 2-feet, property information including adjoining property information, steep slopes, existing drainage systems/patterns, type of soils, waterways, wetlands, vegetative cover, one hundred (100) year flood plain boundaries, locations of existing and future buffer strips and labeling the portions of the site that are within trout stream or Outstanding Resource Value Water watersheds.
E A site construction plan that includes the location of the proposed land disturbing activities, proposed topography with contour interval not greater than 2-feet, stockpile locations, erosion and sediment control plan, construction schedule, and the plan for the maintenance and inspections of the storm water pollution control measures.
F Adjacent areas: neighboring streams, lakes, residential areas, roads, etc., which might be affected by the land disturbing activity.
G Designate the site’s areas that have the potential for serious erosion problems.
H Erosion and sediment control measures: the methods that will be used to control erosion and sedimentation on the site, both during and after the construction process.
I Permanent stabilization: how the site will be stabilized after construction is completed, including specifications, time frames or schedules.
J Calculations: any that were made for the design of such items as sediment basins, detention/retention basins, diversions, waterways, infiltration zones and other applicable practices.
604.7.5 General Storm Water Pollution Control Plan Criteria. The plan shall address the following:
A Stabilizing all exposed soils and soils stockpiles and the related time frame or schedule.
B Establishing permanent vegetation and the related time frame or schedule.
C Preventing sediment damage to adjacent properties and other designated areas such as streams, wetlands, lakes and unique vegetation (e.g., oak groves, rare and endangered species habitats.)
D Scheduling for erosion and sediment control practices.
E Where permanent and temporary sedimentation basins will be located.
F Engineering the construction and stabilization of steep slopes.
g) Measures for controlling the quality and quantity of storm water leaving a site.
h) Stabilizing all waterways and outlets.
i) Protecting storm sewers from the entrance of sediment.
j) What precautions will be taken to contain sediment when working in or crossing water bodies.
k) Re-stabilizing utility construction areas as soon as possible.
l) Protecting paved roads from sediment and mud brought in from access routes.
m) Disposing of temporary erosion and sediment control measures.
n) How the temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control practices will be maintained.
o) How collected sediment and floating debris will be disposed of.
604.7.6 Minimum Storm Water Pollution Control Measures and Related Inspections.
6-11
These minimum control measures are required where bare soil is exposed. Due to the diversity of individual construction sites, each site will be individually evaluated. Where additional control measures are needed, they will be specified at the discretion of the city engineer. The city will determine what action is necessary to prevent excessive erosion from occurring on the site.
a) All grading plans and building site surveys must be reviewed by the city for effectiveness of erosion control measures in the context of the site topography and drainage.
b) Sediment control measures must be properly installed by the builder before construction activity begins. Such structures may be adjusted during dry weather to accommodate short-term activities, such as those that require the passage of very large vehicles. As soon as this activity is finished or before rainfall, the erosion and sediment control structures must be returned to the configuration specified by the city.
c) Diversion of channeled run-off around disturbed areas, if practical, or the protection of the channel.
d) Easements. If a storm water management plan involves directing some or all of the site’s run-off off-site, the applicant or his designated representative shall obtain from adjacent property owners any necessary easements or other property interests concerning the flowing of such water.
e) The scheduling of the site’s activities to lessen their impact on erosion and sediment creation.
f) Minimize the amount of exposed soil.
g) Control run-off as follows (Either 1 and 2, or 1 and 3):
1.) Unless precluded by moderate or heavy snow cover (Mulching can take place if a light snow cover is present.), stabilize all exposed inactive disturbed soil areas within one hundred (100) feet of any water of the state, or with in one hundred (100) feet of any conveyance (curb, gutter, storm sewer inlet, drainage ditch, etc.) to a water of the state with sod, seed or weed free mulch. This must be done, if the developer will not work the area for seven (7) days on slopes greater than three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical (3:1), fourteen (14) days on slopes ranging from 3:1 to 10:1 and twenty-one (21) days for flatter slopes.
2.) For disturbed areas greater than five (5) acres construct temporary or permanent sedimentation basins. Sedimentation basins must have a minimum surface area equal to at least 1% of the area draining to basin, and be constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications as contained in the latest version of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's publication, "Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas," including access for operations and maintenance. Basin discharge rates must also be controlled to prevent erosion in the discharge channel.
The applicant is required to obtain a National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System/State Disposal System (NPDES/SDS) construction
storm water permit from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency for any
project that disturbs five (5) acres or more of land.
3.) For disturbed areas less than five (5) acres sedimentation basins are encouraged, but not required, unless specifically required by the city engineer. The applicant shall install erosion and sediment controls at locations directed by the city. Minimum requirements include silt fences, rock check dams, or other equivalent control measures along slopes. Silt fences are required along channel edges to reduce sediment-reaching
6-12
channel. Silt fences, rock check dams, etc. must be regularly inspected and maintained.
h) Sediment basins related to impervious surface area. Where a project’s ultimate development disturbs areas greater than five (5) acres and replaces surface vegetation with one (1) or more acres of cumulative impervious surface, and all run-off has not been accounted for in a local unit of government’s existing storm water management plan or practice, the run-off must be discharged to a retention facility prior to entering waters of the State. The City Council, upon its review, will determine whether the applicant shall either install, construct, or pay the city fees for all storm water management facilities. If the council determines that the applicant pay the city fees, the applicant shall make an in-kind or monetary contribution toward the development and maintenance of community storm water management facilities designed to serve multiple land disturbing activities undertaken by one or more persons, including the applicant, or by the City of Plainview. The monetary contribution shall be a prorata share in accordance with Section 10.3. If the council determines the applicant shall either install or construct a storm water facility, the applicant shall be responsible for all costs incurred to install or construct the storm water management facility. The responsibility of any future maintenance and the burden of cost for that maintenance shall be as specified in Section 7.6 t).
a) Generally, sufficient silt fence will be required to hold all sheet flow run-off generated at an individual site, until it can either infiltrate or seep through silt fence’s pores.
j) For soil stockpiles greater than ten (10) cubic yards the toe of the pile must be more than twenty-five (25) feet from a road, drainage channel or storm water inlet. If such stockpiles will be left for more than seven (7) days, they must be stabilized with mulch, vegetation, tarps or other means. If left for less than seven (7) days, erosion from stockpiles must be controlled with silt fences or rock check dams.
k) All sand, gravel or other mining operations taking place on the development site shall have a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System General Storm Water permit for industrial activities and all required Minnesota Department of Natural Resources permits.
l) Temporary rock construction entrances may be required wherever vehicles enter and exit a site.
m) Parking is prohibited on all bare lots and all temporary construction entrances, except where street parking is not available. Gravel entrances are to be used for deliveries only as per the development contract.
n) Streets must be cleaned and swept whenever tracking of sediments occurs and before sites are left idle for weekends and holidays. Establishment of a regular sweeping schedule is encouraged.
o) Water (impacted by the construction activity) removed from the site by pumping must be treated by temporary sedimentation basins, geotextile filters, grit chambers, sand filters, up-flow chambers, hydro-cyclones, swirl concentrators or other appropriate controls. Such water shall not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion or flooding of the site, receiving channels, adjacent property or a wetland.
p) All storm drain inlets must be protected during construction until control measures are in place with either silt fence or an equivalent barrier that meets accepted design criteria, standards and specifications as contained in the latest
6-13
version of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s publication, ”Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas.”
q) Catch basins. All newly installed and rehabilitated catch basins must be provided with a sump area for collecting coarse-grained material. Such basins must be cleaned when they are half filled with material.
r) Roof drain leaders. All newly constructed and reconstructed buildings must route roof drain leaders to pervious areas (not natural wetlands) where the run-off can infiltrate. The discharge rate shall be controlled so that no erosion occurs in the pervious areas.
s) Inspections may be performed by the city on a regular basis to ensure that erosion and sediment control measures are properly installed and maintained. In all cases the inspectors will attempt to work with the developer and/or builder to maintain proper erosion and sediment control at all sites. In cases where cooperation is withheld, construction stop orders may be issued by the city, until erosion and sediment control measures meet specifications. A second erosion and sediment control/grading inspection must then be scheduled and passed before the final inspection will be done.
t) Inspection and Maintenance. All storm water pollution control management facilities must be designed to minimize the need of maintenance, to provide easy vehicle and personnel access for maintenance purposes and to be structurally sound. These facilities must have a plan of operation and maintenance that ensures continued effective removal of the pollutants carried in storm water run-off. The applicant shall enter into a detention/retention facility agreement with the City of Plainview for any detention/retention facility required by an approved storm water management plan. The agreement, at minimum, shall specify maintenance and ownership of the facility, along with any prorata share of costs and responsibility for those costs of maintenance and ownership. The city or its designated representative shall inspect all storm water management facilities during construction, during the first year of operation and at least once every five (5) years thereafter. The city will keep all inspection records on file for a period of six (6) years. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any necessary easements or other property interests to allow access to the storm water management facilities for inspection and maintenance purpose.
604.7.7 Permanent Storm Water Pollution Controls. The applicant shall either install, construct, or pay the city fees for all storm water management facilities necessary to manage increased run-off, so that the two (2) year, ten (10) year, and one hundred (100) year peak storm discharge rates existing before the proposed development are not increased. These predevelopment rates shall be based on the last ten (10) years of how that land was used. Accelerated channel erosion must not occur as a result of the proposed land disturbing or development activity. The City Council, upon its review, will determine whether the applicant shall either install, construct, or pay the city fees for all storm water management facilities. If the council determines that the applicant pay the city fees, the applicant shall make an in-kind or monetary contribution to the development and maintenance of community storm water management facilities designed to serve multiple land disturbing activities undertaken by one or more persons, including the applicant, or by the City of Plainview. If the council determines the applicant shall either install or construct, the applicant shall be responsible for all costs incurred to install or construct a storm water management facility.
All calculations and information used in determining these peak storm discharge rates shall be submitted along with the storm water pollution control plan. The applicant shall consider
6-14
reducing the need for storm water management facilities by incorporating the use of natural topography and land cover such as natural swales and depressions as they exist before development to the degree that they can accommodate the additional flow of treated (e.g., settled) water without compromising the integrity or quality of the wetland or pond.
The following storm water management practices must be investigated in developing the storm water management part of the storm water pollution control plan in the following descending order of preference:
A Protect and preserve as much natural or vegetated area on the site as possible, minimizing impervious surfaces, and directing run-off to vegetated areas rather than to adjoining streets, storm sewers and ditches.
B Flow attenuation of treated storm water by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions;
C Storm water retention facilities;
D Storm water detention facilities (including percolation facilities); and
E A combination of successive practices may be used to achieve the applicable minimum control requirements specified in subsection a) above. The applicant shall provide justification for the method selected.
606.7.8 Minimum Design Standards for Storm Water Detention/Retention Facilities. At
a minimum these facilities must conform to the most current technology as reflected in the current version of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s publication, “Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas” and the current requirements found in the same agency’s NPDES permits for storm water associated with construction activities, and the following design factors:
A A permanent pool length-to-width ratio of 3:1 or greater.
B A minimum protective shelf extending 10-feet into the permanent pool with a slope of 10:1, beyond which the slopes shall not exceed 3:1 below the 10-foot shelf and 4:1 above the 10-foot shelf.
C All storm water detention/retention facilities shall have a device to keep oil, grease, and other floatable material from moving down stream as a result of normal operations.
D All storm water detention/retention facilities must have a forebay to remove coarse-grained particles prior to discharge into a water course or storage basin.
606.7.9 Abandonment of Storm Water Detention/Retention Facilities. Should the City of
Plainview construct a regional storm water detention/retention facility within the watershed of an individual development storm water detention/retention facility, the individual development storm water detention/retention facility can be abandoned upon approval of the City Council. The person(s) responsible for the maintenance of the individual storm water detention/retention facility shall be responsible for all cost to abandon the individual storm water detention/retention facility, including filling the facility in and restoring to original conditions.
604.7.10 Minimum Protection for Natural Wetlands. Run-off must not be discharged directly into wetlands without appropriate quality (i.e., treated) and quantity run-off control, depending on the individual wetland’s vegetation sensitivity. See the current version of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s publication, “Storm-Water and Wetlands: Planning and Evaluation Guidelines for Addressing Potential Impacts of Urban Storm-Water and Snow-Melt Run-off on Wetlands” for guidance.
Wetlands must not be drained or filled, wholly or partially, unless replaced by either restoring or creating wetland areas of at least equal public value. Compensating for the impact by
6-15
replacing or providing substitute wetland resources or environments with those of at least equal public value. Compensation, including the replacement ratio and quality of replacement should be consistent with the requirements outlined in the rules adopted by the Board of Water and Soil Resources to implement the Wetland Conservation Act of 1991 including any and all amendments to it.
Work in and around wetlands must be guided by the following principles in descending order of priority:
A Avoid both the direct and indirect impact of the activity that may destroy or diminish the wetland.
B Minimize the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the wetland related activity and its implementation.
C Rectify the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected wetland environment with one of at least equal public value.
D Provide a protective buffer strip of natural vegetation at least 20-feet in width around the wetland.
E Reduce or eliminate the adverse impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the activity.
604.7.11 Additional Special Trout Stream and Outstanding Resource Value Water Requirements.
A For discharges directly to or to tributaries directly to Minnesota Department of Natural Resources designated trout streams, and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency designated Outstanding Resource Value Waters there shall be no increase in either the volume or rate of discharge from any design storm with a statistical recurrence interval of less than ten (10) years (i.e., for the two (2) year, five (5) year, etc. storm events), unless diversion is not practical and/or the soil is not suitable for storm water infiltration techniques. This pertains to discharges directly to or upstream of such waters.
1.) The phrase, “tributaries directly to,” refers to tributaries within at least one Minnesota Department of Natural Resources Division of Waters minor watershed of the designated water. At its discretion the city may extend this area of protection.
2.) The phrase, “soil not suitable for storm water infiltration techniques,” means soils with permeability values less that Group C soils (less than 2.5 inches per hour) as defined by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resources Conservation Service and a high water table is not present.
B During construction temporary sedimentation basins are required for disturbed areas over one (1) acre.
C Storm water treatment devices that remove oil and floatable material (e.g., basin outlets with submerged entrances) must be part of BMP systems.
D Where feasible lightly used vehicle traffic areas such as overflow parking lots should use pervious surfaces where feasible.
E If the proposed project site includes a tributary that currently experiences erosion and/or sedimentation problems, the applicant shall work with the city to include channel modifications in the project that will also address the existing erosion and/or sedimentation problem.
F Permanent buildings erected on sites that border directly on and all tributaries to a Minnesota Department of Natural Resources designated trout stream and/or a Minnesota Pollution Control Agency designated Outstanding Resource Value
6-16
Water must not be occupied until the permanent vegetative cover has been established. Such cover must meet this permit’s definition of “final stabilization.”
G The applicant shall consider methods for reducing the amount of impervious surface on the site. Suggestions include:
1.) Disking in compost or in some other manner increasing the porosity of the soil that will be come covered by lawns.
2.) Reduced road widths.
3.) Eliminating paving in the center of cul-de-sacs.
4.) Reducing sidewalk widths.
5.) Allowing and providing for shared parking.
6.) Installing semi-permeable/permeable or porous paving.
7.) Vegetated swales instead of curb and gutter.
8.) Filter strips
9.) “Green” (vegetated) roofs.
604.7.12 Methodologies/Computations. Hydrologic models and design
methodologies used for the determining run-off characteristics and analyzing storm water management structures must be approved by the city engineer. Plans, specifications and computations for storm water management facilities submitted for review must be sealed and signed by a registered professional engineer. All computations must appear in the plans submitted for review, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.
604.8 Plan Review Procedure
604.8.1 Process. Storm water management plans meeting the requirements of Section 6.0 shall be distributed to the appropriate departments for review in accordance with the standards of Section 7.0. Upon completion of review, each department shall submit, in writing, their review comments to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall then submit the storm water management plan and all review comments to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission shall recommend approval, recommend approval with conditions, or recommend denial of the storm water management plan. Following Planning and Zoning Commission action, the storm water management plan shall be submitted to the City Council at its next available meeting. Action must be taken on the plan within 60 days following the date the application for approval was filed with the City Clerk, as set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 15.99. This initial 60-day period can be extended for another 60 days if the council provides for an extension in writing supported by reasons why the extension is needed.
606.8.2 Duration. Approval of a plan submitted under the provisions of this ordinance
shall expire two years after the date of approval, unless construction has commenced in accordance with the plan. However, if prior to the expiration of the approval, the applicant makes a written request to the City Clerk for an extension of time to commence construction setting forth the reasons for the requested extension, the City Council may grant one extension of not greater than one single year. Receipt of any request for an extension shall be acknowledged by the City Clerk within 15 days. The City Council shall make a decision on the extension within 30 days of receipt.
606.8.3 Conditions. A storm water management plan may be approved subject to
compliance with conditions reasonable and necessary to insure that the requirements contained in this ordinance are met. Such conditions may, among other matters, limit the size, kind or character of the proposed development, require the construction of structures, drainage facilities, storage basins and other facilities, require replacement of vegetation, establish required monitoring procedures, stage the work over time, require alteration of the site design to insure
6-17
buffering, and require the conveyance to the City or other public entity of certain lands or interest therein.
606.8.4 Permit Required. If the city determines that the storm water pollution control
plan meets the requirements of this ordinance, the city shall issue a permit valid for a specified period of time, that authorizes the land disturbance activity contingent on the implementation and completion of this plan.
606.8.5 Denial. If the city determines that the storm water pollution control plan does not
meet the requirements of this ordinance, the city shall not issue a permit for the land disturbance activity. All land use and building permits for the site in question must be suspended until the developer has an approved storm water pollution control plan.
604.9 Modification of Plan and Record Retention. An approved storm water pollution control plan may be modified on submission of a written application for modification to the City, and after written approval by the City Engineer. In reviewing such an application, the City Engineer may require additional reports and data. The City shall retain the written records of such modifications for at least five (5) years.
604.10 Financial Securities.
604.10.1 Performance Bond. Prior to approval of any storm water management plan, the
applicant shall submit an agreement to construct such required physical improvements, as described and delineated on the approved grading plan, to dedicate property or easements, or to comply with such conditions as may have been agreed to. Such agreement shall be accompanied by a bond to cover the construction costs of the improvements necessary to comply with the agreement. The agreement and bond shall guarantee completion and compliance with conditions within a specific time, which time may be extended in accordance with Section 8.2.
a) The adequacy, conditions, and acceptability of any agreement and bond shall be determined by the Plainview City Council, or any official of the City of Plainview, as may be designated by resolution of the Plainview City Council.
b) The city may request a greater financial security, if the city considers that the development site is especially prone to erosion or the resource to be protected especially valuable.
604.10.2Fees. All applications for storm water management plan approval shall be accompanied by a processing and approval fee. This fee shall be set by Resolution of the City Council of Plainview.
604.10.3 Storm Water Management Fee. Applicants who have been approved by
the City Council to participate in the City of Plainview’s Regional Surface Water Management Plan shall contribute cash-in-lieu of constructing their own sediment basin, and/or detention/retention basin. There shall be separate fees for sediment control and flood control, with fees being set by Resolution of the City Council of Plainview.
604.10.4 Action Against the Financial Security. The city may act against the financial security of any of the conditions listed below exist. The city shall use funds from this security to finance remedial work undertaken by the city or a private contractor under contract to the city and to reimburse the city for all direct cost incurred in the process of remedial work including, but not limited to, staff time and attorney’s fees.
a) The developer ceases land disturbing activities and/or filling, and abandons the work site prior to completion of the grading plan.
b) The developer fails to conform to the grading plan and/or the storm water pollution control plan, as approved by the city.
c) The techniques utilized under the storm water pollution control plan fail within one (1) year of installation.
d) The developer fails to reimburse the city for corrective action taken.
6-18
604.10.5 Returning the Financial Security. Any unspent amount of the financial security
deposited with the city for faithful performance of the storm water pollution control plan and any storm water and pollution control plan related remedial work must be released one (1) full year after the completion of the installation of all storm water pollution control measures, as shown on the grading and/or the storm water pollution control plan, and establishment of final stabilization.
604.11 Notification of Failure of the Store Water Pollution Control Plan. The city shall notify the developer when the city is going to act on the financial securities part of this Ordinance.
604.11.1 Notification by the City. The initial contact will be to a party or parties listed on the application and/or the storm water pollution control plan. Forty-eight (48) hours after notification by the city or seventy-two (72) hours after the failure of erosion control measures, whichever is less, the city, at its discretion, may begin corrective work.
604.11.2 Erosion Off-Site. If erosion breaches the perimeter of the site, the applicant shall immediately develop a clean-up and restoration plan, obtain the right-of-entry from the adjoining property owner, and implement the clean-up and restoration plan within forty-eight (48) hours of obtaining the adjoining property owner’s permission. In no case, unless written approval is received from the city, shall more than seven (7) calendar days go by without corrective action being taken. If in the discretion of the city, the applicant does not repair the damage caused by the erosion, the city may do the remedial work required and charge the cost to the applicant.
606.11.3 Erosion into Streets, Wetlands, or Water Bodies. If eroded soils (including
tracked soils from construction activities) enter or appear likely to enter streets, wetlands, or other
water bodies, prevention strategies, clean-up, and repair must be immediate. The applicant shall
provide all traffic control and flagging required to protect the traveling public during the clean-up
operations.
604.11.4 Failure to Do Corrective Work. When an applicant fails to conform to any provision of this policy within the time stipulated, the city may take the following actions:
a) Withhold the scheduling of inspections and/or the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
b) Revoke any permit issued by the city to the applicant for the site in question, or any other of the applicant’s sites within the city’s jurisdiction.
c) Direct the correction of the deficiency by city personnel or by a separate contract. The issuance of a permit constitutes a right-of-entry for the city or its contractor to enter upon the construction site for the purpose of correcting deficiencies in erosion control.
d) All costs incurred by the city in correcting storm water pollution control deficiencies must be reimbursed by the applicant. If payment is not made within thirty (30) days after costs are incurred by the city, payment will be made from the applicant’s financial securities, as described in Section 10.0.
604.12 Lawn Fertilizer Regulations.
604.12.1 Use of Impervious Surfaces. No person shall apply fertilizer to or deposit grass clippings, leaves, or other vegetative materials on impervious surfaces, or within storm water drainage systems, natural drainage ways, or within wetland buffer areas.
604.12.2 Unimproved Land Areas. Except for driveways, sidewalks, patios, areas
occupied by structures or areas which have been improved by landscaping, all areas shall be
covered by plants or vegetative growth.
604.12.3 Fertilizer Content. Except for the first growing season for newly established
turf areas, no person shall apply liquid fertilizer which contains more than one-half percent by weight of phosphorus, or granular fertilizer which contains more than three percent by weight of phosphorus, unless the single application is less than or equal to one-tenth pound of phosphorus
6-19
per one thousand square feet. Annual application amount shall not exceed one-half pound of phosphorus per one thousand square feet of lawn area.
604.12.4 Buffer Zone. Fertilizer applications shall not be made within 20 feet of any
wetland or water resource.
604.13 Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this ordinance can warrant a civil penalty. Any violation of this ordinance is a misdemeanor. Each day that violation is committed or permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The city may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate such violations or threatened violations. The imposition of any fine or sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this ordinance; and the city may pursue, by appropriate actions or proceedings, any or all additional other remedies.
604.14 Other Controls. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this ordinance and the provisions of an erosion control or shoreland protection ordinance adopted by the City Council, the more restrictive standard prevails.
604.15 Severability. The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If any provision of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.
605 BLIGHTED PROPERTIES
605.1 Purpose. It is hereby determined that the timely completion of building construction, maintenance of adequate exterior finishes on buildings, and proper maintenance of exterior property areas is necessary to avoid the creation of blighted, unsafe and unsanitary conditions within the City of Plainview. The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Plainview, and to protect the character and stability of the properties within the city.
605.2 Completion of Construction. All building construction, for which a valid zoning and building permit is required and has been issued, shall be completed with one (1) year of the date of permit issuance. An extension of up to six (6) months may be granted by the Enforcement Officer upon a showing of hardship by the applicant and prior bonafide effort to complete the construction.
605.3 Exterior of Structures. The exterior of all buildings and accessory structures, including detached garages, shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair, and shall comply with the following:
A Every exterior wall shall be substantially free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, falling or loose stucco, substantial amounts of peeling paint, or any other condition which might admit rain or dampness-to the interior of the building;
B All exterior wood surfaces, other than naturally decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by paint which is not lead-based paint or by other approved protective covering or treatment, which shall be maintained in a neat and attractive manner. Unprotected or uncovered building paper shall not be considered an approved protective covering or treatment.
C Every roof shall be structurally sound, tight, and have no defects which might admit rain or dampness;
6-20
D All doors and windows shall be maintained in good repair, fit reasonably well within their frames, and be free of open breaks or holes.
605.4 Exterior Property Areas. All exterior property areas and vacant areas shall be comply with the following minimum standards:
A Be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage, and free from any hazard or dangerous condition;
B Be graded and maintained to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any building or structure located thereon-,
C Be kept free from species of weeds or plant growth, rodents, vermin or other pests which are noxious or detrimental to public health.
605.5 Vacated Structures and Vacant Properties. The owner of any dwelling which is unfit for human habitation, as determined by the Enforcement Officer in good faith, and the owner of any structure which has been vacant for a period of sixty (60) days or more, shall make same safe and secure so that it is not hazardous to the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and does not constitute a public nuisance. Any such structure open at the doors and windows,, if unguarded, shall be deemed to be a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public, and a public nuisance. The owner of vacant lands shall make said lands safe and secure by barricading or fencing the property or the like, or by placing said lands in their natural unimproved condition and removing all dangerous conditions. Upon failure of the owner to comply, the City may have such structure or vacant property made safe and secure, or remove the dangerous condition, and assess the cost to the owner in accordance with the procedures of MN.Statutes 463.15 - 463.261.
605.6 Enforcement Officer. The City Council will designate the Enforcement Officer, and it is the Enforcement Officer's duty to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
605.7 Inspections. The Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to make or cause to be made inspections to determine the condition of structures and premises and vacant properties in order to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the public. The Enforcement Officer, or his designated representative, shall, with the permission of the owner, be authorized to inspect any vacant areas and the exterior areas of any premises, and the interior areas of structures at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing his duties under this Ordinance. If the owner, operator, or person in possession of the structure shall refuse to consent to the inspection, and there is probable cause to believe that a Violation exists on that premises, a search warrant may be obtained.
605.8 Compliance Order. Whenever the Enforcement Officer determines that any structure or the premises fail to meet the provisions of this Ordinance, the Enforcement Officer may issue a compliance order setting forth the violations of the Ordinance and ordering the owner, occupant, operator, or agent to correct such violations. The compliance order shall:
A Be in writing; B Describe the location and nature of the violations of this Ordinance; C Establish a time for the correction of such violation, which shall be at least ten (10) days, D Notify of ability to appeal to the City Council;
E Be served upon the violator, either the owner, occupant, operator, or agent. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon the violator if a copy thereof is served upon him personally, or sent by registered or certified mail to that person's last known address or to the property address.
6-21
605.9 Designated Officers. Designated officers, employees and independent contractors of the City who have discretionary duty to enforce an ordinance or statute, may pursuant to this section, issue citations whenever the officer, employee or independent contractor has probable cause to believe that the person cited has committed a misdemeanor which the officer, employee or independent contractor has a discretionary duty to enforce, and issue a notice to appear and release such person on his or her written promise to appear in court. The officer, employee or independent contractor shall deliver executed citations or 'notices to the City Clerk for filing with the court after review for legal sufficiency. No officer, employee or independent contractor shall be allowed by his or her superior to exercise the citation authority herein conveyed, unless the officer, employee or independent contractor has been designated by resolution of the City Council to exercise such citation authority as to specified misdemeanor violations.
605.10 Appeals. Appeals of interpretation or requests for a variance shall be made in writing to the City Council, and shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after receipt of the compliance order. The City Council in its' discretion, may elect to hear appeals or requests for variances when made more that ten (10) days after the receipt of the compliance order, but such action by the City Council is completely discretionary, and shall not delay or prevent criminal prosecution or other enforcement actions, unless the City Council grants the appeal or grants the variance prior to the completion of the enforcement activities. The City Council may grant variances in instances where the strict enforcement of this Ordinance would cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration, when it is demonstrated that such action will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance.
606 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT, GENERAL GOVERNMENT PROVISIONS
606.1 Title. This section of the City Code may be referred to as the Land Management Ordinance of the City of Plainview, Minnesota.
606.2 Intent and Purpose. It should be known that the process of dividing raw land into separate parcels for other uses including residential, industrial and commercial sites, is one of the most important factors in the growth of any community. Once the land has been subdivided and the streets, homes and other structures have been constructed, the basic character of this permanent addition to the community has become firmly established. It is therefore, to the interest of the general public, the developer, and the future landowners that subdivisions be conceived, designed, and developed in accordance with the highest possible standards of excellence. All subdivisions of land hereafter submitted for approval shall fully comply, in all respects, with the regulations set forth herein. It is the purpose of these regulations to:
A To implement the policies of the City of Plainview,
B Protect and promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare,
C Provide for the health and safety of residents by requiring the necessary services such as properly designed streets and adequate sewage and water service, and
606.3 Interpretation Of Standards. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements. Where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction than is imposed, or required by other provisions of law, or by other rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. Where the
6-22
requirements of any other ordinance of the City of Plainview are more stringent or restrictive than the requirements set forth herein, nothing herein shall be construed to waive compliance with the provisions of such other ordinance.
606.4 Validity. This ordinance and the various articles and sections thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
606.5 Compliance. Except as hereinafter specified, no building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used or subdivided which does not comply with all of the applicable provisions established by this ordinance.
606.6 Enforcement. This ordinance shall be enforced by the City Council of Plainview, Minnesota, as set forth herein.
606.7 Jurisdiction. This Land Management Ordinance shall apply to all lands as defined herein, located within the corporate limits of Plainview.
606.8 Enactment. This ordinance is enacted pursuant to §§462.35 to 462.364, laws of Minnesota, 1959, as amended. Amendments to this ordinance were adopted on December 9, 2002, and all the amendments shall be effective January 1, 2003.
606.9 Reservations And Appeals. Upon the adoption of this ordinance according to law, any previous zoning or subdivision regulations of the City of Plainview, as amended, are hereby repealed except as to such sections expressly retained herein. The City Council, if it believes it is in the best interests of the public, may waive some of the new requirements of the Land Management Ordinance for applications that had been submitted for consideration to the Planning Commission and City Council at the time this ordinance was adopted. All applications and projects adopted after January 1, 2003, must conform to all specifications and regulations of the Land Management Ordinance.
606.10 Issuance Of Building Permits Prohibited. No building permit shall be issued for any construction, enlargement, alteration or repair, demolition or moving of any building or structure on any lot or parcel until all the requirements of these regulations have been fully met.
606.11 Platting. Any subdivision creating parcels, tracts or lots after the adoption of these regulations shall be platted.
606.12 Precedent. Any mistake or oversight on behalf of the City Council, Planning Commission, and/or City Staff in review, approval, or enforcement of these regulations do not constitute a defacto new precedent. Any change in these regulations must follow the established process in 608
606.13 Enforcement. Any person or corporation who violates any of the provisions of these regulations, or who sells, leases or offers for sale or lease any lot, block or tract of land herewith regulated before all the requirements of these regulations have been complied with, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof be subject to fine and/or imprisonment. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
A Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, a
6-23
person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the City Clerk or City Council. Immediate investigation and action shall be taken as provided by this ordinance.
B Violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or use permits) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000 or be imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both; and in addition thereto shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees necessitated in the prosecution of the case each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
C The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation, may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.
D Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
607 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT, DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows, or if there are any terms or words not contained herein that described the applicable physical characteristic or condition that prevails, then the definition or abbreviations contained in the current Uniform Building Code as published shall prevail. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tense; the singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory, and the words "should" and "may" are permissive. In the event of conflicting provisions in the rest of these regulations, the more restrictive shall apply.
1. Accessory Buildings– A subordinate structure or building on the same lot which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the primary or main building.
Accessory Building, Permanent- Any structure for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or personal property of any kind, which is permanently affixed to the land. A permanent building shall consist of a floor of solid construction, a roof constructed of solid material supported from the floor by structural supports and enclosed by walls. The structure shall be permanently fixed to the ground resting on a poured concrete or block foundation or concrete footings. Storage structures and accessory use structures including but not limited to garages may have earthen floors provided the structure is permanently attached to below-grade footings or a poured or constructed foundation. Typical permanent accessory buildings could be detached garages, garden sheds, gazebos, greenhouses, etc.
Accessory Building, Temporary –Any structure (usually consisting of floor, sidewalls, and roof) which is not permanently attached to the ground, or concrete block foundation, poured concrete footings, or a poured concrete foundation. All structures which are on temporary timbers or wheels (but not-motorized) shall constitute temporary buildings. All structures that are portable in nature and capable of being relocated which are not permanently fixed to a foundation or permanent foundational footings installed on the ground shall constitute a temporary building. Typical temporary accessory buildings could be dog houses, arbors, swing sets, tree houses, sandboxes, etc.
2. Agriculture Building. A building located on agricultural property and used to shelter farm
6-24
implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock, or other farm produce, in which there is no human habitation and which is not used by the public.
3. Alley. A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street.
4. Alley, Maintained. Alley used on a regular basis for through traffic with upkeep provided by the City of Plainview.
5. Alter or Alteration. Any change, addition, or modification in construction or occupancy.
6. Applicant. The landowner proposing change of land use or his representative, according to this ordinance. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises.
7. Basement. A story partly underground, but having at least one-half (1/2) of its height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as a story if used or intended to be used for dwelling or business purposes. No structure which consists solely of a basement shall, for any period of time, be used as a dwelling.
8. Block. Any combination of land ownership bounded by streets, roads, or highways or a combination thereof or by a combination of streets, roads, or highways and public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-ways, streams, lakes, or similar man-made or natural physical barriers.
9. Board of Adjustments. A five member governmental Board appointed by the City Council according to MSA 462.354, Subd. 2. The purpose of this board is to act upon appeals regarding the Plainview Land Management Ordinance.
10. Bond. Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the governing body. All bonds shall be approved by the governing body whenever a bond is required by these regulations.
11. Buildable Area. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided.
12. Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
13. Building Official. The officer charged with the administration and enforcement of this ordinance or his regularly authorized deputy.
14. Cellar. A portion of a structure having one-half (1/2) or more of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement. No structure which consists solely of a cellar shall be, for any period of time, used as a dwelling.
15. City Council. Governing body of the City of Plainview.
16. Cluster Development. A subdivision development planned and constructed so as to group housing units into patterns while providing a unified network of open space and wooded
6-25
areas, and meeting the overall density regulations of this Ordinance. A cluster development must be at least 5 acres in size.
17. Comprehensive Plan (Master Plan). "Comprehensive Municipal Plan" means a compilation of policy statements, goals, standards, and maps for guiding the physical, social, and economic development, both private and public, of the municipality and its environs and may include, but is not limited to, the following: statements of policies, goals, standards, a land use plan, a community facilities plan, a transportation plan, and recommendations for plan execution. A comprehensive plan represents the city's recommendations for the future development of the municipality.
18. Condominium. A multiple dwelling containing individually owned dwelling units and jointly owned and shared areas and facilities, which dwelling is subject to applicable provisions of Minnesota State Statute §515A, commonly known as the Uniform Condominium Act.
19. Construction Plan. The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the Planning Commission as a condition of the approval of the plat.
20. Cross Walkways. A right-of-way or easement dedicated to public use which cuts across or into a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties.
21. Cul-de-sac (court). A short street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a circular turn-around for vehicles.
22. Developer. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided, or his representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises.
23. Development. The act of building structures and installing site improvements.
24. Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental, or lease on weekly, monthly, or longer basis and physically separate from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
25. Dwelling Unit, Multi-family Unit. A residential building designed for or occupied by three or more families, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.
26. Dwelling Unit, Single-family. A detached residential dwelling unit including, but not limited to, stick built housing, manufactured housing complying with Minnesota statutes §327.3l to §327.36, and mobile homes complying with Minnesota Statutes §327.3l to §327.36, designed for and occupied by one family only.
27. Dwelling Unit, Two Family. A residential building containing two dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families.
6-26
28. Easement. A grant by the property owner of the use of a designated portion of land by the public, individuals, groups, or corporations for specific purposes.
29. Escrow. A deposit of cash with the local government in lieu of an amount required and still in force on a performance or maintenance bond. Such escrow funds shall be deposited by the Plainview City Clerk in a separate account.
30. Existing Building or structure. A building erected prior to the adoption of this code, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.
31. Family. One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood, marriage, or adoption, no such family shall contain over five persons; but further provided that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a family or families.
32. Fences. A structure dividing pieces of property which may or may not be on adjoining property lines.
33. Filling Station. Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires, and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail. Uses permissible at a filling station do not include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in filling stations.
34. Footing. That portion of the foundation of a structure which spreads and transmits loads directly to the soil or the piles.
35. Frontage. That side of a lot abutting on a street or way and ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot; but it shall not be considered as the ordinary side of a corner lot.
36. Garage. A building or portion thereof in which a motorized vehicle or equipment containing gasoline, distillate, or other volatile, flammable liquid in its tank, is stored, repaired, or kept.
37. Garage, Private. A building attached or detached to the primary building used by the owner or tenant for the storage of motorized vehicles or equipment.
38. Garage, Commercial. A building which provides for motorized vehicle and equipment storage, mechanical repair, and body work.
39. General Development Plan. A sketch preparatory to the preparation of the preliminary plat to enable the subdivider to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the Planning Commission and City Council to the form of the plat and the objective of these regulations.
40. Governing Body. The City Council of Plainview.
41. Grade. The slope of a road, street, or other public way, specified in percentage (%) terms.
42. Ground Floor. First floor entirely above grade.
6-27
43. Height of Building. The vertical distance from the “grade” to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
44. Home Occupation. Any gainful occupation or profession engaged in by the occupant of a dwelling at or from the dwelling when carried on in a dwelling unit. Such uses include professional offices, minor and small appliance repair services, photo or art studios, dressmaking, barber shops, beauty shops, tourist homes, daycare centers, or similar uses. Auto repair, welding, and large equipment repair shall not be included as a home occupation.
45. Improvements. See Lot Improvements or Public Improvements.
46. Inspection. A procedure of determining the location of buildings and structures and the general construction or erection utilized to meet the intent of this ordinance.
47. Loading Space, Off-street. Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in figuring of required off-street parking space.
48. Lot. For purposes of this ordinance, a lot is a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an approved public street, or on an approved private street and may consist of: a single lot of record; a portion of a lot of record; a combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record, a parcel of land described by metes and bounds. In no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance.
49. Lot, Corner. A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.
50. Lots, Double Frontage. Lots which have a front line abutting on one street and a back or rear, line abutting on another street.
51. Lot, Interior. A lot which is located between two other lots.
52. Lot, Through. A lot situated such that any two of its opposite sides are adjacent to street.
53. Lot Improvement. Any building, structure, work of art, or other object, or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. Certain lot improvements shall be properly bonded as provided in these regulations.
54. Lot Measurement. Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear. The width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard; provided, however, that width
6-28
between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than eighty percent (80%) of the required lot width, except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sacs, where the 80% requirement shall not apply.
55. Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the county recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
56. Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the transport-able mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that the term includes any structure which meets all the requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of HUD and complies with the standards established under Chapter 327 of Minnesota statutes.
57. Manufactured Home Park. Any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon which two or more occupied manufactured homes are located, either free of charge or for compensation, and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of the manufactured home park.
58. Manufactured Home Park Space or Manufactured Home Park Lot. A parcel of ground within a manufactured home park designed for the accommodation of one manufactured home.
59. Metes and Bounds Description - A description of real property which is not described by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by starting at a known point and describing the bearing and distances of the lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineates a fractional portion of a section, lot or area by describing lines or portions thereof.
60. Minimum Subdivision Design Standards. The guides, principles and specifications for the preparation of subdivision plats indicating, among other things, the minimum and maximum dimensions of the various elements set forth in the plan.
61. Monument. Concrete and/or metal markers utilized to establish survey points and lot boundaries.
62. Municipal Attorney. The licensed attorney designated by the City of Plainview to furnish legal assistance for the administration of these regulations.
63. Municipal Engineer. The licensed engineer designated by the City of Plainview to furnish engineering assistance for the administration of these regulations.
64. Neighborhood. Real property situated wholly or partially within 350 feet of the real property in question.
65. Non-Conforming. That which fails to meet the requirements and intent of this ordinance. Also refer to Article IV, §§1, 2, and 3.
6-29
66. Nonresidential Subdivision. A subdivision whose intended use is other than residential, such as commercial or industrial. Such subdivision shall comply with the applicable provisions of these regulations.
67. Official Map. A map of the municipality and/or any portion thereof lying within the incorporated limits, which shows the exact alignment, gradients, dimensions, and other pertinent data for highways and major streets, and including specific controls for setbacks from the right-of-way of buildings or other physical structures or facilities.
68. Open Space. An area of land preserved from building development and reserved for the use of the general public or a homeowners' association for the purpose of active and passive recreation and certain necessary community facilities.
69. Ordinance. Any legislative action, however denominated, of a local government which has the force of law including any amendment or repeal of any ordinance.
70. Outdoor Advertising Business. Provisions of outdoor displays or display space on a lease or rental basis only.
71. Owner. Any person, group or persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these regulations.
72. Park. Area of public land developed and maintained primarily as pleasurable
landscaped areas provided for both active and passive recreational pursuits, including tot-lots, playground-s' neighborhood parks, play fields, and special purpose areas.
73. Parking Space, Off-Street. For the purpose of this ordinance, an off-street parking space shall consist of a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room.
74. Plat. A drawing or map of a subdivision prepared for filing of record containing all elements and requirements set forth in applicable local regulations.
75. Plat, Final. All required maps, information, and documents as set forth in the subdivision regulations and as required by the City and containing all conditions imposed on the preliminary plat.
76. Plat, Preliminary. The preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council for their consideration.
77. Planning Commission. A governmental agency appointed by the City Council according to MSA 462.351 through 462.363.
78. Private Street - A street serving as vehicular access to one or more parcels of land which is not dedicated to the public but is owned by one or more private parties.
79. Protective Covenants - Contracts entered into between private parties and constituting a
6-30
restriction on the use of all private property within a subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to impair stability of values.
80. Public Improvement. Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian-way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance, operation, and/or ownership or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established.
81. Recreation Vehicle. A transportable overnight or short-term sleeping vehicle. The term includes, but is not necessarily limited to, travel trailer, pickup camper, fold-down camper, and mobilized camper.
82. Recreation Vehicle Park. An approved site, lot, field, or tract of land designed, maintained, or used for the purpose of supplying location and accommodations for recreation vehicles and including any building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of such park; unoccupied recreation vehicles which are parked for purposes of inspection and sale may be placed in a recreation vehicle park if they are incidental to the operation of said recreation vehicle park.
83. Recreation Vehicle Space or Lot. A parcel of ground within a recreation vehicle park designed for the accommodation of one recreation vehicle.
84. Repair. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose of its maintenance. The work "repair" or "repairs" shall not apply to any structural or spatial modifications.
85. Resubdivision. A change in a map or an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line; or if it affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.
86. Right-of-way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land-platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels.
87. Right-of-way Width. The distance between property lines measured at right angles to the center of the street.
88. Setbacks. Distance required from nearest point of wall of structure to property line.
89. Sign. Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the sign is located.
90. Signs, Number of. For the purpose of determining number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner
6-31
without organized relationship of elements, or where there is reasonable doubt about the relationship of elements, each element shall be considered to be a single sign.
91. Sign, On-site. A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services, or activities on the premises. On-site signs do not include signs erected by the outdoor advertising industry in the conduct of outdoor advertising business.
92. Signs, Off –site. A sign other than an on-site sign.
93. Streets.
94. Street, Arterial. An urban arterial is a four-lane street which provides service for intra-urban trips at a somewhat lower level of travel mobility than the expressway. The at-grade intersections should be fully or partially regulated by conditions for the arterial traffic. Direct private access onto the street will be permitted but regulated. Under certain circumstances, a frontage road may be needed. Additional right-of-way would be required for the frontage road.
95. Street, Collector. A street that serves local traffic and provides for direct private access to abutting land uses. This system channels the local traffic to and from the arterial system and is capable of serving a minimum of through traffic.
96. Street, Expressways. Expressways are divided roadways which are designed for through traffic and also to serve intra-urban travel between major centers of activity in the metropolitan area. The at-grade intersections are usually spaced at infrequent intervals and are fully or partially regulated by traffic control devices. No direct private access onto the street should be permitted so as to minimize the number of vehicle-vehicle conflicts. If no alternative forms of access are available and frontage roads are warranted, additional right-of-way will be required.
97. Street, Freeways. Freeways are designed for the safe and efficient movement of high volumes of through traffic at relatively high speeds. A standard design feature of a freeway is a divided roadway with full control of access by the use of ramps.
98. Street, Frontage. A frontage street (road) is adjacent to a major thoroughfare. Its primary function is to preserve the safety and capacity of the thoroughfare by controlling leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or development a subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit, access to the major street while still providing direct private access to the adjoining properties. The roadway of the frontage road usually abuts the thoroughfare's right-of-way.
99. Street, Local. A local street offers the lowest level of mobility because service to through traffic is deliberately discouraged. Direct private access to abutting land uses is provided.
100. Street Width. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way.
101. Subdivider. Any person who (1) having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision, or who (2) directly or indirectly, sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or develop, or advertises for sale, lease, or
6-32
development any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit, or plat in a subdivision, or who (3) engages directly or through an agent in the business of selling, or plat in a subdivision, or (4) is directly or indirectly controlled by or under direct or indirect common control with any of the foregoing.
102. Subdivision. Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to be divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease, or development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms, and conditions, including resubdivision. Subdivision includes the division or development of residential and non-residential zoned land, whether by deed, metes and bounds description, lease, map, plat, or other recorded instrument.
103. Structure. A building or edifice of any kind that is built, constructed, or erected on a fixed location upon the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. A structure can be among other things a wall, fence, or a prior mobile home which has been immobilized and erected on some type of permanent footings or foundation.
104. Townhouse. A structure housing two (2) or more dwelling units of not more than two (2) stories each and contiguous to each other only by the sharing of one (1) common wall, such structures to be of the town or row house type as contrasted to multiple dwelling apartment structures. Each dwelling shall have separate and individual front and rear entrances.
105. Variance. A variance is a city authorized deviation from a requirement of the zoning code where, due to circumstances unique to the subject property, strict enforcement of the zoning code would cause practical difficulties. The consideration of a variance request shall be based upon those defined practical difficulties criteria contained in Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.357, subd. 6 (2).
106. Yard. A required open space other than a court unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lot upward; provided, however, that fences, walls, poles, posts, and other customary yard accessories, ornaments, and furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility.
107. Yard, Front. A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a lot adjoining a public street.
In the case of through lots, unless the prevailing front yard pattern on adjoining lots indicates otherwise, front yards shall be provided on all frontages. Where one of the yards that would normally be required on a through lot is not in keeping with the prevailing yard pattern, the zoning administrator may waive the requirement for the normal front yard and substitute therefore a special yard requirement which shall not exceed the average of the yards provided on adjacent lots.
In the case of corner lots which do not have reversed frontage, a front yard of the required depth shall be provided in accordance with the prevailing yard pattern and a second front yard of a half depth required generally for front yards in the district shall be provided on the other frontage.
6-33
In the case of reverse frontage corner lots, a front yard of the required depth shall
be provided on either frontage, and a second front yard of half the depth required generally for front yards in the district shall be provided on the other frontage.
In the case of corner lots with more than two frontages, the administrator shall determine the front yard requirements, subject to the following limitations: at least one front yard shall be provided having the full depth required generally in the district; no other front yard on such lot shall have less than half the full depth required generally.
Depth of the required front yards shall be measured at right angles to a straight line joining the foremost points of the side lot lines. The foremost point of the side lot line in the case of rounded property corners at street intersections shall be assumed to be the point at which the side and front lot lines would have met without such rounding. Fronting and rear lines shall be parallel.
108. Yard, Side. A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard to the rear lot line, or in the absence of any clearly defined rear let line, to the point on the lot farthest from the intersection of the lot line involved with the public street. In the case of through lots, side yards shall extend from the rear lines of front yards required. In the case of corner lots, yards remaining after full and half depth front yards have been established shall be considered side yards.
109. Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the rear of the lot between inner side yard lines. In the case of through lots and corner lots, there will not be rear yards, but only front and side yards.
608 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT, ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
608.1 Public Hearings. No change or amendment to the City Code Chapter 600 shall be adopted until a public hearing has been held by the Planning Commission or the City Council. A notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of Plainview at least ten days prior to the day of the hearing. When an amendment involves changes in district boundaries affecting an area five acres or less, a similar notice shall be mailed at least ten days before the day of the hearing to each owner of affected property and property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which the amendment relates. For the purpose of giving mailed notice, the City Clerk may use any appropriate records to determine the names and addresses of owners. A copy of the notice and a list of the owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested to by the City Clerk and shall be made a part of the records of the proceedings. The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners, or defects in the notice, shall not invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with these procedures has been made. All applicants shall provide the list of the owners and addresses to which the notice is to be sent.
608.2 Public Meetings. Where, in the administration of this ordinance, a public meeting is required, said meeting shall occur at a regularly scheduled meeting of the meeting body or at a special meeting only after public notification of said special meeting by notice given in the official newspaper prior to the meeting date.
608.3 Text Amendments. Whenever the public necessity to maintain the integrity of this ordinance requires it, the City Council may by ordinance amend the text of this ordinance. Such changes to this ordinance shall be made only after the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council have both held a public hearing on the proposed amendment. Text amendments
6-34
to this ordinance shall require a 4/5 vote of the City Council.
608.4 District Changes. Whenever the public necessity to maintain the integrity of this ordinance requires it, the City Council may by ordinance change the district boundaries shown on the District Boundary Map. Such changes shall be made only after the Planning and Zoning Commission has held a public hearing and the City Council has held a public meeting on the proposed change. District changes to this ordinance shall require a 4/5 vote of the City Council.
608.5 Initiating Changes. Text amendments or district boundary changes may be initiated by either the City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission. In addition, district boundary changes may be initiated by petition by any property owner within the boundary change area. Property owner petitions shall be submitted to the City Clerk three weeks (21 days) prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which the petition is to be heard. The property owner petition for change shall include a legal description of the property to be changed, a description of the existing 'and intended use of the property, a map of the property showing existing structures and property lines of the change area and adjacent properties and the required filing fee.
608.6 Use Permits. A use permit shall be obtained as described below before starting or proceeding with the erection, construction, moving in, or the structural alteration of a building or structure. One of the two following use permits shall be secured as required by regulations of the district the property is located in:
608.6.1 Permitted Use Permit. An applicant for a permitted use permit shall submit an application at least three (3) days prior to a public meeting of the City Council. The application shall be accompanied by a description of the use proposed and a site plan showing compliance with this ordinance. The City Council may approve or disapprove such an application based on compliance to this ordinance and general acceptance of the site plan.
608.6.2 Conditional Use Permit. For any use designated as a conditional use within the district in which the proposed use is to be located, a conditional use permit shall be secured from the City of Plainview after the Planning and Zoning Commission holds a public hearing pursuant to §1 above and the City Council holds a public meeting. The applicant for a conditional use permit shall submit in writing, at least three (3) weeks (21 days) prior to the hearing, the permit request to be heard. A description of the property and use proposed and a site plan including, but not limited to the following shall accompany a conditional use permit:
a. Location of all structures, existing and proposed.
b. Location of all parking and drive areas.
c. Property lines.
In granting a conditional use permit, the City Council shall consider the advice and recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the effect of the proposed use on the comprehensive plan and upon the health, safety, and general welfare of occupants of surrounding lands. Among other things, the City Council shall make the following findings where applicable:
i. The use will not create an excessive burden on existing parks, schools, streets, and other public facilities and utilities which serve or are proposed to serve the area.
ii. The use will be sufficiently compatible or separated by distance or screening from adjacent residentially zoned or used land so that existing homes will not be depreciated in value and there will be no deterrence to development of
6-35
vacant land.
iii. The structure and site shall have an appearance that will not have an adverse effect upon adjacent residential properties.
iv. The use, in the opinion of the City Council, is reasonably related to the overall needs of the city and to the existing land use.
v. The use is consistent with the purposes of the zoning ordinance and the purposes of the zoning district in which the applicant intends to locate the proposed use.
vi. The use is not in conflict with the comprehensive plan of the city.
vii. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and necessary facilities have been or will be provided.
Additional Conditions. In permitting a new conditional use or the alteration of any existing conditional use, the Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may impose, in addition to these standards and requirements expressly specified by this ordinance, additional conditions which the City Council considers necessary to protect the best interest of the surrounding area or the community as a whole. These conditions may include, but are not limited to the following:
i. Increasing the required lot size or yard dimension.
ii. Limiting the height, size, or location of buildings.
iii. Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points.
iv. Increasing the street width.
v. Increasing the number of required off-street parking spaces.
vi. Limiting the number, size, location or lighting of signs.
vii. Requiring diking, fencing, screening, landscaping, or other facilities to protect adjacent or nearby property.
viii. Designation sites for open spaces.
ix. Other conditions as judged necessary.
The City Administrator shall maintain a record of all use permits issued including information on the use, location, and conditions imposed by the City Council, time limits, review dates, and such other information as may be appropriate.
After reviewing the submitted information and the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council, after holding a public meeting, (i) may approve the permit, (ii) may approve the permit with conditions, or (iii) may deny the permit, having found it not consistent with the City of Plainview's comprehensive plan or not compatible with the general character of the neighborhood.
The City Council will forward its decisions/findings to all applicants. Applicants will be financially responsible for the published notices as well as filing fees with the County Recorder's Office or Registrar of Titles' Office.
Denial Appeal. The applicant for any permit denied under 608.3.6 may appeal, within ten days after the denial, to the Board of Adjustment for relief, which may be granted after holding a public hearing, with a 4/5 vote of the Board of Adjustment.
Approval Appeal. An aggrieved party of the approval of any permit under 608.3.6 may
6-36
appeal, within ten days after approval or imposition of additional conditions, which may be done after holding a public hearing and notifying the applicant prior to said hearing to review permit approval. Reversal of permit approval shall require a 4/5 vote of the Board of Adjustment.
Accessory Building Use Permits. Any person desiring a use permit or a building permit for an accessory building as defined under this ordinance, shall accompany such permit request with the following information:
A scale drawing of the proposed building to include front, side, and rear elevations.
A scale grid drawing with the location of:
i. all structures existing and proposed;
ii. all parking and drive areas;
iii. all landscaping and existing and proposed;
iv. all property lines.
Structures exceeding $10,000.00 in cost would require blueprints submitted in addition to the above.
All other information as requested by the City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission.
609 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT, GENERAL REGULATIONS
609.1 Non-Conforming Uses. The lawful use of a building or land existing on the effective date of this ordinance may be continued, although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof. Whenever a non-conforming use has been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restrictive use. The expansion of a non-conforming use is expressly prohibited, unless such expansion is done within the provisions of a conditional use permit, as allowed in the district the property is located within.
609.2 Discontinuance Of Non-Conforming Use. No premise, building, or portion thereof used in whole or part for nonconforming purposes according to the provisions of this ordinance, which hereafter become and remain vacant for a continued period of one year shall again be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which such building or premise is situated.
609.3 Damaged Non-Conforming Buildings. No building which has been damaged to the extent of more than sixty-five percent (65%) of the estimated fair market value of the building immediately prior to damage shall be restored except in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance.
609.4 Corner Lots. For corner lots platted after the effective date of this ordinance, the side street yard shall be equal in width to the setback regulation of the lot to the rear having frontage on the intersecting street. If there are no lots to the rear having frontage on the
6-37
intersecting street, the side yard shall be not less than fifty–percent (50%) of the front yard requirement. However, in R-1 and R-2 Districts, the street side yard setback shall be 15 feet.
On corner lots platted and of record at the time of the effective date of this ordinance, the same regulations shall apply, except that this regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of the corner lot facing an intersecting street to less than 30 feet nor to prohibit the erection of any accessory building.
609.5 Front Yard. There shall be a minimum front yard in any "R" district, as stated in the yard requirements for that particular district; but in no case shall the front yard depth be less than the average front yard depth of all structures facing the same street in the same block.
609.6 Requirements Reduced. No lot shall be reduced in size so as to make the width or total area of the lot, or any yard, or any other open space, less than the minimum required in this ordinance, unless in compliance with 609.14.
609.7 Parking. In all districts except "C-l" in connection with every industrial, business, institutional, recreational, or dwelling use and for similar uses, space for parking and storage of vehicles shall be provided of sufficient area to care for the normal parking demands of the building involved. In no case shall the parking area provided be less than that shown on the following schedule:
Automobile services 3 spaces per service bay
Bowling alley 4 spaces per line
Clinics 1 space per 200 square feet
Furniture/Appliance stores 1 space per 600 square feet
Offices, banks, etc. 1 space per 400 square feet
Restaurants 1 space per 200 square feet
Industrial 1 space per 1.5 employees of largest shift
Dwellings 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Public uses 1 space per employee
All other commercial 1 space per 300 square feet
Required off-street parking areas for automobiles shall be so designated, maintained, and
regulated that no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public street, walk,
or alley and so that any automobile may be parked and unparked without moving another.
For purposes of rough computation, an off-street parking space and necessary access and
maneuvering room may be estimated at 300 square feet, but off-street parking requirements will
be considered to be met only when actual spaces meeting the requirements above are provided
and maintained, improved in a manner appropriate to the circumstances of the case and in
accordance with all ordinance and regulations of the city.
609.8 Maximum Height. No buildings shall exceed the heights shown on the following schedule in each of the various district:
AG: 50 feet C-1: None I: None R-1: 30 feet
C-2: 35 feet R-2: 30 feet T: 35 feet
609.9 Wastewater Treatment. No new non-farm dwelling shall be constructed that will not be connected to the Plainview wastewater treatment system. Low water, non-residential uses shall be permitted to use septic tanks or other suitable on-site treatment, provided a
6-38
conditional use permit is approved and the site can accommodate it and the lot has a minimum lot area of one acre.
609.10 Resubdivision Of Land. For any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on such map, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or it affects any map or plan legally reached prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be approved by the Planning Commission by the same procedures, rules, and regulations as for a subdivision.
609.11 Conveyances Prohibited. No conveyance involving a portion of a platted lot or involving unplatted land, the conveyance of which is prohibited by Minnesota Statutes §462.358, subd. 4, shall be made unless the conveyance involves a single parcel of land of not less than five acres and having a width of not less than 300 feet.
609.12 Quick Plats. On application of the owner, the City of Plainview may approve a quick plat under the following circumstances:
Platted Land: the Planning Commission, at a public meeting, may approve a quick plat of a portion of a platted lot if, in each instance, the new and residual parcels of land which would result from the quick plat meet the frontage and area requirements of the zoning district:
When it is desired to detach a portion of multiple platted lots and add them to adjoining platted lot.
When it is desired to divide platted lots into more parcels and the dedication of public utility and street easements is not involved.
Unplatted Land: The City Council, at a public meeting, may approve a quick plat by metes and bounds if it is determined that the following conditions exist:
That the restriction against such a quick plat will create an unnecessary hardship,
That a quick plat will not interfere with purposes of the subdivision regulations,
That the dedication of public utility or street easements is not involved, and
That the new and residual parcels of land which would result from the quick plat meet the frontage and area requirements of the zoning ordinance.
609.13 Setbacks. For the purpose of computing front yard dimensions,
measurements shall be taken from the nearest point of the front wall of the building to the lot line, subject to the following qualifications.
604.13.1 Cornices, Canopies, or Eaves. Cornices, canopies, or eaves may extend into the required yard a distance not exceeding two feet, six inches.
Cornices, canopies, or eaves may extend a distance not exceeding two feet, six inches without affecting the footprint or square footage requirements of a structure. Any portion of a cornices, canopies, or eaves that exceeds two feet six inches shall be included into the footprint and square footage requirements. The first two feet six inches will not be counted in the footprint calculation.
604.13.2 Fire Escapes. Fire escapes may extend into the required front yard a distance not exceeding four feet, six inches.
604.13.3 Landing Place or Porch. A landing place or uncovered porch may extend six feet if the landing place or porch has its floor no higher than the entrance floor of the building. An
6-39
open railing no higher than three feet may be placed around such place.
604.13.4 Handicap Accessibility Ramp. A ramp built for the sole purpose of assisting with handicap accessibility may extend up to ten feet into the required front yard setback, provided the handicap ramp will not negatively affect traffic safety by restricting visibility.
The above-enumerated architectural features may also extend into any side or rear yard to the same extent, except that no porch, terrace, or outside stairway, shall project more than three feet into any side yard and then, in the case of an outside stairway, only if it is unroofed and unenclosed above and below the steps. In no case shall a porch, stair landing, or any other architectural feature extend closer than four feet to the side property line.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or to permit another person working on their behalf to erect any building or structure of any kind within the required setback area or within the right of way or an easement on any parcel of land within the City. A violation of this ordinance shall be deemed a misdemeanor offense.
609.14 Costs. Whenever the Land Management Ordinance requires a public hearing and requires notice given to owners of affected property and property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the property to which an ordinance amendment, subdivision plat, quick plat, or zoning district change relates, the party requesting the subdivision, quick plat, zoning change, or zoning amendment shall bear the cost of setting up the public hearing therefore. Costs may include, but not be limited to, all costs of research to determine who are the owners of affected property, costs of mailing notice, and costs of posting notice.
The costs referred to above shall be borne by those persons requesting the following: 1) Approval of general development plans, preliminary plats, final plats, and quick plats, or 2) Zoning ordinance amendments or district changes
609.15 Dwelling, Single Family. A detached residential dwelling unit designed for and occupied by one family only shall meet the following specifications:
A) At least 24 feet wide at its narrowest point measured from the face of the exterior walls;
B) Has a minimum of 864 feet of enclosed year-round living area on its ground floor, or a minimum sum of 1,440 square feet of enclosed year-round living area on the ground floor and the next floor above;
C) Is placed on a permanent foundation which complies with all standards and specifications of the Uniform Building Code as adopted in Minnesota. Said foundations shall be solid foundations extending the entire length and width of the dwelling;
D) Has a roof which meets the standards and specifications of the Uniform Building
Code as adopted in Minnesota or Minnesota Statutes §327.3l et. seq. (the Manufactured Homes Building Code);
E) Has exterior walls and attic areas which meet minimum energy envelope
requirements. Exterior walls must be covered with siding which meets the standards and specifications of the Uniform Building Code as adopted in Minnesota or Minnesota Statutes §327.3l et. seq.
F) Has such architectural design, color, roof, and exterior material which are not so
inconsistent with surrounding buildings and areas as to constitute a blight or devalue surrounding property, or otherwise impair the health, safety, and welfare of the community.
6-40
609.16 Fences: Fences may be on constructed on adjoining property lines. The following shall apply to all fences constructed in Plainview:
A) Fences shall have no setback requirements unless specifically stipulated by the City Council;
B) Fences cannot exceed seven feet in height;
C) Any fence having only one finished side shall be required to have the finished side facing out away from the property upon which the fence is constructed; and
D) Fences shall be maintained by property owner erecting the structure;
Fences shall be allowed in utility easements provided that the fences has no permanent
foundation and that the fence is constructed or raised off the ground so as not to impede the flow of stormwater. All fences in easements shall be constructed at the property owner’s risk, and that if any public utility (including the city) needs to access the easement, than the fence shall be removed at the owner’s cost. If possible, the property owner may be given some advance notice in order to be allowed to remove the fence him/her self. In addition, the property owner will hold all public utilities, including the City, harmless from any damages and that the cost to rebuild the fence or return the property to the previous condition shall be borne solely by the property owner.
609.17 Home Businesses. The City of Plainview has zoned several large areas of the city for residential use. Generally, people living in residential areas expect the residential character of their neighborhood to be protected from intrusion by commercial businesses. However, under certain circumstances, the City of Plainview allows some small scale business to be carried out in residential areas. The regulation of home businesses (businesses operated at a persons home) within residential structures is intended to ensure that the use is clearly accessory or secondary to the principal dwelling, and that compatibility with the surrounding residential uses is maintained.
609.17.1 Home Business Determination. The following elements shall be considered to determine whether an home business exists: 1) meetings with customers occur on the premises; 2) mail or packages or materials for the business are delivered to the premises, 3) the business lists its mailing address as being on the premises; 4) goods or services are sold to customers on the premises; 5) materials used in the creation of products or services are stored on the premises; and 6) money is accepted from customers in return for goods or services on the premises. A person has a home business if they meet the first criteria, meetings with customers on the premises, or if they meet two of any of the remaining other five criteria.
609.17.2 Types of Home Businesses. There are two types of home business, minor and major. Minor home businesses are anticipated to have no or very little impact on residents of the neighborhood. Major home businesses are anticipated to have little or some impact on residents of the neighborhood.
609.17.3 Minimum Requirements for Major Home Businesses
1. A home business may only employ members of the residence plus one non-resident at any one time. At least one member of the residence must be an employee of the home business.
2. Activity must be between the hours of 8:00 am and 8:00 pm.
3. The home business must be contained entirely within the primary residence or a detached garage and no more than 35% of the floor area of the structure may be used for the home business
4. The home business must not be inconsistent with the neighborhood so as to constitute a blight or devalue surrounding property or otherwise impair the health, safety, environment, or welfare of that neighborhood.
5. Must provide off-street parking for non-resident employees.
6. Must provide sufficient off-street parking to meet the needs of the anticipated visiting customers, if any. If less than one customer per every two hours of operation is
6-41
anticipated, than no off-street parking is required. If no customers are anticipated on site, than no off street parking is required.
7. Must have interior storage for all equipment and inventory used for the business.
8. The primary purpose of the residence must be for residential use; the business use must be clearly incidental to the residential use. If residential use is discontinued, than the home business must also discontinue.
9. May not create pedestrian, automobile, or truck traffic significantly in excess of the normal amount in the area.
10. May not create noise or dust significantly in excess of the normal amount in the area.
609.17.4 Minimum Requirements for Minor Home Businesses
1. Must meet all the minimum requirements for a major home business.
2. A home business may only employ members of the residence.
3. Other than permitted signage, the activity from a home business must not be visible from the public street.
4. Must have interior storage for all vehicles and equipment used for the business.
5. Must provide sufficient off-street parking to meet the needs of the anticipated visiting customers, if any. If less than one customer per every four hours of operation is anticipated, than no off-street parking is required. If no customers are anticipated on site, than no off street parking is required.
609.17.5 Inspection. The City reserves the right to inspect the premises in which the occupation is being conducted to ensure compliance with the City Code.
609.17.6 Signage. Residents are allowed to display signs advertising a home occupation as long as the sign does not exceed four (4) square feet and is located on the principal structure.
609.17.7 Examples and Exceptions. Typical home businesses may include such business as: photo studio, art or craft studio, professional practice, carpentry, furniture refinishing, upholstering, bakery, sewing or clothing alterations, beauty or parlor shops, etc.
Bed and breakfasts, and similar home businesses, may be licensed as a home business as long as they have four or fewer rooms for rent. Small functions of less than 10 people (such as receptions or business meetings) shall be permitted on site. There must be at least one off street parking spot per rental room.
Day cares that have a valid state or county license are not required to have a home business license. However, day cares must still abide by the City’s nuisance ordinances.
Businesses conducted out of a person’s home, but with no activity on-site (such as a computer technician that goes to client’s homes), shall not require a home business license. However, such businesses must have interior storage for inventory and equipment.
Restaurants are not to be allowed as home businesses.
609.17.8 Application Process. Those wishing to apply for a minor home business must fill out an application. The application will be approved or rejected, with reason, at a City Council meeting, but a specific public hearing for a minor home business is not required. Those wishing to apply for a major home business must fill out an application. A major home business will be processed as a conditional use permit, with a required public hearing with the Planning Commission and City Council. Upon approval of the City Council, an application will receive a license for the home business. (‘The license must be renewed annually.’ Council removed this part on 7/14/2009- Fix made a motion and Pederson second to pass taking the wording out of the ordinance that would require a home business to renew the license yearly. Motion passed unanimously to take out the annual fees.)
609.17.9 Fee. The application fee for a minor home business is $15. The application fee for a major home business is $100. Once granted, the annual renewal of a minor or a major home business shall be $15.
6-42
609.17.10 Non-Conforming Use. Existing home business lawfully existing prior to 1978 may continue as non-conforming uses.
609.17.11 Denial or Conditions. The City may deny an application if it is deemed that there is a potential to be a nuisance or be a danger to the general health, safety, and welfare of the area. The City may attach reasonable conditions to the operation of a home business. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a home occupation who does not own or lease the property and who does not actually reside on the property. It shall be unlawful for any operator of a home occupation to employ any person who does not reside on the property.
609.17.12 Duration of Application. If the City Council approves an application for a home occupation, the home occupation operator may only operate the business as long as the operator continues to reside on the property. In the event the operator moves from the property to another residentially zoned property in the City, the operator must reapply for approval to pursue the home occupation at the new residence location and receive such approval in order to operate the home occupation at the new location. In addition, once the operator of a home occupation moves from the original approved home occupation site, the authorization to conduct that home occupation at the original approved site ceases and t is not transferable to a subsequent owner or tenant of the site. It shall be unlawful for a subsequent owner or tenant to operate the home occupation business without submitting an application for a home occupation which is approved by the City Council.
609.18 Private Garages. No lot, residence, or business shall have more than three accessory structures. Any garage, be it attached or detached, shall count as one accessory structure towards the maximum limit of three. The total square footage of the accessory buildings shall not exceed more than 100% of the ground square footage of the principal use, or 768 square feet, whichever is the larger. The sum of the accessory buildings shall not exceed 1,500 square feet in any event.
609.18.1 Securely Affixed. All accessory buildings, whether permanent or temporary, shall be securely affixed to the ground in a manner that will resist movement from storms or vandalism.
609.18.2 Setback Requirements. All accessory buildings, whether permanent or temporary, shall meet the setback requirements.
609.18.3 Height Limit. No accessory buildings, whether permanent or temporary, shall exceed the height of the principal building. In no event may an accessory building exceed 17 feet in height.
609.18.4 Residence. No accessory buildings shall be used as a residence or a place of habitation on a permanent or temporary basis.
609.18.5 Compatible. The architectural style, color, and facing material of permanent accessory structures shall be compatible with the dwelling unit.
609.19 Townhouses; Water/Sewer Lines. In order to obtain a building permit for a townhouse development in the City of Plainview, the following is required:
A developer will be required to provide plans for construction indicating that separate water lines and separate sewer lines will be constructed from the city's water and sewer mains to each unit of a townhouse development.
Final approval of each unit of a townhouse development will be granted by the city's building inspector only after the developer demonstrates to the building inspector that separate water lines and separate sewer lines have been constructed from the city's mains to each unit of the townhouse development and that a separate water meter has been installed for each unit of the development.
6-43
609.20 Lot Split. In the event a property owner wishes to detach a portion of one
platted lot and add it to an adjoining platted lot, this shall be known as a "lot split" and the process for accomplishing this shall be as set forth in this section.
An owner desiring a lot split shall submit a completed application form to the City. This application form shall contain the name of the applicant, the address of the applicant, the home and work telephone number of the applicant, the fax number or e-mail address of the applicant where applicable, the address of the property if different from the applicant's address, the legal description for the property and a summary of the reasons why the property owner believes the lot split is warranted. It shall be signed and dated by the applicant.
An owner desiring a lot split shall also submit either a certificate of survey prepared by a registered land surveyor, a plat drawing prepared by a person who prepares plat drawings for attorneys handling real estate closings, or a plat drawing prepared by the owner indicating the specific physical location of lot markers or lot lines. The owner shall also submit an application fee to be established by resolution of the City Council.
Upon receipt, the completed application and survey/plat drawing shall be submitted to the City Council for review. In deciding whether to approve the request, the City Council shall consider, among other things, the reason for the request, whether the lot after the split would comply with all the requirements of the Land Management Ordinance concerning minimum size, setbacks etc. and the effect which the lot split if approved might have on the rights of adjoining property owners. In order to be approved, the lot split must not result in a lot or portion of a lot which lacks access to a public street or roadway.
If approved, the City shall issue notice of approval in writing to the property owner. The property owner shall be required to record this approval with the Wabasha County Recorder and bear any costs associated with doing so. If denied, the owner shall have the right to a public hearing before the City Council in conformance with the variance appeal procedure.
609.21 Floodplains. No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve,
move, or demolish any building or structure without first obtaining a separate permit for each building or structure from the City.
No man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, fences, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, shall be commenced until a separate permit has been obtained from the City for each change.
No manufactured home shall be placed on improved or unimproved real estate without first obtaining a separate permit for each mobile home from the City.
610 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS. Manufactured home parks shall comply with all statutes of the State of Minnesota, including but not limited to statutes §327.14 to 5327.28, 5327.31 through 5327.35, and 5327C.O1 to 5327C.15 and the regulations of the State Board of Health and the regulations of the Building Code. When this ordinance is more restrictive than the state statutes, the provisions of this ordinance will control over the provisions of the state statutes.
6-44
610. 1 Permits Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a manufactured home park or facility within the city limits of the City of Plainview unless such person procures a conditional use permit therefore in accordance with this ordinance. The City Council is hereby authorized to revoke any license or permit as provided in this ordinance upon receipt or proof of non-compliance with any part of this ordinance:
A) Permit Application: Application for a manufactured home park permit shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall contain the following information:
all requirements of a conditional use application;
name and address of the applicant;
location and general description of the manufactured home park. Plans showing all facilities in said manufactured home park, together with all streets and lots therein, approved by the Dept. of Public Health of the State of Minnesota.
B) Transfer of Permit. Any application for transfer of the permit or expansion alterations
of the park shall be treated in the same manner as an original application for permit.
C) Approval Required. Prior to application for a permit, said applicant shall first have obtained approval of said manufactured home park from the State Board of Health.
610.2 Lot Size And Specifications.
1) A manufactured home lot shall consist of a minimum of 4,000 square feet, with a minimum width of street frontage of 35 feet.
2) A manufactured home shall not be placed closer than 15 feet from any private street or alley within the manufactured home park or be located nearer than 20 feet from the line of adjacent private property.
3) Manufactured homes located in said park shall be located so that there shall be at least 15 feet of lateral clearance between any two manufactured homes or any mobile home and adjacent building.
4) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to the ground surface at four points to afford protection from wind damage as specified by city building code.
5) All manufactured homes must be skirted within 90 days of location on a lot in a manufactured home park.
6) No buildings or structures shall be erected or attached to a manufactured home without obtaining approval of the City Council during a public meeting and a building permit thereof.
610.3 Driveways. All lots shall be provided with an all-weather surface driveway that shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width.
610.4 Public Utilities. A municipal sanitary sewer and water system shall be installed in accordance with city specifications. Each manufactured home site shall be equipped with a water and sewer outlet. All water and sewer facilities shall be approved by the State Board of Health.
610.5 Community Storm Shelter Facilities. There shall be provided within each manufactured home park that has 10 units or more suitable storm shelter facilities constructed to meet Minnesota state building codes, Minnesota State Board of Health rules and regulations, rules of the Commissioner of Administration and the City of Plainview building codes. The shelter space must accommodate room for the number of people as defined in the following
6-45
formula:
Minimum shelter space = number of trailer units times 2.5 people per trailer unit.
610.6 Recreation Area. A recreation area consisting of 150 square feet per manufactured home site shall be provided, but in no instance shall there be less than a total of 4,500 square feet provided for recreational purposes in each manufactured home park.
610.7 Private Streets And Street Construction In Manufactured Home Park. Minimum width of street surface within a manufactured home park shall be 30 feet. Asphalt surface and asphalt or concrete curbs shall include the following:
1) removal of all topsoil;
2) replacement with a granular material such as Class 4 sand and gravel or crushed rock;
3) replacement of a 6" base meeting MHD specifications for Class 5 sand and gravel;
4) replacement of a 11/2 bituminous mat meeting MHD Sec. 2231;
5) all streets shall be crowned to provide for the runoff of surface drainage with consideration of adjacent property a governing factor.
610.8 Responsible Attendant. Each park is required to have a responsible attendant or caretaker on duty or on call at all times. The name and phone number of said caretaker or attendant shall be filed with the City Clerk. His chief duty is to maintain the park with its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition. The caretaker is answerable with the licensee for any violations of this ordinance.
610.9 Construction Requirements. All plumbing, electrical, building, and other work on or at any park licensed under this ordinance shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the City of Plainview and the statutes of the State of Minnesota. Licenses and permits granted under this ordinance in no way grant the right to erect or repair any structure in said manufactured home park.
610.10 Additional Requirements. In addition to the foregoing, the City of Plainview may impose such other procedures, conditions, requirements, or limitations concerning the design, development, and operation of such manufactured home park as it may deem necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest.
611 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT, ZONING DISTRICTS
611.1 Purpose. Areas of the City of Plainview have different needs and goals. To properly meet these needs and goals, the community has been divided into several land management districts. The purpose of these districts is to classify, regulate, and restrict the location of trades, industry, and the location of buildings designed for specified uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or altered, to regulate and determine the area of yards, courts, and other open spaces within and around such buildings.
611.2 Allowed Uses. In order to allow maximum flexibility in the development of the community and provide a measure of security in existing neighborhoods, within each district are allowed two levels of land use. The two levels are permitted uses and conditional uses.
Permitted uses are those uses allowed in the district. These uses are the primary activity
6-46
of the district.
Conditional uses are use activities that are generally acceptable within the district, but the nature of the activity creates negative impacts on other uses and properties. Such uses shall be allowed on a limited and selected basis only, where it is shown that there is substantial benefit to the community and the level of negative impacts is kept at a minimum or eliminated. Successful applicants will be financially responsible for filing fees with the County Recorder's/Registrar of Title's office.
611.3 Zoning Districts. The City of Plainview, Minnesota is hereby divided into seven (7) classes of districts as follows:
AG: Agricultural District
R-1: Residential District
R-2: Residential District
T: Transition District
C-1: Central Business District
C-2: Service Commercial District
I: Industrial District
In addition to the seven zoning districts, the City of Plainview also has one overlay zoning district. The DWM, Drinking Water Management Overlay District, is applied to and superimposed upon all other zoning districts. The regulations and requirements imposed by this district are in addition to those established by the other zoning districts of the Land Management Ordinance.
611.4 Boundaries. The boundaries of these districts are indicated upon the District Boundary Map of the City of Plainview, Minnesota, which map is made part of this ordinance by reference. The said District Boundary Map and all the notations, references, and other matters shown thereon shall be as much a part of this ordinance as if the notations, references, and other matters set forth by said map were all fully described herein, the original of which is properly attested and is on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Plainview.
611.5 Boundary Lines. The district boundaries are either lot lines or the centerlines of streets and alleys, unless otherwise shown; and where the districts designated are bounded approximately by street, alley, or lot lines and are not dimensioned otherwise, the lot line or centerlines of streets and alleys shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts.
611.6 Annexation. All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City of Plainview shall be considered as being in the “AG" Agricultural District until otherwise changed by ordinance.
6-47
612 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT, AG, AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
612.1 Intent And Purpose: The AG Agricultural District is established to protect and allow for the continuance of agricultural activities on the peripheral areas of the community.
612.2 Permitted Uses:
1 Single family dwellings, and
2 Agricultural use and the usual agricultural buildings and structures.
612.3 Conditional Uses:
1 Retail sale of agricultural products produced on premises,
2 Recreational vehicle parks and camping areas. In the application for a conditional use permit for a recreational vehicle park and camping area, all parks will be required to meet Chapter 327,§327.10 - §327.28 of the State of Minnesota manufactured Home Park and Recreational Camping Area Law, and
3 Any additional commercial uses the City Council deems appropriate for the area and community welfare of Plainview.
612.4 Lot Area, Frontage, And Yard Requirements:
Rear Side Yards
Yard/ Sum of
Lot Lot Front Any Both
Use Area Frontage Yard Side Sides
Dwelling 2 acres 150 ft. 50 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft.
6-48
613 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT, R-1, RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
613.1 Intent And Purpose: The R-l Residential District is established to identify and protect both existing and future residential areas, where the single family dwelling shall be the major use activity. Over all other criteria, the protection and enhancement of the single-family dwelling shall be considered. Other use activities may be allowed to the extent they will not detract from the single family residential character of the district.
613.2 Permitted Uses:
1 Single-family dwellings.
613.3 Conditional Uses:
1 Public uses, such as public parks, public schools, etc.
2 Semi-public uses such as churches, private schools, etc.
3 Cemeteries, funeral parlors,
4 Two-family dwellings/units,
5 Nursing or convalescent homes,
6 Residential care facilities, providing there are no more than 12 residents, and
7 Home occupation.
613.4 Lot Area, Frontage, And Yard Requirements:
Rear Side Yards
Yard/ Sum of
Lot Lot Front Any Both
Use Area Frontage Yard Side Sides
Single-family 7500 sq.ft. 60 ft 5 ft. rear 5 ft. 15 ft.
dwelling 25 ft. front
Two-family 9000 sq. ft. 80 ft. 5 ft. rear 10 ft. 20 ft.
dwellings/units 25 ft. front
Non-residential 1 acre 100 ft. 25 ft. rear 10 ft. 30 ft.
25 ft. front
Public Uses 12,000 sq. ft 100 ft. 25 ft. rear 10 ft. 30 ft.
25 ft. front
613.5 Exceptions To Lot Frontage. Residential lots in cul-de-sacs shall be allowed if the lot frontage is at least 50 feet, so long as the lot frontage is 60 feet at the front setback line (25 ft past the property line). Zero-lot line two family dwellings have a minimum lot frontage of 50 feet per lot (100 feet for both lots).
613.6 Parking: Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
6-49
614 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT, R-2, RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
614.1 Intent And Purpose: The R-2 Residential District is established to identify and promote the construction and reconstruction of multi-family residential areas.
614.2 Permitted Uses:
1 Single-family dwellings,
2 Two-family dwellings/units,
3 Public uses such as public parks, public schools, etc.,
4 Semi-public uses such as private schools, churches, etc.,
5 Cemeteries, funeral parlors,
6 Nursing or convalescent homes, and
7 Residential care facility.
614.3 Conditional Uses:
1 Multi-family dwellings/units,
2 Professional offices,
3 Manufactured home parks, and
4 Home occupations.
614.4 Lot Area, Frontage, And Yard Requirements:
Rear Side Yards
Yard/ Sum of
Lot Lot Front Any Both
Use Area Frontage Yard Side Sides
Single-family 6000 sq. ft. 60 ft. 15 ft. rear 5 ft. 10 ft.
dwelling 25 ft. front
Two-family 8000 sq. ft. 60 ft. 15 ft. rear 10 ft. 20 ft.
dwellings/units 25 ft. front
Multi-family 3000 sq. ft/. 80 ft. 15 ft. rear 10 ft. 20 ft.
dwellings/units dwelling unit 25 ft. front
Non-residential 1 acre 100 ft. 25 ft. rear 10 ft. 30 ft.
25 ft. front
Public Uses 12,000 sq. ft 100 ft. 25 ft. rear 10 ft. 30 ft.
25 ft. front
614.5 Exceptions To Lot Frontage. Residential lots in cul-de-sacs shall be allowed if the lot frontage is at least 50 feet, so long as the lot frontage is 60 feet at the front setback line (25 ft past the property line). Zero-lot line two family dwellings have no minimum lot frontage, but in no case may any structure come closer than 10 feet to the side lot lines.
614.6 Manufactured Home Parks: In the application for a conditional use permit for a manufactured home park, all parks will be required to comply with Section 602.5.
6-50
615 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT, T, TRANSITION DISTRICT
615.1 Intent And Purpose: There are some areas of the community that, by their very nature and location, are destined to be underutilized if placed in a traditional dominant use district. The T Transition District has been established to accommodate these areas where there exist conflicting uses, and the continuance of the use mixture is desirable for the community welfare. By their very nature, uses allowed in this district will have both positive and negative impacts on one another. It is the purpose of this District to minimize or eliminate those conflicts.
615.2 Permitted Uses:
1 Any accessory use of an existing conforming and/or approved conditional use.
615.3 Conditional Uses:
1 Single family dwellings,
2 Two family dwellings/units,
3 Multi-family dwellings/units,
4 Automotive sales, service, and storage,
5 Retail sales,
6 Personal services,
7 Home improvement services and trades,
8 Repair shops,
9 Offices,
10 Home occupations, and
11 Any permitted or conditional use allowed in a district if that district has an adjoining boundary line with the Transitional District. (For example, if a C-2 District is adjacent to the Transitional District, offices (which are a permitted use in the C-2 District) could be considered under this Conditional Use definition.)
615.4 Lot Area, Frontage, And Yard Requirements:
Side Yards
Lot Area Lot Rear Yard/ Any Sum of
Use (sq. ft.) Frontage Front Yard Side Both Sides
Single Family 6,000 60 ft. 15 ft. 5 ft. 15 ft.
Dwellings
Two Family 8,000 60 ft. 15 ft. 5 ft. 15 ft.
Dwellings/Units
Multi-Family 3,000 60 ft. 15 ft. 5 ft. 15 ft.
Dwelling/Unit
Non-Residential 7,500 60 ft. 15 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft.
615.5 Requirements Reduced: Where the proposed use involves the utilization of an existing structure built prior to the adoption of this ordinance, the City Council may reduce the lot area, frontage, and yard requirements, but new additions or new construction are to comply with this provision.
6-51
616 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT, C-1, CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
616.1 Intent And Purpose: The C-l Central Business District is established to promote and encourage development and redevelopment of the core commercial area of the community and to enhance its position as a regional rural service center.
616.2 Permitted Uses:
1 Retail sales,
2 Restaurants,
3 Automotive sales and service,
4 Entertainment,
5 Home improvement trades,
6 Printing and related trades,
7 Parking garages and lots,
8 Appliance sales and service,
9 Repair shops,
10 Banks and savings & loans,
11 Offices,
12 Personal services,
13 Hotels and motels, and
14 Single Family and Two Family Dwellings in Existence Prior to July 1, 2003 (Amended July 14, 2003)
616.3 Conditional Uses:
1 Animal hospitals and clinics,
2 Automotive storage,
3 Farm equipment, sales, storage, and repair,
4 Food processing,
5 Wholesaling and warehousing, and
6 Multi-family dwellings/units.
616.4 Lot Area, Frontage, And Yard Requirements:
Rear Side Yards
Yard/
Lot Area Lot Front Any Sum of
Use (sq. ft.) Frontage Yard Side Both Sides
Multi-family 3,000/ 80 ft. 25 ft. frt. 10 ft. 20 ft.
Dwellings/ dwelling unit 15 ft. rear
Units
All other uses none none none none none
6-52
617 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT, C-2, SERVICE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
617.1 Intent And Purpose: The C-2 Service Commercial District is established to accommodate commercial development in localized areas of the community outside of the Central Business District.
617.2 Permitted Uses:
1 Retail sales,
2 Restaurants,
3 Banks and savings & loans,
4 Home improvement trades,
5 Animal hospitals and clinics,
6 Offices,
7 Repair shops,
8 Personal services,
9 Automotive sales and services, and
10 Single Family and Two Family Dwellings in Existence Prior to July 1, 2003 (Amended July 14, 2003)
617.3 Conditional Uses:
1 Automotive storage,
2 Farm equipment sales, storage, and repair, and
3 Any additional commercial uses the City Council deems appropriate for the area and community welfare of Plainview.
617.4 Lot Area, Frontage, And Yard Requirements:
Lot Lot Front Rear Side Yard/
Use Area Frontage Yard Yard Any Side
All uses 10,000 100 ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft.
sq. ft. from furthest each side
extension
617.5 Additional Lot Area Required: If the building floor area exceeds 3,000 sq. ft., additional lot area of 1,000 sq. ft. shall be required for each additional 300 sq. ft. of floor area or fraction thereof.
617.6 Screening Required: Any lot line adjoining a Residential District shall be screened with a solid fence or shrubbery at least five (5) feet in height.
617.7 Landscaping Required: In the front yard of each lot shall be an area of at least 1,000 sq. ft. landscaped and maintained in an attractive manner. No buildings or parking and drives shall be allowed in this area.
6-53
618 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT, I, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
618.1 Intent And Purpose: The I Industrial District is established to enhance and promote Plainview as a community for industrial development and still maintain its quality environment.
618.2 Permitted Uses:
1 Wholesaling and warehousing,
2 Manufacturing,
3 Food productions and processing,
4 Agriculture related uses, such as grain elevators,
5 Farm equipment sales, storage, and repair,
6 Contractor's storage yard, and
7 Land consumptive business necessitating outdoor storage.
618.3 Conditional Uses:
1 Any of the above uses where excessive odor, noise, smoke, etc. may be generated, and
2 Any uses the City Council deems appropriate for the area and the community welfare and growth of Plainview.
618.4 Lot Area, Frontage, And Yard Requirements:
Rear Side Yards
Yard/
Lot Lot Front Any Sum of
Use Area Frontage Yard Side Both Sides
All uses½ acre 75 ft. 35 ft. 20 ft. 40 ft.
618.5 Additional Lot Area Required: If the total building floor areas exceed 5,000 sq. ft., additional lot area of 1, 000 sq. ft. shall be required for each additional 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area or fraction thereof.
618.6 Screening Requirement: Same as in the C-2 Commercial District.
6-54
619 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT, DWM, DRINKING WATER MANAGEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
619.1 Intent And Purpose: The purpose of this district is to promote proper management and protection of the City’s Drinking Water Supply Management Area (DWSMA) and Wellhead Protection Area (WHPA). The intent is to prevent possible contamination of the City’s drinking water, which would adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. The DWM, Drinking Water Management Overlay District, is applied to and superimposed upon all other zoning districts as existing or amended by text and map of this section. The regulations and requirements imposed by this district are in addition to those established by the other zoning districts of the Land Management Ordinance.
619.2 Permitted And Conditional Uses: Permitted and conditional uses of the underlying zoning district apply within the DWM District, with the following exceptions:
619.2.1 New Underground Storage Tanks. No new underground storage tanks (UST) are
allowed to be constructed or placed in the DWM District,
619.2.2 New Aboveground Storage Tanks. New aboveground storage tanks (ABT) are permitted as an accessory use to a legal, conforming permitted or conditional use, but must meet all state and federal requirements for spill containment, spill contingency plans, and leak detection.
619.2.3 Prohibited. The following uses are expressly prohibited:
A. Waste Disposal and/or Storage,
B. Toxic Chemical Creation, Storage or Disposal,
C. Fertilizer or Pesticide Creation, Storage, or Disposal,
D. Salt Storage,
E. Livestock Waste Storage,
F. Salvage or Junk Yards,
619.3 Lot Area, Frontage, Yard Requirements, And Other Standards And Requirements. Lot area, frontage, screening and landscaping requirements, and other standards and requirements of the underlying zoning district apply within the DWM District.
6-55
620 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT, PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION OF PLATS
620.1 Pre-Application Meeting. Prior to the preparation of a General Development Plan or Preliminary Plat, the subdividers or owners shall be allowed to meet with the Zoning Administrator, Engineer, and other appropriate officials in order to be made fully aware of all applicable ordinances, regulations, and plans in the area to be subdivided. At this time or at subsequent informal meetings, the subdivider may submit a general sketch plan of the proposed subdivision and preliminary proposals for the provision of water supply and waste disposal. The sketch plan can be presented in simple form but should show that consideration has been given to the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing community facilities that would serve it, to neighboring subdivisions and developments, and to the natural resources and topography of the site. The subdivider is urged to avail himself of the advice and assistance of the local planning staff at this point in order to save time and effort, and to facilitate the approval of the preliminary plat.
620.2 Overall Development Guidelines. The City Council may require qualified technical and staff services such as economic and legal to review the General Development Plan, the Preliminary Plat, and the Final Plat and advise on its suitability regarding general planning; conformity with plans of other private and public organizations and agencies; adequacy of proposed water supply, sewage disposal, drainage and flood control, special assessment procedures and other features. The subdivider shall also be required to pay the cost of such services.
620.3 Sixty Day Rule. The preliminary application must be approved or disapproved by the City Council within 60 days following the delivery of an application completed in compliance with these regulations by the applicant, unless an extension in accordance with Minnesota Law (MS 15.99) has been invoked by the city; in which case Council action must be accomplished within 120 days unless an extension of the review period has been agreed to by the applicant. If the city fails to preliminarily approve or disapprove an application within the review period, the application shall be deemed approved, and upon demand the city shall execute a certificate to that effect. If the City Council disapproves, the grounds for any such disapproval shall be set forth in the minutes of the City Council meeting.
620.4 Denial Of Plan And/Or Plat. In the case of all subdivisions, the Planning Commission shall recommend denial of, and the City Council may deny, approval of a general development plan, preliminary or final plat if it makes any of the following findings:
(a) That the proposed subdivision, including the design, is in conflict with any adopted component of the Plainview Comprehensive Plan, Land Management Ordinance, Storm Water Pollution Control Ordinance, or any other provision of the City Code;
(b) That the physical characteristics of this site, including but not limited to topography, vegetation, susceptibility to erosion and siltation, susceptibility to flooding, water storage, drainage and retention, are such that the site is not suitable for the type of development or use contemplated;
(c) That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;
(d) That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements is likely to cause substantial environmental damage;
(e) That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems;
(f) That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements of record;
6-56
(g) That the design will create a significantly higher density than the surrounding areas;
(h) That the design will create an undue burden on the City’s traffic system or water/wastewater infrastructure.
620.5 General Development Plan. Prior to the filing of any formal plats, the applicant shall engage a registered land surveyor to prepare a general development plan and submit copies to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall send copies of the general development plan to each of the following agencies for their comments or recommendations. All applications shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the public hearing of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
a. County Engineer j. Cable Company
b. County Assessor k. Plainview-Elgin
c. County Surveyor Sanitary Sewer District
d. County Zoning Administrator l. U.S. Post Office
e. City Engineer m. City Clerk
f. Power Company n. Public Works Director
g. Telephone Company o. Plainview Fire Department
h. Minnesota Dept. of Transportation p. Plainview Ambulance Service
i. Natural Gas Company q. Plainview School District
620.6 Public Hearing On General Development Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the general development plan. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in the same manner as required by 608.1, Public Hearings.
620.7 Planning Commission Action -- General Development Plan. After considering the comments and suggestions received at the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall, by motion, submit its findings to the City Council that the plan, as submitted or as modified, does or does not meet the objectives of this ordinance and is recommended as approved or not approved on those grounds.
620.8 Public Meeting On General Development Plan. The City Council shall hold a public meeting on the general development plan. Notice of the public meeting shall be given in the same manner as required by 608.2, Public Meetings.
620.9 City Council Action -- General Development Plan. The City Council shall, by resolution adopted within 60 days after the public meeting, approve or disapprove the general development plan. The reasons for disapproval shall be recorded in the minutes of the City Council and reported to the applicant and Planning and Zoning Commission by the Clerk.
620.10 Changes And/Or Alterations To An Approved General Development Plan. If, in the opinion of the applicant or the City, there have been changes and/or alterations sufficient to warrant review of an approved general development plan, the above procedures shall be required. Such changes and/or alterations may include, but not be limited to, different street design, a change in the number of lots (especially to a greater number), and any substantial change to the overall theme or character of the plan that would have an adverse impact on adjacent property and require a public hearing.
620.11 Preliminary Plat. Upon approval of the general development plan, the subdivider may prepare a preliminary plat, which shall conform to the requirements of this ordinance and the approved general development plan, together with improvement plans and other supplemental material as may be specified by the Planning and Zoning Commission and its
6-57
reviewing agencies. An application shall be filed at least 20 days prior to the meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission at which time action is desired. The City Clerk shall send copies of the preliminary plat to each of the above agencies for their comments or recommendations.
620.12 Planning And Zoning Commission Action-Preliminary Plat. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in the same manner as required by 608.1, Public Hearings. After considering the comments and suggestions received at the public meeting, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall either recommend approval of the preliminary plat subject to certain conditions, if any, or disapprove the plat.
620.13 City Council Action-Preliminary Plat. The City Council shall review the preliminary plat after receiving the Planning and Zoning Commission’s recommendation. The City Council shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plat by resolution adopted within 60 days after submission of the plat to the City for consideration, unless the City notifies the applicant in writing that it needs additional time to consider the plat and sets forth the reasons why an extension is needed. The City Clerk shall notify the applicant of the City Council’s action and shall endorse the date of the approval or disapproval on the preliminary plat. If approval is given, the City Clerk shall send the applicant one copy of the preliminary plat marked with any required revisions. If approval is not given, the reasons shall be recorded in the minutes of the City Council and reported to the applicant and Planning and Zoning Commission by the City Clerk.
620.14 Approval Of Preliminary Plat. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Unless earlier rescinded by the City Council, approval of a preliminary plat is limited to a period of one year, after which time the applicant is required to resubmit a preliminary plat. Upon application filed with the City Clerk, the City Council may continue the approval for an additional period of time. The application shall be filed at least 20 days prior to expiration of the approval of the preliminary plat.
620.15 Final Plat. Following approval of a preliminary plat, the applicant may prepare a final plat and shall file with the City Clerk an application for approval of the final plat. The application shall be filed at least 15 days prior to the meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission at which time action is desired. The City Clerk shall send copies of the application and final plat to each of the agencies which received a preliminary plat for their comments, and recommendations. A final plat shall conform to the requirements of this ordinance and all conditions set forth in the approval of the preliminary plat.
620.16 Review Of Final Plat. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the final plat and the comments and recommendations of the other agencies and shall submit its findings and recommendations to the City Council and the applicant.
620.17 Public Meeting Final Plat. The City Council shall hold a public meeting on the final plat after receiving the Planning and Zoning Commission’s recommendation. Notice of the public meeting shall be given in the same manner as required by 608.2, Public Meetings.
620.18 City Council Action -- Final Plat. The City Council shall, by resolution adopted within 60 days after the public meeting, approve or disapprove the final plat. The reasons for disapproval shall be recorded in the minutes of the City Council and reported to the applicant and Planning and Zoning Commission by the City Clerk. No final plat shall be approved by the City
6-58
Council unless satisfactory evidence is filed with the City that all past taxes have been paid in full, that the final plat is in a form acceptable for recording in the Office of the Register of Deeds or Registrar of Titles, and until there is deposited with the City the amount of the filing fee to be charged for such recording.
620.19 Recording Final Plat. Upon approval by the City Council, the City Clerk shall record the final plat in the Office of the County Recorder, as provided by law.
620.20 Quick Plat. An individual may prepare a quick plat which shall conform to all specifications for quick plats of this ordinance. An application shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council. The City Clerk shall send copies of the quick plat to the same agencies as receive a conventional plat.
620.21 Public Meeting On Quick Plat. The Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council shall hold a public meeting on the quick plat after receiving the comments and suggestions of the reviewing agencies. Notice of public meeting shall be given in the same manner as required in 608.2, Public Meetings.
620.22 City Planning Commission Action -- Quick Plats. Same as Section 620.12, Planning And Zoning Commission Action-Preliminary Plat.
620.23 City Council Action – Quick Plat. Same as Section 620.18 City Council Action -- Final Plat
621 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT APPLICATION GUIDELINES
621.1 Application For General Development Plan
1) A copy of the application on a form approved by the City Council
2) Fifteen copies of the plan, which should include the following information:
a. scale and north point,
b. name and address of property owner,
c. name and address of subdivider,
d. zoning, classification of proposal and adjacent lands,
e. names of existing streets,
f. general street design,
g. general lot layout,
h. key map including area within one mile radius of plat,
i. date of preparation,
j. elevation and drainage.
621.2 Application For Preliminary Plat. An application for approval of a preliminary plat shall include the following:
1) A copy of the application on a form approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
2) Fifteen copies of the preliminary street profile map on with outside dimensions of
22 inches wide and 34 inches long, drawn to a horizontal scale of one inch equals 100 feet or less and a vertical scale of one inch equals 10 feet or less, showing the location of existing and proposed street, utility easements, depth to rock and ground water along the streets, and typical street cross sections.
3) Fifteen copies of a vicinity map drawn either on each preliminary plat or on a
separate sheet, with a scale of one inch equals 400 feet or more but not to exceed 1,000
6-59
feet, showing existing subdivisions, streets and tracts of land adjoining the subdivision.
4) Two copies of existing or proposed private deed restrictions, if any.
621.3 Application For A Final Plat. An application for approval of a final plat shall include the following:
1) Two copies of the application on a form approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
2) Fifteen copies of the final plat on black or blue line prints.
3) Two muslin backed originals and two reproducible mylars of the final plat, each of which shall contain all of the certifications, signatures (except that of the City Clerk and Register of Deeds), and acknowledgment required to file and record the same in the Office of the Register of Deeds.
4) Two copies of a title opinion prepared by an attorney and approved by the
municipal attorney, identifying the owners and persons of record having an interest in the property being subdivided.
5) A copy of boundary closure calculations.
6) Two copies of existing or proposed private deed restrictions, if any.
7) Except for the signature of the City Clerk, the final plat shall be in recordable form and shall include the fee to be charged for filing and recording of the plat in the Office of the Register of Deeds, indicating the amount of such fee.
8) When the preliminary plat is waived and the applicant is permitted to proceed directly to a final plat, a cash filing fee shall be submitted with the application for final plat approval.
621.4 Application For Quick Plat. Same as Application for Final Plat, except for subsections 3 and 8.
621.5 Format. Each preliminary plat shall be prepared by a Minnesota Registered Engineer or a Minnesota Registered Land Surveyor, and each final and quick plat shall be prepared and signed by a Minnesota Registered Land Surveyor. The outside dimensions shall be 20 inches wide and 30 inches long. A border line shall be placed two inches inside the outer edge on the left side of the 30-inch length and one-half inch inside the outer edge of the other three sides. When more than one sheet is required for any plat, each sheet shall be numbered consecutively and shall contain a notation of the total number of sheets; i.e. 2 of 3. Each plat shall be drawn to scale of one inch equals 100 feet or less.
621.6 Form Of Plats. Preliminary plats, final plats, and quick plats shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the laws of the State of Minnesota and shall contain the following information:
Preliminary Plat Final Plat Quick Plat
(All measurements and
information accurate)
1. Identification. 1. Identification. Same 1. Identification.
Date, Scale, north Same.
Point and proposed
name of subdivision.
The name shall not
duplicate or closely
approximate the name
of any other subdivision in the country.
6-60
2. Legal description. 2. Legal description. Same. 2. Legal description.
Legal description of Same.
the land to be subdivided.
3. Principals. Name of 3. Principals. Same. 3. Principals. Same.
the owners of record
and registered land surveyor.
4. Boundaries. Length 4. Boundaries. Same. 4.Boundaries. Same.
and bearings of the exterior
boundaries of the land being subdivided.
5. Radii and tangents. 5. Radii and tangents. Same. 5. Radii and tangents.
Approximately radii of all curves Same.
and lengths of all tangents.
6. Lots and Block. Layout and 6. Lots and Block. Same. 6. Lots and Block.
approximate dimensions of lots and Same.
blocks. Lots shall be numbered
progressively through each block,
and blocks shall be numbered progressively
through each plat.
7. Monuments and lot 7. Monuments and lot 7. Monuments and lots.
corners. The approx. location corners. The exact location Same.
of all permanent monuments and material of all permanent
and lot corners. lot corners and monuments.
8. Existing streets and 8. Existing streets and 8. Existing streets and
public uses. Layout, width, public uses. Same. public uses. Same
and identification of existing public
streets, easements, drainage ditches,
parks, and other public property
proposed for subdivision.
9. Existing Utilities. 9. Omit 9. Omit
Location of existing sanitary
and storm sewer lines, water mains,
and culverts within and adjacent to the
proposed subdivision, with pipe sizes,
cross-sectional areas, grades and capacities indicated.
10. Other existing feature. 10. Other existing feature. 10. Omit
Location of existing buildings Same except buildings
and structures, Railroad right-of- and structures shall be
way, municipal lines, township
lines, and lakes, rivers, and streams
and their known high and low water
elevations. Water elevation references shall
be the United States Geological Survey
Datum. Flood hazard areas shall be clearly labeled.
6-61
11. Proposed features. Layout, 11. Proposed features. 11. Omit
width, and identification of Layout, width, and
proposed streets, easements, identification of proposed
drainage ditches, parks, and street right-of-ways,
other property to be dedicated easements, drainage ditches,
to the public or reserved by parks, and other property to
covenants for the common use be dedicated to the public or
of property owners within the reserved by covenants for the
subdivision. Location of proposed common use of property owners
sewer lines, water mains, within the subdivision.
culverts, and drainage facilities.
12. Topographic map of the area 12. Omit. 12. Omit.
showing the contours as follows:
Two (2) foot intervals where slope
is seven (7) percent or less; five
(5) foot intervals where slope is
from seven (7) to fifteen (15) percent;
twenty (20) foot intervals where
slope is greater than fifteen (15) percent.
All areas of the subdivision to be platted with
a slope greater than twenty five
(25) must be clearly indicated.
13. Percolation test results 13. Omit. 13. Omit
results, minimum of two
(2) per lot, together with
soil borings, every acre
to indicate depth to water
table and rock formulation.
Omit if municipal sanitary
Sewer is available.
14. Zoning. 14. Omit. 14. Zoning. Same as
Identification of zoning Preliminary Plat.
Classification.
15. Restrictive deed covenants. 15. Restrictive deed 15. Omit.
Within identified flood plain covenants. Same.
areas, restrictive deed
covenants requiring the
flood plain areas to be left essentially
in the state shown on the plat,
establishing finished elevations of
buildings, structures, and private streets
and roads, and requiring that additions or
modifications to the facilities shall comply with
applicable ordinances and regulations
governing such food plain areas.
6-62
16. Dedication. Omit. 16. Dedication. A 16. Dedication. A
statement of dedication statement of
signed, acknowledged dedication signed,
and witnessed as acknowledged, and
required by law for witnessed as required by
recording conveyances. law for recording
The dedication shall conveyances. The
read substantially as dedication shall read
follows: “We, the as follows: “We, the
undersigned, certify that undersigned, certify
that we are the sole that we are the sole
interested parties in the interested parties in the
tract of land described in tract of land witnessed
the foregoing Surveyor’s as required described in
Certificate, which is the foregoing Surveyor’s
written on the plat on Certificate, which is
on which this instrument written on the plat on
is written, that we have which this instrument is
caused the same to be written, that we have
to be surveyed and caused the same to be
platted as. . .Subdivision surveyed and platted as
as shown on said plat, and . . .Subdivision, as shown
that we do hereby grant on said plat.”
and dedicate to the public
use forever the streets,
alleys, avenues, park sites,
walks, easements, and limited
accesses as shown thereon.”
17. Certificates. Omit. 17. Certificates. i) Surveyor. 17. Certificates. Same.
A certificate of the surveyor that
the plat was made in accordance with
This chapter and the laws of Minnesota, that the plat is a correct representation of the survey, that all distances are correctly shown on the plat, that all distances are correctly shown on the plat, that all monuments have been correctly placed in the ground as shown, and that the outside boundary lines are correctly designated on the plat. ii) Owner. A certificate of the owners in substantially the form as follows: “As owners, we hereby certify that we caused the land described on this plat to be surveyed, divided mapped, dedicated as represented on the plat.” This certificate shall be signed, acknowledged and witness as required by law for recording conveyances. iii) Taxes. A certificate by the County Auditor that all prior taxes have been paid. iv) City Clerk. A certificate by the City Clerk that the Plat has been approved by the City Council. V) County Surveyor. A Certificate that the plat has been checked
for surveying accuracy and compliance with applicable state platting laws.
6-63
622 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT, SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
622.1 General. The design of each subdivision and resubdivision shall conform to the design standards contained in this ordinance.
622.2 Street Design. The street system of a proposed subdivision shall be designed to facilitate adequate traffic circulation within the subdivision and from the subdivision to adjacent areas. Street arrangement, character, width, grade, location, sight distance, and surface material shall be related to existing or planned streets, topography, convenience, and safety and their intended ultimate function.
1 The arrangement of major streets in a subdivision shall provide for the continuation or projection of existing streets in adjacent areas or conform to a plan approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission where topographic or other conditions make continuance or conformation to existing streets impracticable.
2 Collector streets shall be properly related to major streets and designed in a manner so as to supplement the major street system but not to serve in lieu thereof.
3 Local streets shall be designed to benefit the topography, to discourage through traffic, and to provide the minimum amount of streets necessary for safe access to adjacent properties. The reasonable and intelligent use of curvilinear and cul-de-sac streets is allowed, where necessary.
4 When a subdivision abuts upon or contains an existing or proposed highway, major thoroughfare, or railroad right-of-way, the City Council may require reverse frontage lots with appropriate screen plantings in the non-access reservation strip, or the provision of suitable access roads parallel to and on either side of said highway, major thoroughfare, or railroad right-of-way providing access to adjacent properties and affording separation of through and local traffic.
5 Streets designed and laid out so as to have one end permanently closed shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet in length, except where the Planning and Zoning Commission has approved additional length due to property limitations or large lot size.
6 Turnarounds shall be provided at the permanently closed end of all streets and shall have a minimum turnaround radius of sixty (60) feet. The City Council may approve a "T" or "Y" type turnaround in lieu of the circular turnaround.
7 All subdivisions abutting a public lake, river, or stream shall provide public access at least eighty (80) feet wide to the low water elevation so that there will be public access at not more than one quarter (1/4) mile interval as measured along the lake, river, or stream shoreline.
8 Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the proper projection of streets so that parcels will not be land-locked. When a new subdivision adjoins developable land, then the new streets shall be carried to the boundaries of such unsubdivided land.
9 Where new streets extend to existing adjoining streets, their projection shall be at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the minimum required width.
6-64
10 The City Council shall issue street names; names shall not duplicate the names of other streets. All street names shall be in conformance with the current system of assigning numerical names, i.e. 7th Street NE.
11 A tangent of at least 150 feet shall be introduced between reverse curves on collector streets and 100 feet on lesser streets.
12 When connecting street lines deflect from each other at one point by more than 10 degrees they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to ensure a sight distance of no less than 500 feet for arterials, 300 feet for collectors, 100 feet for all other streets.
13 Half streets shall be prohibited except where it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, in which case the dedication of a half street may be permitted.
14 Private streets shall be prohibited.
15 Curb lines at street intersections shall be rounded at a radius of not less than 15 feet.
16 Each subdivision shall have at least two public accesses available to every lot.
17 Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided.
18 The Planning Commission and/or City Council may require the provision of pedestrian ways in proximity to public service areas such as parks, schools, shopping facilities or in other appropriate locations of a similar nature. The design of the pedestrian walkways shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned pedestrian walkways, to reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic conditions, to run-off of storm water and to the proposed uses of the area to be served. Pedestrian right-of-ways shall be at least 10 feet wide.
19 All subdivision street stubs (and underlying infrastructure) designed in a final plat shall be constructed at the same time as the other streets in the final plat.
622.3 Intersections. All streets shall intersect at right angles or as close thereto as possible. No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 70 degrees. More than two streets intersecting at the same location shall be prohibited. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall be avoided. Intersections having more than four corners shall be prohibited. Adequate land for future intersection and interchange construction needs shall be dedicated to the city.
622.4 Cul-De-Sacs. Cul-de-sacs are to be discouraged in subdivisions because of their effect of reducing the efficiency of traffic flow and circulation. However, when necessary due to topographical constraints, the maximum length of a street terminating in a cul-de-sac shall be 500 feet, measured from the centerline of the street of origin to the end of the right-of-way. Lots on cul-de-sacs in R-1 and R-2 zoning districts shall have a minimum lot width of 50 feet at the property line and 60 feet at the front setback.
6-65
622.5 Blocks. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet; and if possible, shall not be less than 300 feet. In blocks longer than 800 feet, a pedestrian crossway with the minimum right-of-way of 10 feet may be required near the center of the block. The use of additional accessways to schools, parks and other destinations may be required also. Block widths shall be sufficient to provide two tiers of lots of appropriate depth.
TABLE #1: MINIMUM STREET DESIGN STANDARDS
Arterial
Collector
Street
Local
Street
Frontage Road
or Service
Access Street
Alley
Rights-of-Way
as specified by
city engineer
66’
60’
40’
20’
Surface Width
“
as specified by
city engineer
(Min. 44 feet)
as specified by
city engineer
(Min. 36 feet)
as specified by
city engineer
(Min. 26 feet)
as specified by
city engineer
(Min. 20 feet)
Case Specification
“
“
“
“
“
Minimum Horizontal
Curve Radii*
400’
300’
300’
100’
100’
Minimum Tangent
Between Curves
200’
200’
50’
50’
50’
Minimum Grade
0.4%
0.4%
0.4%
0.4%
0.4%
Maximum Grade
6%
8%
10%
10%
10%
Pavement
Specifications
as specified by
city engineer
as specified by
city engineer
as specified by
city engineer
as specified by
city engineer
as specified by
city engineer
*As measured from the centerline of the street.
622.6 Lots.
The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the proposed subdivision and the type of use contemplated. All lots shall comply with the minimum lot frontage and area requirements specified in the Zoning Ordinance.
Every lot shall abut on a public street to assure access for fire protection, utilities, and other services.
Lot remnants which are less than the minimum lot size shall be added to adjacent lots.
Side lot lines shall be as near to right angles with streets having straight lines or radial to adjacent streets having curved lines as possible.
Residential lots fronting freeways, expressways, and major streets, where deemed appropriate by the City Council, shall be separated there from by the use of frontage roads, parallel streets, service drives, or alleys in order to eliminate direct access to the major street.
In the subdividing of any land, due regard, as determined by the City Council, shall be shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, wetlands, steep slopes, water courses, or similar conditions, and plans adjusted to preserve those which will add attractiveness, safety and stability to the proposed development.
Double frontage (lots with frontage on two parallel streets) or reverse frontage shall not
6-66
be permitted except where lots back on, or are adjacent to, an arterial or collector street.
622.7 Utility Easements. Easements for telephone service, electricity, gas lines, and other public utilities shall be provided and centered along the front and if required by the City Council, the rear and side lot lines where deemed appropriate. The easements shall be 10 feet in width or greater as recommended by the City Engineer and shall be aligned from block to block. Easements for storm or sanitary sewers shall be at least 10 feet wide. They shall have continuity of alignment from block to block. Temporary construction easements may be required where installation depths are greater than 10 feet. Utility easements shall be kept free of any vegetation or structures that would interfere with the free movement of utility service vehicles.
622.8 Water Courses. When a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainageway, channel or streets, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such water courses, and with such further width or construction as may be determined to be necessary by the City Engineer.
622.9 Parks, Open Space, And Public Use. It is declared general policy that in all new subdivisions, a percentage of the gross area of all property subdivided shall be dedicated for parks, playgrounds, or other public use. Such percentage shall be in addition to the property dedicated for streets, alleys, waterways, pedestrian ways or other public ways. The following schedule shall be applicable to all subdivisions. This schedule is based upon density of the development allowed in each district and is intended to equalize the amount and value of land dedicated for parks per dwelling unit in the various districts.
In areas zoned:
R-1 5% of the total land area R-2 8% of the total land area
No areas may be dedicated as parks, playgrounds, or public lands until such areas have been approved for the purpose to which they are to be dedicated. The parkland shall be graded to the contours set forth in the preliminary plat. The developer shall provide a minimum of three inches of black dirt over the entire park area and the area shall be seeded with a type of seed approved by the city. The financial guarantees by the developer to the city shall be in effect at least until such time that the parkland is graded and seeded.
The land dedicated for parks, open space or public use shall be suitable for active recreation use. Active recreation meaning organized playground activities such as softball, football, etc. These areas to be used for organized playground activities shall have a slope of less than 2% grade and be largely clear of forest vegetation. Some of the areas to be dedicated may be forested and may have steeper slopes, if allowed by the City Council.
When the subdivision is small or does not include a park or public area shown on the comprehensive plan, or if in the judgment of the Council the area proposed to be dedicated is not suitable or desirable for park/playground purposes because of location, size or other reason, the Council may require, in lieu of land dedication, a payment to the municipality of a sum equal to the percentage listed above of the undeveloped value of the land to be subdivided. The undeveloped land value shall be the value of the land when ready to be platted but not including utility costs; the estimated cost of grading and seeding the land shall be included in the land value. The City Council and/or its agents shall have the authority to make the final determination of the value of the land for purposes of park dedication. If requested, the City Council shall provide the developer or landowner with the methodology used to calculate the value of the land.
6-67
Such dedication of land for public use shall be without restrictions or reservations and shall be transferred to the City by deed or by plat. Money given to the City in lieu of land shall be used by the City only for acquiring or developing public parkland.
All parkland dedicated to the City shall be clearly marked and signed as a public park. The City shall not accept or maintain a park or parkland if its a private park in character or for use by only the surrounding and/or adjacent residents of the parkland. Public parks shall have adequate parking available for public occupancy when using the park.
622.10 Hardship To Adjoining Properties. The street arrangements shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining property in platting their own land and providing convenient access to it.
622.11 Public Subsidies. If the subdivider receives Tax Increment Financing, Tax Abatement, or any other form of local government aid or public subsidy, the City Council may require additional performance standards.
622.12 Environmental Awareness Worksheet Or Environmental Impact Statement. If a proposed development is of sufficient size to trigger a mandatory EAW or EIS, the required reports must be prepared before the City Council can approve or deny the proposed development. The EAW/EIS must be made available at least 10 days before the scheduled public hearings in order to be available for citizen review.
622.13 Previous Work Or Commitments. No subdivider shall be permitted to start work on any other subdivision without special approval of the City Council if he has previously defaulted on work or commitments, as determined by the City Council, on a previous subdivision or development in the City of Plainview.
622.14 Variances. If the applicant can not meet the requirements of this ordinance
because of exceptional topography or any other physical conditions that strict compliance with
these regulations would cause exceptional and undue hardship, the applicant may apply for a
variance as stipulated in these regulations. The variance must be applied for, and granted, before
or at the same time that the GDP, preliminary plat, or final plat is approved by the City Council.
622.15 Zero Lot Line Development. A two family dwelling may be split from one
lot into two along the party wall to allow for individual ownership of each unit. The newly
created lots shall each be in compliance with the lot requirements of the Land Management
Ordinance, with the exception of lot width as addressed in section 15.5 below. The following
conditions must be met before a zero-lot line development may be approved:
The property and structure must be able to be easily split into two (2) substantially equal
portions.
The structure must meet current building code standards for fire wall separation. This shall also apply to existing structures.
Deed restrictions shall be recorded with the property requirements that the structure shall have a uniform exterior appearance in terms of color, design, and maintenance. In addition, if one unit is burned or destroyed, than the development shall be reconstructed in a uniform appearance.
6-68
Separate utility services must be provided (see also Article III §§2l). If the property is already provided with a single one inch or larger water service, this water service shall be separated at the property line by installing a wye and two additional curb stops and boxes on the home side of the exiting curb stop and box. If, however, in the opinion of the City, it is feasible to make a second water service connection to the existing main, the existing water service shall not be split at the property line. If the existing water service is smaller than one inch diameter, a separate service connection shall be made to the City watermain. If a lot is intended to be used for a two-family dwelling unit under separate ownership and the public water system is under construction, reconstruction, or if the street is under reconstruction making access to the water system feasibility, separate services shall be extended to the lot at that time. Separate sanitary sewer service shall be provided by splitting an existing sanitary sewer service at the property line with a wye and two clean-outs. However, if conditions exist as stated above for water services making extension of separate services from the City sewer system feasible, such extension shall be made.
Zero lot line development are permitted in R1 and R2 zoning districts. However, they shall also be allowed in Transition Districts if the Transition District abuts either an R1 or R2, as provided for in Article X, Section 3. The lot width for each of the new parcels of the zero lot line development in an R1 shall be a minimum of at least 50 feet, as opposed to the 60 feet normally required. There shall be no minimum lot width for zero lot lines in an R2 zoning district. The newly created lots shall each be in compliance with the setback requirements of the Land Management Ordinance, with the exception of the side setback along the common party wall.
Townhouses and condominiums may reduce side yard setback to zero on common walls. The applicant shall record a covenant and deed restriction on all property which will abut the common lot line. Said covenant and deed restriction shall contain the following conditions:
Provide access to the abutting property for the adjacent property owner and/or his agent, employee or representative for the purpose of construction, reconstruction, repair, and maintenance of either side of the total property;
Provide easements for necessary encroachments for footings, eaves, and provide for mutual perpetual easements in the event of encroachment by the party wall;
Provide for restrictions to limit changes of color, construction material, and design of the dwelling as to compatible with the attached unit;
Provide for furnishing separate services to each dwelling unit for sanitary sewer and water.
622.16 Cluster Development. As an alternative to conventional zoning and development approaches, cluster development regulations may be used to encourage innovation in residential development and to encourage better utilization of land and creation of open space. In a cluster development, dwelling units are grouped on certain portions of a site, and other areas in common or single ownership remain open and free from development.
The intent of the cluster development is to centralize structures in one portion of a tract of land while leaving a significant portion (25-50%) of the property undeveloped, thus
6-69
creating meaningful open space. If a proposed development has structures spread throughout the tract of land, it will not create meaningful open space and thus shall not qualify as a bona fide cluster development.
The tract shall be a development of land under unified control at the time of application is to be planned and scheduled to be developed as a whole. No authorization or permits shall be granted for such development unless the applicant has acquired actual ownership of or executed a binding sales contract for all of the property comprising such tract.
The minimum total lot area of the development shall be no less than five acres. The total lot area requirement can include street and park land that will be dedicated to the public.
The total number of dwelling units allowed in a development shall be determined by the area standards of the zoning district in which the proposed development is to be located. For example, if 30 single family homes are planned for cluster development in an R-1, the total area must be at least 225,000 square feet (7,500 square feet times 30). As is stated in section 16.3 above, the minimum total area for development must be at least 5 acres in size. There is no minimum lot width for individual lots within a cluster development, so long as all other conditions set forth in this ordinance are met.
All structures must conform to setback regulations from property lines.
No building permits shall be granted for any building or structure which does not conform to the approved final plan or final plat.
Proposed dwelling units for a cluster development must conform to permitted or conditional uses (if approved) in its zoning district.
Common area in a cluster development must be maintained by either a landlord or a landowners or homeowners association. If a landowners/homeowners association is established, the following conditions must apply:
1. Membership must be mandatory for each owner and any successive buyer,
2. The Association must be responsible for liability insurance for common areas and for the reasonable maintenance of exterior, residential, and other facilities,
3. Any restrictions on open space must be permanent, not for a given period of time.
622.17 Non Residential Subdivisions. Non residential subdivisions shall be subject to all the requirements of the Land Management Ordinance, as well as such additional standards required by the Planning Commission and City Council. The subdivider shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Council that the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisances from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary.
622.18 Building Permits For Lots In New Developments. No building permit shall be issued for any development (other than necessary infrastructure improvements) until the first lift of the road surface has been laid.
6-70
623 ZONING AND LAND MANAGEMENT, REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND PAYMENT
623.1 Overall Specifications. Unless otherwise stated, all of the required improvements shall conform to engineering standards and specifications as required by the City Council. Such improvements shall be subject to inspection and approval by, and shall be made in sequence as determined by the City.
623.2 Monuments. Durable iron monuments or steel monuments shall be placed within 6 inches of final elevation at all lot corners, block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as shown on the Final Plat. Such installation shall be the subdivider's expense and responsibility. All U.S., State, County or other official benchmarks, monuments, or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise position. All monuments shall be a minimum of 1/2 inch in diameter and 15 inches in length.
623.3 Street Grading. Streets shall be graded to the full width of the right-of-way in accordance with street grades submitted to and approved by the City. All street grading and gravel base construction shall be in accordance with the City’s specifications. Grading shall be complete prior to installation of applicable underground utilities, either private or public in nature. Gravel base construction shall be undertaken after completion of the installation of underground utilities.
623.4 Street Surfacing. Following the City’s approval of street grading and after utility installation, streets shall be surfaced and provided with concrete curbs and gutters in accordance with the latest recommended plans and specifications prepared by the City, and approved by the City Council.
623.5 Driveways. In cases where driveways are constructed after curbing and sidewalk are in place, the sidewalk shall be reconstructed in accordance with driveway specifications to the width of the driveway.
623.6 Sidewalks. Rough grading for sidewalks shall be provided. Sidewalks shall be required in all new subdivisions.
623.7 Utility Installation. All utilities, whether private or public, shall be installed underground so as to enhance the visual appearance of the area, unless special permission is granted by the Council for other installations. Where utilities are to be installed in street or alley rights-of-way, such installations shall take place prior to street surfacing. Water and sewer services shall be laid to the property line.
623.8 Sanitary Sewer Utilities. Sanitary sewer facilities adequate to serve the subdivision shall be installed in accordance with the latest plans and specifications of the City and shall meet the requirements of the master plan for sanitary sewer extensions of the city. All new construction shall be connected to the municipal sanitary sewer system. All new construction shall be connected to this municipal waste water system and pay a sewer access fee, as determined by the City Council. The developer is responsible for sanitary sewer mains and laterals to the lot line.
623.9 Water Supply. Water distribution facilities adequate to serve the subdivision shall be installed in accordance with the latest plans and specifications of the Engineer and shall
6-71
meet the requirements of the master plan for water main extensions of this municipality. All new construction shall be connected to this municipal water system and pay a water access fee, as determined by the City Council. The developer is responsible for water mains and laterals to the lot line, water hydrants, and water main shutoffs.
623.10 Storm Sewer. Storm sewer and/or other surface drainage facilities shall be installed as determined to be necessary by the City for the proper drainage of surface waters. All subdivisions and developments shall conform to the City’s Storm Water Pollution Control Ordinance.
623.11 Other Utilities. The subdivider shall cause gas, electrical power and telephone facilities to be installed in such a manner as to make adequate service available to each lot in the subdivision. No such electrical or telephone service shall be located on overhead poles along the front lot lines unless otherwise allowed due to exceptional topography or other physical barrier.
623.12 Utility Poles. Any developer of a new subdivision in the City of Plainview shall pay the cost of placement and erection of utility poles used for the transmission of electrical energy to streetlights within the subdivision. All such poles shall be of a material, size, and weight, and shall be erected so as to meet or exceed all specifications promulgated by both the city's public works director and the city's electrical franchisee. Said utility poles shall be paid for and erected within 90 days of the issuance of the first building permit by the city council for the new subdivision. If all utility poles are not erected by that time, no further building permits shall be issued until all the poles have been erected.
623.13 Public Acceptance Of Improvements. Improvements within a subdivision which have been completed prior to application for approval of the plat or execution of the contract for installation of the required improvements shall be accepted as equivalent improvements in compliance with the requirements only if the engineer shall certify that he is satisfied that the existing improvements conform to applicable standards and are in a state of good repair.
623.14 Installation Of Required Improvements. Prior to the installation of any required improvements and prior to approval of the plat, the subdivider shall enter into a contract in writing with the city requiring the subdivider to furnish and construct said improvements in accordance with plans and specifications and usual contract conditions. This shall include provision for supervision of details of construction by the engineer and shall grant to the engineer authority to correlate the work to be done under said contract by any subcontractor authorized to proceed thereunder with any other work being done or contracted by the city in the vicinity. On request of the subdivider, the contract may provide for completion of part or all of the improvements covered thereby prior to acceptance of the plat. In such event the amount of the deposit or bond may be reduced in a sum equal to the estimated cost of the improvements so completed prior to the acceptance of the plat. The time for completion of the work and the several parts thereof shall be determined by the governing body upon recommendation of the engineer after consultation with the subdivider. What is a reasonable time shall depend upon the work to be done, the seasons of the year, and proper correlation with construction activities in the plat and subdivision.
623.15 Public Improvements. Final plans for required public improvements shall be prepared in accordance with the City's Public Improvement Policy. All costs of required improvements shall be allocated as outlined in the City's Public Improvement Policy.
6-72
623.16 Public Finance Of Improvements. In the event that the City shall publicly finance and administer subdivision improvements, the developer shall not be required to post a payment and performance bond.
623.17 Private Finance Of Improvements. In the event the developer elects to privately finance and administer improvements, the developer must comply with the following provisions:
623.17.1 Completion of Improvements. Before the plat is signed, all applicants shall be required to complete, in accordance with the City Council’s decision and the satisfaction of the municipal engineer, all the street, sanitary, and other improvements, including lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision as required in these regulations, specified in the final
subdivision plat, and as approved by the City Council, and to dedicate same to the local
government free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the property and public
improvements thus dedicated.
623.17.2 Payment and Performance Bond.
1. The City Council, in its discretion, may waive the requirement that the applicant complete and dedicate all public improvements prior to the signing of the subdivision plat and that, as an alternative, the applicant post a bond at the time of application for final subdivision approval in an amount estimated by the municipal engineer and the City Council as sufficient to secure to the local government the satisfactory construction, installation, and dedication of the uncompleted portion of required improvements. The payment and performance bond shall also secure all lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision as required in these regulations.
2. Such payment and performance bond shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the municipal attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution as set forth in these regulations. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified by the City Council in the resolution approving the final subdivision plat and shall be incorporated in the bond and shall not, in any event, exceed two (2) years from date of final approval.
3. Such bond shall be approved by the governing body as to amount and surety and conditions satisfactory to the governing body. The City Council may, upon proof of difficulty, recommend to the governing body extension of the completion date set forth in such bond for a maximum period of one (1) additional year. The governing body may, at any time during the period of such bond, accept a substitution of principal of sureties on the bond upon recommendation of the City Council.
4. In the event the subdivider defaults in the terms or conditions of the contract with the city for such improvements, the city may complete the project referred to in the contract and assess all costs of the completion incurred by the city against the real property being subdivided, a special assessment and collect it the same as if it were any other special assessment levied by the city against real property. All assessments shall be pursuant to Chapter 429 of Minnesota State Statutes.
623.18 Warranty. Unless specifically waived by the City Council, the Developer shall be required to give a two (2) year warranty for improvements (sewer, water, street, curb, gutter, etc.) from the date the City accepts the improvements. Any defect or repair necessary of said improvements shall be the responsibility of the Developer. If there is a necessary repair that needs immediate attention due to the risk of the public’s health or safety, the City shall be allowed to address the issue and bill the developer for the manpower and materials cost.
6-73
623.19 General Benefit To The Community. The required improvements as listed in this ordinance are to be furnished and installed at the sole expense of the subdivider. However, by the judgment of the City Council, if any improvement installed within the subdivision will be of substantial benefit to lands beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, provision may be made for causing a portion of the cost of the improvement, representing the benefit to such lands, to be assessed against the same. In such a situation, the City Council may require that the subdivider be required only to pay for such portion of the whole cost of said improvement as will represent the benefit to the property within the subdivision. For benefiting properties beyond subdivisions, a deferred assessment or hook-up charge can be enacted by ordinance, collectible upon development of the property.
623.20 City Acceptance Of Private Infrastructure. The City shall not accept the improvements until the City Engineer or the Public Works Director have determined that the improvements to the subdivision are substantially and satisfactorily complete. Before the City may accept any sewer or water lines, the developer must televise the infrastructure. This is to ensure that the lines are of sufficient integrity and quality so as to not require unnecessary public maintenance or repair after the warranty period expires.
624 VARIANCES; PLANNING COMMISSION; APPROVAL BY CITY COUNCIL
624.1 Variances, Conditions Governing Applications, Procedures. Pursuant to Minnesota Statute 462.357, subd. 6, as may be amended from time to time, the Planning Commission as hereinafter provided, shall have the power to hear requests for variances from the requirements of a zoning ordinance based upon practical difficulties, including restrictions placed on nonconformities. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing as is provided in this section and shall, by majority vote of the Commission, make a written recommendation to the City Council that includes factual findings on the practical difficulties standard contained in Minnesota Statute 462.357. The City Council shall have the authority to review the Planning Commission’s recommendation and shall vote to either accept or reject the Commission’s recommendation, and shall include in such decision written findings as is required by Minn. Stat. 462.357.
624.1.2. Application and Public Hearing. Application for a variance from a requirement of a zoning ordinance shall be made to the City Clerk in the form of a written application for a permit to use the property or premises as set forth in the application. An application for a variance shall be accompanied by payment of a fee in such amount as may be set by the Council from time to time in addition to the regular building fee, if any. The amount shall be specified in the fee schedule adopted by the City, as amended from time to time. Upon receipt of any application the City Clerk shall set a time and place for a public hearing before the Planning Commission on such application. Applications under this section must be submitted at least fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing on the application. The Planning Commission or City Clerk shall give notice of the time and place of the public hearing - notice shall be given not more than thirty (30) days nor less than ten (10) days in advance of the hearing, by publishing a notice thereof at least once in the official newspaper, by notifying the owner or owners of the property under consideration, and by notifying by mail at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting the property owners within three hundred and fifty (350) feet of the subject property. The current City Assessor’s tax records shall be deemed sufficient for the location of said properties.
624.1.3. Review and Recommendations. The Planning Commission shall, after a public hearing required by Section 624.1.2, make its decision upon the application and report its
6-74
recommendation to the Council within ten (10) days after such hearing. In recommending denial of a variance application the Commission shall specify the reasons why the variance should not be granted. In recommending approval of a variance under the provision of this section, the Planning Commission may designate conditions as set forth in Section 624.1.4 of this Section.
624.1.4. Conditions. The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may impose conditions that:
1. Assures compliance with the terms of the variance and protects adjacent properties; and
2. Directly relates to and bears a rough proportionality to the impact created by the variance.
624.1.5. Use Variances. The board may not permit as a variance any use that is not identified as permitted, permitted with standards, conditional, or accessory use under the zoning ordinance for property in the zone where the affected person’s land is located.
624.1.6. Findings by the City Council. Upon receipt of a report with recommendations from the Planning Commission, the Council shall accept or reject the same and by resolution shall either grant or deny the application for a variance according to its own determination of the question involved. In all cases in which adjustments or variances are granted under the provisions of this section, the Council shall require such evidence and guarantees as it deems necessary to assure compliance with the conditions designated in connection therewith. A variance may only be granted if it meets all of the following criteria which are consistent with Minnesota Statute 462.357:
1. The variance is in harmony with the purpose and intent of the ordinance;
2. The variance is consistent with the comprehensive plan;
3. The proposal seeks to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by the zoning ordinance;
4. The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner;
5. The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality; and
6. Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties. Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.
624.1.7. Record of Proceedings. The Planning Commission and the Council shall provide for a record of their proceedings, which shall include the minutes of their meetings, their findings, and the action taken on each matter heard by them, including final recommendation, decision and order.
624.1.8. Appeals from the Decision of the Council. Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, department, or bureau of the city aggrieved by any decision of the Council may seek review by a court of record of such decision, in the manner provided by the laws of the State and particularly by Chapter 462.361, Minnesota State Statutes.
624.2 Re-Submission Of Use Permit And Variance Requests And Subdivision Plats. Following denial by the City Council of a use permit request, variance request, or subdivision plat, an applicant may not re-submit the same request again to the City Council within one year of the date of denial of said request, unless the applicant has made a good faith effort to change his request as instructed by the City Council in its findings denying the original request.
6-75
624.3 Appeals From The Board Of Adjustment. Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, department, or bureau of the City aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may seek judicial review, in the manner provided by the state statutes.
625 COMMUNICATION TOWERS. All commercial wireless telecommunication towers or antennas erected, constructed or located within the City shall comply with the following requirements.
625.1 New Tower or Antennas. A proposal for a new tower or antennas shall not be approved unless the City finds that the telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed structure cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or structure within a two (2) mile search radius of the proposed tower due to one or more of the following reasons:
1 The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or structure, as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower or structure cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned equipment at a reasonable cost;
2 The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or structure as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer or qualified radio frequency engineer and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;
3 Existing or approved towers and structures within the search radius that are 60 feet or over in height that cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer;
4 Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or structure.
Any proposed tower shall be designed (structurally, electrically and in all other respects) to accommodate both the applicant antennas and comparable antennas for at least two additional users if the tower is over 100 feet in height, or for at least one additional user if the tower is over 60 feet in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
625.2 Signs and Advertising. The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment information signs is prohibited.
625.3 Tower Lighting. A tower shall not be illuminated by artifical means and shall not have affixed or attached to it in any way, except during time of repair or installation, any lights, reflectors, flashers or other illuminating device, except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission or any state agency. Strobe lights will not be permitted for night time tower lighting. The applicant shall choose from alternative lighting standards supplied by the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission or state agency. The applicant shall submit with their application the required lighting standards specified by these agencies. When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots or similar areas may be attached to the tower.
6-76
625.4 Abandoned or Unused Towers: Abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the zoning administrator. In the event that a tower is not removed within 12 months of the cessation of operations at a site, the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the City and the costs of removal may be assessed against the property.
626 OUTDOOR SOLID FUEL BURNERS
626.1 Purpose
This ordinance is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Plainview by regulating the air pollution and fire hazards of outdoor solid fuel burners.
626.2 Applicability
This ordinance applies to all outdoor solid fuel burners within the City of Plainview.
626.2.1 This ordinance does not apply to grilling or cooking food using charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas in appliances intended for cooking or grilling other than outdoor solid fuel burners.
626.2.2 This ordinance does not apply to burning for the purpose of generating heat in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating device within a building used for human or animal habitation.
626.2.3 This ordinance does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for heating, construction or maintenance activities.
626.2.4 This ordinance does not apply to campfires which are small outdoor fires on the ground using clean wood intended for recreation or cooking. However, it shall be unlawful for any person to create a campfire intended for disposal of waste wood, garbage, or refuse.
626.3 Definitions
626.3.1 “Construction and demolition debris” means building waste materials, including but not limited to waste shingles, insulation, tar paper, wall board, treated wood, painted wood, wiring, plastics, packaging, and rubble of other similar smoke producing materials that results from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on a house, commercial or industrial building, or other structure.
626.3.2 “Outdoor solid fuel burner” means a fired burner, stove or furnace that is not located within a building intended for habitation by humans or domestic animals. An outdoor solid fuel burner may also be referred to as an outdoor wood burner, wood boiler, or an outdoor wood fired hydronic heater.
626.3.3 “Refuse” means any waste material except trees, logs, brush, stumps, leaves, grass clippings, and other vegetative matter.
626.3.4 “Garbage” means any of the following materials: food wastes, food wraps, cardboard, newspaper or other product with ink or dye, packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted materials, furniture, composite shingles, construction or demolition debris or other household or business wastes, asphalt and products containing asphalt, treated or painted wood including but not limited to plywood, composite wood products or other wood products that are painted, varnished or treated with preservatives, any plastic material including but not limited to nylon, PVC, ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and plastic containers, rubber including tires and synthetic rubber-like products.
626.3.5 “Clean Wood” means natural wood which has not been painted, varnished or coated with a similar material, has not been pressure treated with preservatives, and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products.
6-77
623.4 Operation of Outdoor Solid Fuel Burners
No outdoor wood-burning stoves or solid fuel-fired heating devices designed and intended, and/or used, for the purpose of heating the principal structure or another accessory structure on the premises are allowed to be installed within the City of Plainview.
623.5 Non-Conforming Use
626.5.1 The lawful use of any existing outdoor wood-burning unit or outdoor solid fuel-fired heating device existing at the time of the effective date of this ordinance may be continued, although such use may not conform to the provision of this ordinance.
626.5.2 No pre-existing, non-conforming outdoor wood-burning unit or outdoor solid fuel-fired heating device shall hereafter be replaced, extended, enlarged, or expanded.
626.5.3 At such time as the useful life of an outdoor non-conforming wood-burning unit or outdoor solid fuel-fired heating device has elapsed or would need to be repaired to function properly, the unit cannot be replaced and must be abandoned, not used, and removed from the property immediately.
626.5.4 All outdoor wood burning or solid fuel burners in existence prior to the date that this ordinance was adopted must be registered and recorded at City Hall. Owner must supply the following information to City Hall: date the solid fuel burner was installed, manufacturer name, model number, and a photocopy of the manufactures’ recommendations and operating instructions, and the last time the owner maintained the device per manufactures recommendations. The City may also require inspections of the devices.
623.6 Severability
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the ordinance
623.7 Liability
A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor solid fuel burner shall be responsible for all fire suppression costs incurred by the City or its authorized agents and any other liability resulting from damage caused by the fire.
623.8 Penalty
Any person convicted or violating a provision of the ordinance is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $1000 or up to 90 days in jail or both.
7-1
700 PUBLIC SAFETY
701 DEFINITIONS. Any term used in Chapter 700 and defined in Minnesota Statutes Section 169.01 has the meaning given it by State Statute.
702 ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
702.1 Purpose. Administrative offense procedures established pursuant to this Section are intended to provide the public and the City of Plainview with an informal, cost effective, and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of certain City Code provisions. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on the part of those who have been charged with administrative offenses. At any time prior to the payment of the administrative penalty as is provided for thereafter, the individual may withdraw from participation in the procedures, in which event the City may bring criminal charges in accordance with law. Likewise, the City of Plainview in its discretion, may choose not to initiate an administrative offense and may bring criminal charges in the first instance. In the event a party participates in the administrative offense procedures, but does not pay the monetary penalty which may be imposed, the City of Plainview will seek to collect the costs of the administrative offense procedures as part of a subsequent criminal sentence, in the event the party is charged and is adjudicated guilty of the criminal violation.
702.2 Administrative Offense Defined. An administrative offense is a violation of a provision of the City Code and is subject to the administrative penalties set forth in the schedule of offenses and penalties referred to in Section 9, entitled “Offenses and Penalties”, hereinafter.
702.3 Notice. Any officer of the City of Plainview Police Department or any other person employed by the City, authorized in writing by the Chief of Police and having authority to enforce the City Code, shall upon determining that there has been a violation, notify the violator, or in the case of a vehicular violation, attach to the vehicle a notice of the violation. Said notice shall set forth the nature, date and time of the violations, the name of the official issuing the notice, and the amount of the scheduled penalty.
702.4 Payment. Once such notice is given, the alleged violator may, within fifteen (15) days of the time of issuance of the notice, pay the amount set forth on the schedule of penalties for the violation, or may request a hearing in writing, as is provided for hereinafter. The penalty may be paid in person or by mail, and payment shall be deemed to be an admission of the violation.
702.5 Hearing. Any person contesting an administrative offense pursuant to this section may, within fifteen (15) days of the time of issuance of the notice, request a hearing by a hearing officer who shall forthwith conduct an informal hearing to determine if a violation has occurred. The hearing officer shall have authority to dismiss the violation or reduce or waive the penalty. If the violation is sustained by the hearing officer, the violator shall pay the penalty imposed within seven (7) days.
702.6 Hearing Officer. The Mayor shall designate in writing a hearing officer. The hearing officer is authorized to hear and determine any controversy relating to administrative offenses provided for in this Section and may be compensated by the City for such hearings and related findings.
702.7 Failure to Pay. In the event a party charged with an administrative offense fails to pay the penalty, a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor charge may be brought against the alleged violator in accordance with applicable statutes. If the penalty is paid or if an individual is found not to have
7-2
committed the administrative offense by the hearing officer, no such charge may be brought by the City of Plainview for the same violation.
702.8 Disposition of Penalties. All penalties collected pursuant to this Section shall be paid to the City of Plainview and deposited in the General Fund.
702.9 Offenses and Penalties. Offenses which may be charged as administrative offenses and the penalties for such offenses shall be established by resolution of the City Council from time to time. Copies of such resolution shall be maintained at City Hall.
703 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
703.1 Restrictions on Turns. The Council by Resolution may, whenever necessary to preserve a free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents, designate any intersection as one where the turning of vehicles to the left or to the right or both, is to be restricted at all times or during specific hours. The Public Works Director shall mark by appropriate signs, any intersection so designated. No intersection on a Trunk Highway shall be so designated until the consent of MnDOT to such designation is first obtained. No person shall turn a vehicle at any such intersection contrary to the direction on such signs.
703.2 U Turns. No person shall turn a vehicle so as to reverse its direction on any street in the central business district or at any intersection where traffic is regulated by a traffic control device.
703.3 Through Streets; One Way Streets. The Council by Resolution may designate any street or portion of a street as a through highway or a one-way roadway, where necessary to preserve the free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents. The Public Works Director shall post appropriate signs at the entrance to such streets. No Trunk Highway shall be so designated unless the consent of the Commissioner of Highway to such designation is first secured.
703.4 Exhibition Driving Prohibited. No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate, or otherwise operate a motor vehicle within the City, in a manner which causes unnecessary engine noise or backfiring, squealing tires, skidding, sliding, swaying, throwing of sand or gravel, or in a manner simulating a race. Squealing or screeching sounds emitted by tires or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires, is prima facie evidence of a violation of this Section.
703.5 Traffic Laws During an Emergency. The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this Ordinance and the state traffic laws. Police officers are authorized to direct all traffic within the City, either in person or by means of visible or audible signal, in conformity with this Ordinance and the state traffic laws. During a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of this Ordinance and the state traffic laws. Officers of the Fire Department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at the scene of a fire or in the immediate vicinity.
703.6 Speed Limits in Mobile Home Park and Camping Area. It shall be unlawful for any type vehicle to travel at a rate in excess of 10 miles per hour while within the limits of a mobile home park or a recreational camping area and such 10 miles per hour limit shall be clearly posted throughout the mobile home park. The City Police of the City of Plainview are hereby instructed to enforce the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Section 327.27, Subdivision 2, in any mobile home park or recreational camping area within the City limits of Plainview, Minnesota.
It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to violate the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Section 327.27, Subdivision 2, unless the violation is committed in a manner and under circumstances so as to
7-3
endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property, in which case said violation shall be a misdemeanor. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes Section 169.89, as amended by laws 1979, c. 233, Section 1, are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this ordinance as though fully set forth herein.
703.7 Traffic Laws and Regulations While Operating on Public Roads, Streets, and Alleys. All motorized and non-motorized vehicles, including bicycles, scooters, mopeds, golf carts, and other similar devices are required to follow posted traffic laws and other traffic regulations while operating on public roads, streets, and alleys.
704 PUBLIC NUISANCES
704.1 Public Nuisance Defined. Whoever by his act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally does any of the following, is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:
A Maintains or permits a conditions which unreasonably annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable number of members of the public;
B Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage, any public highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or
C Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or this Ordinance, to be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically provided.
704.2 Nuisances Affecting Health. The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health and shall be unlawful:
A Milk which is produced by cows which have not been tested and found free of tuberculosis within the year previous to the offering of such milk for sale within the City.
B Garbage cans which are not fly-tight.
C The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal, or body of water by sewage, creamery, or industrial wastes or other substances.
D All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or private property.
E Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas or soot, or cinders in such quantities as to render the occupancy of property uncomfortable to a person of ordinary sensibilities.
704.3 Public Nuisances Affecting Morals and Decency. The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and decency and shall be unlawful:
A All non-legal gambling devices, slot machines, and punch boards;
B Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in such occupations.
C All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or, gambling houses,
D All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in violation of law or where, in violation of law, persons are permitted to congregate for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of law, and all liquor and other property used for maintaining such a place;
E Any vehicle used for the illegal transportation of intoxicating liquor, or for prostitution , or for any other obscene or illegal purpose.
The word "obscene” refers to that term defined by the United States Supreme Court applying contemporary community standards, such definition being expressly incorporated into this Chapter as though fully set forth.
7-4
704.4 Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety. The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety and shall be unlawful:
A All wires which are strung less than fifteen (15) feet above the surface of any street.
B All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise, and which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the public.
C All buildings and all alterations to buildings made or erected within the fire limits as established by Ordinance in violation of the Ordinance concerning manner and materials and of construction.
D Any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the streets or sidewalks.
E All signs, awnings and other structures hanging over the streets or sidewalks, so situated or constructed as to endanger public safety.
F The allowing of rainwater, ice or snow to fall from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk.
G All dangerous, unguarded machinery, in any public place or so situated or operated on private property as to attract the public.
H The distribution of handbills, pamphlets, and flyers except as provided by Ordinance.
I All motorized vehicles that have their mufflers removed and have either straight pipes or performance mufflers on the end of the tail pipe.
704.5 Accumulation of Junk in Open Spaces on Real Property.
704.5.1 Definitions. “Open area” means that part of a residential lot or property that is not covered by an enclosed building or structure, regardless of whether the view from outside the property is shielded by a fence, vegetation or other structure. The term “open area” includes, but is not limited to, the yard, open porches, and areas under structures that are not entirely enclosed, such as a carport.
704.5.2 Open Spaces To Be Maintained. All open areas and parts of premises shall be maintained and kept in a reasonably clean and neat condition. This requirement shall include the removal of dead trees and brush, the removal of inoperable machines, appliances, fixtures and equipment; the removal of lumber piles and building materials not being used in actual construction on the premises unless such premises are being used by a business dealing in or requiring the use of such lumber and materials, and the storage of these materials for business use is allowed or permitted by ordinance; the removal of tin cans, broken glass, broken furniture, mattresses, box springs, boxes, crates, cardboard, tires, and other garbage and debris; and the removal of furniture and other items of the type not designed or intended to be stored outside or in such a manner that they are exposed to weather and climatic conditions.
704.6 Non-Conforming Motor Vehicles.
704.6.1 Definitions. "Motor vehicle" means every vehicle which is self-propelled.
704.6.2 Requirements. No person shall place, park, permit to remain, store or leave upon an open space area of any property, a motor vehicle if the motor vehicle:
A Lacks essential parts that would render it inoperable; or,
B Is in a rusted, wrecked, partially dismantled or junked condition.
704.6.3 Motor Vehicles Violation. If a motor vehicle, meets any of the above provisions, the owner or possessor of the motor vehicle shall be responsible to remove the motor vehicle to a duly licensed junk yard or other authorized place of deposit or storage within 10 business days of a demand by the City. In the event the owner or possessor of the motor vehicle cannot be located, then it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises to remove the motor vehicle to a duly licensed junk yard or other authorized place of deposit or storage within 10 business days of a demand by the City.
7-5
704.7 Violations a Public Health or Safety Hazard. A person who creates, maintains or allows to continue a condition on property which poses a risk to the health or safety of the public, including but not limited to in violations of Section 704 of this Code, shall be deemed to have created in the City a public health or safety hazard, which is subject to abatement by the City as provided in 704.9.
704.8 Penalty. Any person who shall knowingly cause or create any nuisance or
permits any nuisance to be created or to be placed upon or to remain upon any premises owned or occupied by him shall upon conviction thereof be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than One Thousand and no/100 Dollars ($1000.00) and costs, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than ninety (90) days.
704.9 Abatement Procedure. If the owner or occupant thereof fails within five days after posting by first class mail of a notice to abate a public health or safety hazard contained on any property, the City by and through its authorized personnel may enter upon such property and abate the public health hazard by any reasonable means, including the contracting with a private person to do so. Any expenses incurred by the City in the abatement of a public health or safety hazard under this section shall be the responsibility of the property owner, and if subsequently unpaid, may be assessed against the property as provided in Minnesota Statute 429.101.
705 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PROPERTY
705.1 Violation a Misdemeanor. The violation of any of the Sections of this Ordinance by any person shall be deemed a. misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than One Thousand and no/100 Dollars ($1000.00) or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than ninety (90) days, together with the costs in either case. The violation of each Section hereof shall be deemed a separate violation, each to be deemed a separate misdemeanor.
705.2 Construction and Excavation.
705.2.1 Excavations to be Guarded. Every person who shall have charge of the construction of any excavation or obstruction adjacent to or under any sidewalk or street shall during the progress of such work cause such excavation to be securely guarded by a fence with at least two (2) strings of good six inch (6") boards nailed not less than eighteen inches (18") apart to posts securely fixed in place; such posts shall be not more than six feet (6') apart and the top of the highest post shall not be less than four and one-half feet (4 1/2') from the surface of the sidewalk or street and from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise shall illuminate such excavation or obstruction with lights sufficient in number and so placed as to show the full extent thereof.
705.2.2 Removing Barricades. No person shall remove, throw down, run over or interfere with any barricade or barricades lawfully directed, placed to guard and protect any grading, paving, sidewalk construction or other work.
705.2.3 Injuring Uncompleted Construction. No person shall walk upon, drive or ride over or cross any pavement in the course of construction before the same has been opened for public travel, or over or across any uncompleted grading, or sidewalk construction which has not been opened for travel.
705.2.4 Blasting Precautions. No person shall blast or cause to be blasted within three hundred (300) feet of any building of this City, rocks or other material, without having the same covered by good sound timber or sheet metal of sufficient weight, length and thickness and so placed as effectively to prevent fragments of rock or other material blasted, from ascending into the air, or shall fail to notify persons approaching the scene of any blasting that blasting is being done.
7-6
705.3 Public Streets
705.3.1 Placing Objects on Public Highways. No person shall place, throw or cause to be placed or thrown on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public property, any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substances or things that might wound any person or animal or cut or puncture any pneumatic tire when passing over the same. No person shall place, throw, or cause to be placed or thrown on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public property any leaves, grass, branches, limbs, vegetation, dirt, sand, silt, mud, or other similar debris.
705.3.2 Spilling Substances in Streets. No person shall haul over the streets or alleys of this City any loose material of any kind, except in a vehicle having a tight box so constructed as to prevent the splashing or spilling of any of the substances therein contained upon said streets or alleys.
705.4 Sidewalks
705.4.1 Deposits on Sidewalks. Whenever any lot or piece of land abutting on any sidewalk shall become or remain in such a condition that earth or other substances therefrom accumulate on such sidewalk, and the owner of such lot or piece of land shall refuse or neglect to place the same in such a condition as to prevent such washing or accumulation on such sidewalk, such owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each day that such owner shall refuse or neglect to abate said condition, after notice from the City Public Works Director , shall constitute a separate offense.
705.4.2 Interference With Sidewalks. No person shall loosen or remove any plank, brick, block or support from any sidewalk, crosswalk, curbing or gutter, provided however, that this action shall not apply to persons making repairs on any sidewalk, temporarily removing the same on account of building operations.
705.4.3 Obstructing Sidewalks. No person shall leave or allow to be left any implements, tools, boxes, merchandise, goods, trash, cans, crates, corn poppers, peanut roaster, ice cream containers, advertising or show cases on any sidewalk or other public way longer than is necessary for loading or unloading the same.
705.4.4 Maintaining Sidewalk Level. No owner of any property having sidewalk adjacent thereto, shall permit any plank, brick, stone or segment of said sidewalk to be raised above the established level of said sidewalk more than one-half inch (1/2") in any manner which might catch the foot of a pedestrian, or shall permit any holes or depressions to occur in the sidewalk in which a pedestrian might step or catch his foot in a manner liable to cause injury.
705.5 Hitching and Picketing Animals. No person shall hitch any animal to any street light, hydrant, drinking fountain, shrub or shade tree, or picket any animal in any of the streets, alleys, parks or public grounds of the City.
705.6 Posting Handbills. No person shall put up any hand bills, advertisements, posters, show bills or other signs on any building, pole or property not his own, without permission from the owner thereof.
705.7 Public Property
705.7.1 Defacing Public Property. No person shall cut, carve, mark, etch, engrave any character, figure, letter or name upon any building or other public property owned, occupied or used by the City, or shall in any manner mar, deface or injure any trees, shrub, plant, vines or any other public property in, on or around the grounds upon which such building is situated, nor shall any person willfully or maliciously displace, remove, injure, or destroy any other public property or any part thereof.
705.7.2 Willful Destruction of Public Park and Public Cemetery Property. No person shall willfully and without authority, cut, pluck or otherwise injure any flowers, shrubs or trees growing in or around any public park, public cemetery, or other public grounds of the City, or shall willfully injure or destroy any stand, bench or other property situated on such park, cemetery, or ground.
7-7
705.7.3 Withholding City Property. No person shall take possession of any property, real or personal, belonging to the City, or to the possession of which the City shall be entitled, or shall commit any trespass thereon, or shall unlawfully withhold the property from the City, and the unlawful withholding of such property after demand therefor has been made under the direction of the City Council, shall be deemed a new and separate offense for every day the possession is withheld after such demand.
705.8 Interference With Public Sewers and Culverts. No person shall willfully injure or destroy or attempt to injure or destroy, any public sewer or culvert, or shall molest any sewer or culvert or any part of said sewer or culvert, by removing the cover of any flash tank, grate, or other part of said public sewer system or culvert, without authority to do so.
705.9 Restriction of Awning. No person shall construct or install, or cause to be constructed or installed, any awning which is supported in whole or in part by posts or other supports set into the public right of way.
705.10 Throwing or Batting Balls on Streets, Etc. No person shall throw or bat any ball stone or other hard substance into, on or across any street or alley, or at or against any public building or vehicle, or at or toward any person.
706 NOISE
706.1 Unnecessary Noises Generally. No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued, any unnecessary or unusual noise between the hours of 6:00 o'clock A.M. and 8:00 o'clock P.M. which either annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others or shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued, between the hours of 8:00 o'clock P.M. and 6:00 o'clock A.M., whether in the operation of any machine or the exercise of any trade or calling or otherwise, any noise which either annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others, unless the making and continuing of the same be necessary for the protection or preservation of property or of the health, safety, life or limb of some person.
706.2 Operation of Radios, Stereos, Etc. No person owning, occupying or having charge of any building, premises, or vehicle, shall allow any loud, excessive or unusual noise in the operation or use of any radio, stereo, or other mechanical or electronic sound-making or reproducing device, instrument or machine, which loud, excessive or unusual noise shall disturb the comfort, quiet or repose of persons therein, or in the vicinity.
706.3 Permit-Necessary for Loudspeakers. No person shall use or operate, or cause to be used or operated in any public street or place, or from any aircraft, or in front of or outside of any building, place or premises, abutting on or adjacent to any public street or place, any devise, apparatus or instrument for the amplification of the human voice or any sound or noise, or other sound-making, or sound reproducing devices, without a written permit from the City Council.
706.4 Advertising Noises. No person shall make or cause to be made for the purpose of advertising or announcing his or her vocation or presence, or in connection with the buying or selling of any goods, wares, merchandise, services or anything whatsoever, or with the carrying on of any trade, occupation, vocation, or profit-making activity, any loud or unusual use of the voice, or of any bell, gong, horn, instrument, article or device. The violation of this Section in connection with any license or permit shall be cause for the revocation thereof.
7-8
706.5 Manner of Conducting Business. No person shall carry on or permit to be carried on, any business or occupation in such a manner as to create any loud, unusual or unnecessary noise.
707 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS
707.1 Discharge of Firearms and Dangerous Weapons Prohibited Without a Permit. No person shall fire, discharge, or explode any gun, pistol, including air powered guns or pistols, or other weapon in any part of the City without a permit from the City Council. Such permit shall be in writing and shall be issued by the Council in its discretion upon application to it.
707.2 Exception. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit any firing of a gun or pistol or other weapon when done in the lawful defense of person, property or family or in the necessary defense or enforcement of the laws.
708 RESTRICTIONS AFTER CURFEW HOURS
708.1 Restriction After Curfew Hours. No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall remain in or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places in the City at night between the hours of 11:00 o'clock P.M. and 5:00 o'clock A.M. on the nights of Sunday through Thursday inclusive or between the hours of 12:00 o'clock midnight and 5:00 o'clock A.M. on the nights of Friday and Saturday, unless such person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody of such minor person or is in the performance of an errand or duty directed by such parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody of such minor person or whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys or public places during the night time, after specified hours.
708.2 Duty of Parent or Guardian. No parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of any person under eighteen (18) years of age shall permit any such child, ward or other person under such age, while in such legal custody, to remain in or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places in said City within the time prohibited in Section 708.1 unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor. Any person violating the provision of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
708.3 Duty of Police Officers. Each member of the police force while on duty is hereby to arrest, any person violating the provisions of Section 708.1 of this Ordinance. Any person or persons so arrested shall, for a first violation of this Ordinance, be taken or sent by the officer to their homes, and their parents or guardians notified of such violation of this Ordinance; upon a subsequent violation of the provisions of the Ordinance, the person or persons so arrested shall be taken or sent home by the officer and the parents or guardians served with subpoenas to appear in Court with the person or persons so arrested, and show cause why the Ordinance has been a second time violated. If no sufficient excuse therefor is offered, the parents or guardians shall be fined according to the provisions of Section 708.2. Any police officer arresting such child or minor person, if the said child or minor person either has no home or guardian, or refuses to give the name and address of such home or guardian to the officer, shall place such child or minor person in the care of the proper authorities. All due diligence shall be used by the officer so arresting such child or minor person to find parents or guardians responsible for such child or minor person. Pending necessary investigations, such minor charges shall not be detained in custody by the police more than twenty-four (24) hours.
709 SNOWMOBILES
709.1 Definitions. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following definitions apply:
7-9
Snowmobile. A self propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice or natural terrain, steered by wheels, skis or runners.
Operate. To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.
Operator. A person who operates or is in actual control of a snowmobile.
709.2 Operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile under
the following circumstances:
A No person shall drive a snowmobile on the streets of the City Of Plainview within the limits of said City, at a speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour.
B On public grounds without express provision or permission to do so by the proper public authority.
C In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
D In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger the safety of any person or property of any other person.
E Without having any such snowmobile registered as provided in Section 84.82 of Minnesota Statutes, except that this provision shall not apply to the operation of a snowmobile on the private property of the owner, by the owner, or a member of his immediate family.
F Within the right-of -way of any public street within the City, unless the operator shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age, or between the ages of fourteen (14) years and eighteen (18) years, only if he has in his immediate possession, a valid Snowmobile Safety Certificate issued by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, or is accompanied by an individual eighteen (18) years of age or older, who is actually occupying a seat in the vehicle.
G Upon any public street, alley or lot within the corporate limits of the City Of Plainview, between the hours of 10:00 o'clock P.M. and 6:00 o'clock A.M. provided, however, that if the snowmobile is being driven for the purpose of going in the most direct, practical route possible from a point outside the city limits to the residence of the operator within the city limits, or from the residence of the operator inside the city limits to a specific designation outside the city limits, then and for that purpose only, operation of a snowmobile between the hours aforesaid shall be lawful.
709.3 Park Property. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Ordinance, the Public Works Director of the City of Plainview shall have authority to supervise and regulate events or programs in connection with the events conducted by the Public Works Director in which snowmobiles are used. The Public Works Director shall have the authority to designate city park areas that they shall deem advisable for use of snowmobiles.
709.4 Equipment. All snowmobiles operated within the City of Plainview shall have the following equipment:
A Mufflers which are properly attached, which reduce the noise of the operation of the vehicle to the minimum noise necessary for operating the vehicle and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device on a vehicle.
B Adequate brakes as required by Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 169.67 and at least one (1) operable headlight and one (1) operable tail light.
7-10
C A safety or so-called "dead man" throttle in operating condition; a safety or "dead man" throttle is defined as a device which, when pressure is removed from the accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged from the driving track.
709.5 Unattended Snowmobiles. It is unlawful for the owner or operator to leave or allow a snowmobile to be or remain unattended on public property, streets or highways while the motor is running or with the keys that start the same in the ignition switch.
709.6 Prohibition. The City Council may by Resolution prohibit the operation of snowmobiles within the right-of-way of the public roads or streets or other City property within the City of Plainview, when, in the opinion of the City Council, the public safety and welfare so requires.
709.7 State Statutes. Section 84.87, Minnesota Statutes and all the provisions thereof is hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as fully and completely as those set forth herein in full.
709.8 Penalty. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this Ordinance, is guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
710 ALL TERRAIN VEHICLES (ATV)
710.1 Definitions.
“All-Terrain Vehicle”. An ATV shall be defined to mean any motor vehicle as that term is defined by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 169.01, subd. 3 which is designed for use primarily on surfaces or terrain outside of the traveled portion of public roadways as those terms are defined by this ordinance. This definition is specifically intended to include, but not be limited to, such common terms for- all-terrain vehicles such as "three-wheelers", "four-wheelers", "dune buggies", or "ATVs". This definition is specifically intended to exclude passenger vehicles, motorcycles, or motorized bicycles as those terms are, defined by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 169.01, subd. 3(a), 4 and 4(a), respectively. This definition is also specifically intended to exclude riding lawn mowers.
“Traveled Portion of Public Roadways”. The traveled portion of a public roadway shall be defined in the case of paved, public roads as that portion which is actually paved. In the case of unpaved public roadways, the traveled portion shall refer to that portion actually used for vehicular travel and shall exclude ditches, slopes and backslopes supporting the traveled portion of the roadway.
“Operate”. Operate means to ride in or on and control the operation of an ATV.
“Operator”. Operator means every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a ATV.
“Owner”. Owner means a person, other than a lien holder, having the property in or title to ATV, entitled to the use or possession thereof.
“Parade”. For purposes of this ordinance, "parade" shall be defined as any organized procession or march for which permission to organize or march has been obtained from the city council of Plainview, Minnesota.
7-11
“Person”. Person includes an individual, partnership, corporation, the State and its agencies and subdivisions and any body of persons, whether incorporated or not.
710.2 Operation of ATV’s by Adults
710.2.1 Operation on Public Roadways Restricted. It shall be unlawful to for any person to operate, permit the operation, or be in actual physical control of any ATV upon the traveled portion of any public roadway within the city of Plainview, Minnesota except as provided in Minnesota Statutes §§84.92 to 84.929 or as specifically authorized and permitted under the terms of this ordinance.
710.2.2 Permit Requirements. Any person who intends to operate an ATV on any public roadway within the limits of the City of Plainview shall obtain an operation permit from the Plainview Police Department. The Police Department shall issue an operation permit upon verification that the applicant has:
A A valid driver’s license.
B Proof by the applicant of liability insurance which covers the ATV.
C Proof that the applicant has registered the ATV with the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
D Standard mufflers which are properly attached to the ATV and which reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass, straight pipe, or similar device on an ATV. The apparatus shall not be audible for a distance more than 500 feet from the place or places where such devices or apparatus will be located.
E Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the ATV under any condition of operation.
F At least one clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet ahead during the hours of darkness and under normal atmospheric conditions, when the ATV is operated between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, or at times of reduced visibility. Such headlamp shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an oncoming ATV operator. The ATV shall also be equipped with at least one red tail lamp having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.
710.2.3 Restrictions on Operation of ATV’s on Public Roadways Following Permit Issuance. Once a permit has been issued to any person, it shall be unlawful for that person to drive any ATV on the portion of any right of way of any public highway, street, road, trail or alley used for motor vehicle travel, except a person may operate upon the most right hand lane of a municipal street or alley unless otherwise herein or hereafter restricted, and may, in passing or making a left turn, operate on other lanes which are used for vehicle traffic in the same direction; and they may also be operated upon the ditch bottom or the outside bank of trunk, county, state-aid and county highways which are so configured within the corporate limits. No travel is permitted on any state or county highway within the City limits.
710.2.4 Other Prohibited Places and Manners of Operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an ATV:
A On a public sidewalk providing for pedestrian traffic;
B On private property of another without written/dated/signed permission of the owner or person in control of said property, which permission shall be on the operator's person while operating the ATV;
C Upon any school grounds without written/dated/signed permission of responsible school authorities, which permission shall be on the operator's person while operating said ATV;
7-12
D On any other public place or ground except as may be specifically permitted by other provisions of the City Code;
E At any place, while under the influence of alcohol or drugs as defined in Minnesota Statute 169.121, which is hereby incorporated herein by reference.
F At a rate of speed greater than (20) miles per hour.
G At any place in a careless, reckless or negligent manner or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger or cause injury or damage to any person or property.
H During the hours of 10:00 PM to 7:00 AM, Sunday through Thursday, and 12:00 AM to 7:00 AM on other days, except that during said prohibited hours of operation, such operation shall be permitted when returning to the City of Plainview for the purpose of following the most direct practical route possible from a point outside the limits of the City of Plainview to the residence of the operator or passenger, and except during the prohibited hours of operation such operation shall be permitted for the purpose of leaving the City of Plainview by the most direct practical route possible to go to a specific destination outside of the City of Plainview.
I Without a lighted headlight and taillight at night.
J In any trees, nursery or planting that damages or destroys growing stock or on any private property without the permission of the owner thereof.
K Entering any intersection without yielding the right of way to any vehicles or pedestrians, which are at the intersection, or so close to the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.
L Leaving an ATV in a public place without locking the ignition, removing the key, and taking the same with him/her.
M Intentionally driving, chasing, running over, or killing any animal with a ATV.
N All passengers and riders under the age of 18 years must where a safety helmet.
710.2.5 Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to an ATV used by governmental agencies in the pursuit of their duties or during emergency use. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the use of ATVs within the right-of-way of a State Trunk or county state aid highway or upon public lands or waters under the jurisdiction of the Commissioner of Natural Resources in an organized contest or event subject to the consent of the official or board having jurisdiction over the highway or public lands or waters. Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the use of ATVs within the right-of -way of a state trunk or county state aid highway or upon other public streets in the City of Plainview during a parade.
710.2.6 All Other Traffic Regulations Applicable. When at any time an ATV is operated within the right-of-way of a public roadway, but outside of the traveled portion, or when an ATV is operated as permitted in crossing a public roadway, all other traffic regulations of the City of Plainview and the State of Minnesota, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to operating or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while intoxicated shall be applicable to the operators of such ATVs. Furthermore, for the purpose of enforcing traffic regulations at any time that any ATV is within the right-of-way of a public roadway or lawfully upon the traveled portion of a public roadway, the ATV shall be deemed to be a motor vehicle, and subject to all rules, ordinances, statutes and regulations pertaining thereto as the same term is defined by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 169.01, subd. 3.
710.3 Operation of ATV’s by Minors. ATV operators who are minors and who wish to operate ATV’s within the City limits are subject to the following conditions in addition to those required for adult operators:
A. No minor under 16 years of age shall be permitted to operate an ATV in the City of Plainview.
7-13
B All minors at least 16 years of age but less than 18 years of age may operate an ATV subject to the restrictions set forth above if the minor possesses a valid driver's license and wears a safety helmet approved by the commissioner of public safety.
710.4 Penalty. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this Ordinance, is guilty of
a petty misdemeanor.
711 BICYCLES.
711.1 Traffic Laws Apply. Every person riding a bicycle on a street or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no application.
711.2 Where to Ride. Every person operating a bicycle upon a street shall ride as near to the right side of the street as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. Persons riding bicycles upon a street shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of streets set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian.
711.3 Operation of Bicycles. Every person operating a bicycle within the city limits shall be subject to the following conditions:
A No person shall ride any bicycle on the sidewalks adjacent to West Broadway from First Street (1st St.) west to Seventh Street (7th St.)
B Persons riding bicycles shall observe all traffic signs and stop at all stop signs.
C No bicycle shall be permitted on any sidewalk, street or other public highway of the City between thirty (30) minutes after sunset and thirty (30) minutes before sunrise unless there is firmly attached to the bicycle a headlight visible under normal atmospheric conditions from the front of the bicycle for not less than 300 feet and a yellow or red light or reflector attached to the rear and visible 200 feet in that direction. The headlight shall give a clear white light and shall be properly lighted during such hours of darkness.
D Every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any street or other public highway in the City shall observe all traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto. The rider shall turn only at intersections, signal for all turns, ride at the right side of the sidewalk, street or highway, pass to the left when passing overtaken vehicles and individuals, and shall pass to the right, vehicles and persons proceeding in the opposite direction.
E No person shall ride any bicycle on any sidewalk in the City Of Plainview, hereinafter described, viz: On Broadway between Fifth Street (5th St.) and Second Street (2nd St.) or on the sidewalks for one (1) block abutting this zone.
711.4 Penalty. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this Ordinance, is guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
712 ROLLER BLADES, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER SKIS, AND SKATEBOARDS
712.1 Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BUSINESS DISTRICT. That part of the City so designated by council resolution.
7-14
OPERATE. To ride on or upon or control the operation of roller blades, roller skates, or a skateboard.
OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of roller blades, roller skates, or a skateboard.
ROLLER BLADES/ROLLER SKATES. A shoe with wheels attached or a device with wheels
which is designed to be attached to a shoe.
ROLLER SKIS. A pair of skis platformed with wheels attached which is intended to simulate skiing.
SKATEBOARD. A device for riding-upon, usually while standing, consisting of an oblong piece of wood, or of other composition, mounted on skate wheels.
712.2 Unlawful Acts.
712.2.1 Prohibited Actions. It is unlawful for any person to operate roller blades, roller skates, roller skis or a skateboard under the circumstances set forth hereafter:
A On any public sidewalk, street, or public parking lot;
B On private property of another without the express permission to do so by the owner or occupant of the property; or
C In any careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger the safety of any person or property of any other person.
712.2.2 Additional Restrictions
A It is unlawful for any person operating roller blades, roller skates, roller skis or a skateboard to attach the same, or the person of the operator, to any vehicle upon a street.
B Every person operating roller blades, roller skates, roller skis or a skateboard upon a street shall ride as close as possible to the right-hand curb or edge of the street.
C Every person operating roller blades, roller skates, roller skis or a skateboard upon a street shall observe the same rules of the road as required of bicycles, pursuant to M.S.169.222.
712.3 Right of Way. The operator of roller blades, roller skates, roller skis or a skateboard shall yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the street shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the street.
712.4 Hours of Use. It is unlawful for any person to use roller blades, roller skates, roller skis or a skateboard upon a public street, sidewalk, or other roadway from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., except on private property with express permission of owner, and except if the roller blades, roller skates, roller skis, skateboard or operator are equipped with reflective surfaces that shall be visible during the hours of darkness from 600 feet when viewed in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. The reflective material shall be a minimum of 40 square inches. All reflective materials used in compliance with this section shall meet the requirements as prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
712.5 Violations. A person apprehended by a peace officer in violation of the provisions of this chapter does, by his or her use of the public sidewalks, streets, and public parking lots, consent to the impoundment by a police officer of the roller blades, roller skates, roller skis or skateboard for a period of three days upon a first offense, a week upon the second offense and 30 days upon a third or additional offense. Any operator aggrieved by the impoundment of his or her roller blades, roller skates roller skis or skateboard may petition the Council for a hearing thereon at the next regular Council meeting following
7-15
the impoundment. This provision is in addition to the provisions for fines and penalties as set forth in Section 100.
713 ABANDONED PROPERTY
713.1 Disposition of Abandoned Property.
713.1.1 Procedure. Except for abandoned and junked vehicles, all property lawfully coming into possession of the city shall be disposed of as provided in this section which is adopted pursuant to M.S. 471.195, as it may be amended from time to time. Abandoned and junked vehicles shall be disposed of according to the procedures of 713.2
713.1.2 Storage. The department of the city acquiring possession of the property shall arrange for its storage. If city facilities are unavailable or inadequate, the department may arrange for storage at a privately-owned facility.
713.1.3 Claim by owner. The owner may claim the property by exhibiting satisfactory proof of ownership and paying the city any storage or maintenance costs incurred by it. A receipt for the property shall be obtained upon release to the owner.
713.1.4 Sale. If the property remains unclaimed in the possession of the city for 60 days, the property shall be sold to the highest bidder at a public auction conducted by the City Clerk or his or her designee after two weeks' published notice setting forth the time and place of the sale and the property to be sold. If the property is deemed to be of nominal value ($100 or less), it may be disposed of in the most cost-effective method as determined by the appropriate department head.
713.1.5 Disposition of Proceeds. The proceeds of the sale shall be placed in the general fund of the city. If the former owner makes application and furnishes satisfactory proof of ownership within six months of the sale, the former owner shall be paid the proceeds of the sale of the property less the costs of storage and the proportionate part of the cost of published notice and other costs of the sale.
713.2 Finding and Purpose. M.S. Ch. 168B, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7035, as they may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference. Sections of this code are adopted under the authority of M.S. 168B.09, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time. If any of these provisions are less stringent that the provisions of M.S. 168B or Minn. Rules Ch. 7035, as it may be amended from time to time, the statute or rule shall take precedence.
714 FIRE HAZARDS AND FIRE PROTECTION
714.1 Uniform State Code Adopted. The State of Minnesota has adopted the International Fire Code as the official fire code of the State of Minnesota (hereinafter known as the State Fire Code). The State Fire Code, one copy of which has been marked as the official copy and which is on file in the office of the City Clerk, is hereby adopted as the Fire Code for the City of Plainview for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion is hereby adopted and made a part of this Ordinance as if fully set forth herein.
714.2 Enforcement. The Chief of the Fire Department serving the City or his representative authorized by him, shall enforce the provision of this Ordinance.
714.3 Inspection of Premises Authorized. The Fire Chief or other officer or member of the department designated by the Fire Chief shall make inspections of the properties for which permits have been issued in this City at periodic intervals and locate and report to the Council places where fire hazards exist and report and abate any conditions existing contrary to this Ordinance or the laws of the State.
714.4 Conditions Prohibited. No owner, agent or occupant of any building in the City shall allow any ashes, waste-paper, hay, straw, rags or other waste material of a combustible nature to
7-16
accumulate in the basement or on any floor of any building, or in any hallway, courtyard or alley adjoining any building owned, controlled or occupied by such person, except that hay and straw may be stored in buildings where livestock is housed. No such person shall permit to exist upon any premises as aforesaid any electric wiring or defective heating device or part thereof, including flues and chimneys of that character, or use or permit to exist on any premises, buildings or structures, or any portion thereof, which by reason of want of repairs, age, dilapidated condition or damage by fire, or any other cause, are especially liable to fire, or which are so situated or are in such condition as to endanger its occupants or persons therein, or the general public.
714.5 Access to Premises. For the purpose of making inspections, the Fire Chief or other properly designated officer shall have authority to enter any dwelling or other building and upon any premises in the City between the hours of 9:00 o'clock A.M. and 5:00 o'clock P.M. Such officer as aforesaid shall notify in writing persons violating the provisions of Section 718.2 hereof to correct any such condition found offensive to this Ordinance. Any such order concerning combustible materials shall be complied with within forty-eight (48) hours after service. Any such order concerning defective equipment or unsound construction shall be complied with within a reasonable time, and such notice shall specify such reasonable time. Upon failure to comply with any such notice, the same shall be reported to the City Council.
714.6 Establishment of Limits of Districts in Which Storage of Flammable or Combustible Liquids in Outside Aboveground Tanks is to be Prohibited. The limits referred to in Section 15.201 of the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, are hereby established as follows:
A R-1 - Single Family Residential
B R-2 - Multi-Family Residential
C C-1 - Central Business District
D C-2 - Service, Commercial
Flammable or combustible liquids stored in outside aboveground tanks which were in place at the time of adoption of this Ordinance may be continued, but only as a non-conforming use subject to the requirements set forth in Article IV, Sections 1, 2 and 3 of the Land Management Ordinances of the City of Plainview.
714.7 Establishment of Limits in Which Bulk Storage of Liquefied Petroleum Gases is to be Restricted. The limits referred to in Section 15.601 of the Minnesota State Fire Code, in which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited, are hereby established as follows:
A R-1 - Single Family Residential
B R-2 - Multi-Family Residential
C C-1 - Central Business District
D C-2 - Service, Commercial
E T - Transition District
714.8 New Materials, Processes or Occupancies Which May Require Permits. The Mayor and the Fire Chief shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said Code. The Chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
714.9 Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provision of this Code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who
7-17
shall build in violation of any detailed statement or specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed by a Court or competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and non-compliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not exceeding One Thousand and 00/100 Dollars ($1000.00) and by imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or ready such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
715 DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS
715.1 Purpose. Due to the inherent risks of fire and injury to persons and property associated with the sale, possession and use of fireworks, the city council has determined that it is necessary and in the interest of public health, safety and welfare to establish reasonable regulations concerning fireworks.
715.2 Definition.
Explosive Fireworks. For purposes of this section, "explosive fireworks" are defined as any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, and includes blank cartridges, toy cannons, and toy canes in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, daygo bombs, sparklers other than those meeting the definition of consumer fireworks, or other fireworks of like construction, and any fireworks containing any explosive or inflammable compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance and commonly used as fireworks.
Consumer Fireworks. For purposes of this section, "consumer fireworks" are defined as wire or wood sparklers of not more than 100 grams of mixture per item, other sparkling items which are non-explosive and non-aerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical mixture per tube or a total of 200 grams or less for multiple tubes, snakes, and glow works, smoke devices, or trick noisemakers, which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops, each consisting of not more than twenty- five hundredths grains of explosive mixture. Toy pistols, toy guns, in which paper caps containing 25/100 grains or less of explosive compound are used and toy pistol caps which contain less than 20/100 grains of explosive mixture are neither “explosive fireworks” nor “consumer fireworks”.
715.3 Sale, Use and Possession of Fireworks. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, use or possess explosive fireworks. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to use or possess consumer fireworks. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess consumer fireworks on public property. It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, or sell at retail or wholesale any consumer fireworks in the City of Plainview without a license.
715.4 License Application. The applicant shall completely fill out and submit an application form for a consumer fireworks license prepared by the City. Information to be submitted as part of the license application includes, but is not necessarily limited to the following information: name, address and telephone number of the applicant; address of location where the fireworks will be sold; a description of the fireworks to be sold; estimated quantity of the fireworks that will be stored on the premises; description of the premises and facility from which the fireworks are proposed to be sold;
7-18
approval of the property owner, if different from the applicant. Prior to the issuance of a license, the premises must be inspected and approved by the City fire code official.
715.5 Conditions of License. A license to sell consumer fireworks shall be issued subject to the following conditions:
A The license is non-transferable, either to a different person or location B The license must be publicly displayed on the licensed premises
C The premises are subject to inspection by City employees including police officers during normal business hours
E The premises for which a license will be issued must be located in a zoning
district permitting retail sales.
F Storage of consumer fireworks on the premises must be in compliance with the Uniform Fire Code
G The premises must be in compliance with the Uniform Fire Code and the Uniform Building Code.
H Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to persons under the age of 18
I Consumer fireworks shall not be used on public property
715.6 License Fee. The license fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. Licenses shall be issued for a calendar year and will not be prorated.
715.7 License Denial, Suspension and Revocation. A consumer fireworks license may be denied, suspended, or revoked in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section of the Plainview Code of Ordinances.
716 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
716.1 Purpose and Policy. Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado, blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in order to insure that preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with those disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary:
A To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for city planning and preparation for emergency government operations in time of disasters.
B To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and disasters.
C To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other political subdivisions of this state and of other states with respect to the carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions.
D To comply with the provisions of M.S. 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time, which requires that each political subdivision of the state shall establish a local organization for emergency management.
716.2 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to
7-19
property, and for which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.
EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado, and other acts of nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous material mishaps. These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services, police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning services, communications, radiological, and chemical, evacuation, congregate care, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions. Emergency management includes those activities sometimes referred to as “Civil Defense” functions.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in city-level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from city departments, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and agencies.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION. The staff responsible for coordinating city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This organization provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state, and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and assures implementation of federal and state program requirements.
716.3 Establishment of Emergency Management Organization. There is hereby created within the city government an emergency management organization which shall be under the supervision and control of the City Emergency Management Director, called the Director. The Director shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term and may be removed by the Council at any time. The Director shall serve with a stipend as established by the City Council and shall be paid his or her necessary expenses. The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency preparedness organization, subject to the direction and control of the Council.
716.4 Powers and Duties of Director.
716.4.1 Organization and Function. The Emergency Management Agency shall be organized into such divisions consistent with state and local defense plans as the Director deems necessary to provide for the efficient performance of local Emergency Management functions during an Emergency Management emergency. The agency shall perform Emergency Management functions within the City and in addition, shall conduct such functions outside the City as may be required pursuant to Minnesota Statutes.
716.4.2 Survey for Adequate Emergency Management. The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human resources, industries, resources, and facilities of the city as deemed necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster. The Director shall establish the economic stabilization systems and measures, service staffs, boards, and sub-boards required, in accordance with state and federal plans and directions subject to the approval of the Mayor.
716.4.3 Emergency Plan. The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the emergency preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the Council for its approval. When the Council has approved the plan, it shall be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness
7-20
forces of the city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time. The Director shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans of the federal government and the state and correlated with emergency plans of the county and other political subdivisions within the state.
716.4.4 Training Programs and Public Information. In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the Director shall institute training programs, public information programs and conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary to assure prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Plan when a disaster occurs.
716.4.5 Cooperation. The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment, supplies, and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all city departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and extend services and facilities to the city's emergency management organization and to the Governor upon request. The head of each department or agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the planning and programming of those emergency activities as will involve the utilization of the facilities of the department or agency.
716.4.6 Recruitment and Training. The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments and agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting, and training of emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to carry out the emergency plans of the city and state. To the extent that emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.
716.4.7 State Emergency Services Law. Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director shall coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations within the city and assist in establishing and conducting training programs as required to assure emergency operational capability in the several services as provided by M.S. 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.
716.4.8 Governor. The Director shall carry out all orders, rules, and regulations issued by the Governor with reference to emergency management.
716.4.9 Reports on Emergency Preparedness. The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency preparedness activities when requested by the City Council.
716.5 Local Emergencies.
716.5.1 Local Emergency Declaration. A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or her legal successor. It shall not be continued for a period in excess of three days except by or with the consent of the Council. Any order, or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
716.5.2 Response and Recovery. A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or inter-jurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance hereunder.
716.5.3 Jurisdictional and Inter-Jurisdictional Agencies. No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency functions. However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency shall provide aid and services in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.
716.6 Emergency Regulations.
716.6.1 Creation of Regulations. Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor or the Council, the Council may by resolution promulgate regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation, respecting: the conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health, fire, and safety regulations,
7-21
drills or practice periods required for preliminary training, and all other matters which are required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in declared emergencies.
716.6.2 Emergency Regulations to be in Writing Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing; shall be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. A copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business hours. Notice of the existence of these regulations and their availability for inspection at the City Clerk's Office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the city hall or other headquarters of the city or at other places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the resolution. By resolution, the Council may modify or rescind a regulation.
716.6.3 Rescinding Regulations. The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any time. If not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it relates, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule, or regulation inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during the period of time and to the extent conflict exists.
716.6.4 Contracts and Obligations. During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions of M.S. 12.31, as it may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding any statutory or Charter provision to the contrary, empowered, through its Council, acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by protecting the health and safety of persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster. The city may exercise these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds, including, but not limited to, publication of resolutions, publication of calls for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to low bids, and requirement for bids.
716.7 Emergency Management a Government Function. All functions and activities relating to emergency management are hereby declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under this resolution or under the worker's compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.
716.8 Participation in Labor Disputes or Politics. The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.
800 MICELLANEOUS
801-GENERAL FEES, FINES, CHARGES
Building Fees (Per MN Building Code) Includes $1.00 State Surcharge
Building Construction Permit Fee
40% of 1997 Code
*Building Demolition
$100.00
Sewer Access Charge (Per Dwelling Unit or Connection)
$1,000.00
Water Access Charge (Per Dwelling Unit or Connection)
$1,000.00
Water/Sewer Access Deposit (Refundable without interest)
$1,000.00
Reroof or Reside
$55.00
Windows/Doors (Exact replacements excluded)
$55.00
Please call City Hall to check if a permit is required
Reissue of Expired Permit
$50.00
Failure to Obtain Building Permit-1st Offense
$150.00, or a sum equal to two
times the building permit fee,
whichever is greater
2nd Offense
3 Times the permit fee
Structure Moving
$30.00
Fence
$20.00
Cement, Sidewalk, Driveway, Patio
$20.00
Furnace/Water Heater
$30.00
*$100.00 Refundable Deposit (WITHOUT Interest) when projects are completed within 180
days nd the final inspection is completed. Examples would be: Decks, New Garages, Additions,
Structure moving, and Demolition.
Miscellaneous Fees
A miscellaneous fee shall be paid by the applicant for expenses which the City incurs. Such expenses may include
but are not limited to, direct City payroll and overhead costs, costs of printing, mailing and supplies, and fees paid
to consultants/professionals. Such miscellaneous fees shall come due immediately upon notification by the City. Upon
request, the City shall provide a breakdown of the various expenses incurred by the City. The City may withhold any
final action and/or rescind prior actions until all miscellaneous fees are paid in full. The City may request additional
deposits if deemed necessary.
CEMETERY FEES
Cemetery Lot Purchase (1 Gravesite)
$300.00
Cemetery Perpetual Care (1 Gravesite)
$100.00
Grave Opening (WITH Frost)*
Regular Burial
$560.00
Cremation Vault Size
$300.00
Grave Opening (WITHOUT Frost)*
Regular Burial
$450.00
Cremation Vault Size
$250.00
*On Sundays and Holidays, the cost increases by $85.00
FIRE FEES
Fire/Emergency Call (First Hour of Service)
$700.00 plus $15/hr/man
Every Hour Thereafter
$250.00/hr plus $15/hr/man
Extrication/Rescue Call
$700.00 plus $15/hr/man
False Alarms/Cancellation enroute
$250.00
Recharge/SCBA Foam
$110.00/unit, plus $8 per bottle of air
Emergency Water Delivery
$90.00/load, plus $20 labor/load
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
Bingo License
$150.00
Dance Permit
$25.00
Dog License
$15.00
Cigarette License
$75.00
Faxing
$2.00 for 1st page, $1/per page add'l
Copies
$0.25 per page (Black and White)
$0.50 per page (Color)
License for Sale of Fireworks
$100.00
Gaming Device/Raffle/Bingo
No Charge
Insufficient Funds (NSF) Check
$30.00
Loudspeaker Permit
$10.00
Refuse Collector License
$500.00
Transient Sales
$30.00
Research*
$100.00
*Fee to be paid before the start of the research and any additional expenses that are incurred will be due
upon completion of the project.
LIQUOR FEES
Beer, Off-Sale
$100.00
Beer, On-Sale
$125.00
Liquor, Club On-Sale
$500.00
Liquor Temporary On-Sale
$50.00
Liquor, On-Sale
$1,500.00
Liquor, Sunday
$200.00
Wine License
$75.00
LIBRARY FEES
Library Card Replacement
$3.00
2nd Notice Fee
$1.00/per item
Photocopies/Computer Printout (BW)
$0.20
Photocopies/Computer Printout (Color)
$0.50
PARK FEES
Field Rental (Per Day)
$30.00
Field Rental (Per Season)
$50.00 plus field maintenance costs
Park Shelter Reservation
$30.00
Picinic Table Rental
$15.00 for first table, plus $10 for
each additional table.
POLICE FEES
Animal Impound Fee Per Day
$25.00
Pick up fee for Animals and Licensed Dogs
$50.00
Pick up fee for Unlicensed Dogs
$150.00
Copies of Police Reports (Pictures)
$0.25 per page
(Up to 100-Actual cost > 100)
Copes of Police Reports (Text)
$0.25 per page
CD Pictures
$15.00
Recreation Vehicle License
$10.00
Golf Cart License
$10.00
Parking Ticket
$25.00
Winter Parking Ticket
$100.00
POOL FEES
Daily Admission
$5.00/day, $3.00 afternoon, $2.00 evening
Family Membership
$130.00
Single Membership
$80.00
Pool Rental (Up to 25 persons)
$80.00
Pool Rental (Over 25 persons)
$80.00, plus $2/person over 25
Pool Lessons (Level I-IV)
$30.00
Toddler
$30.00
Lifeguard Training (Plus Extra for Materials and Book Costs)
$110.00
Adult Lessons
$30.00
Aerobics
$25.00 Punch Card (non-refundable)
AM/PM Aerobics
$2.50/Session
PLANNING AND ZONING FEES
Annexation Petition Filing * **
$200.00
Conditional Use Permit
$200.00
Plat, General Subdivsion Plan* **
$200.00 plus $10 per lot
Plat, Preliminary Subdivision Plan* **
$350.00 plust $10 per lot
Plat, Final Subdivision Filing*
$600.00 plust $15 per lot
Rezoning Petition
$200.00
Variance
$200.00
*Applicant must also pay the cost of public hearing notices, all other miscellaneous administrative fees and other government
requirements such as environmental assessments or stormwater evaluations.
** Applicant to reimburse city for engineering incurred for plan review.
PUBLIC WORKS FEES
Air Compressor and Person
$80.00 / hour
Brush Site Fee
Pickup/Trailer-up to 8' Box or Bed
$15.00
Two-Ton Truck or Larger Trailer
$30.00
Trucks 15 Yards and Over
$50.00
Lawn Mower and Person
$75.00 / hour
Snow Removal and Person
$75.00 / hour
Loader and Person
$100.00 / hour
Street Excavation Fee
$40.00
Street Sweeper and Person
$100.00 / hour
Trimmer and Operator
$35.00 / hour
Truck and Person
$95.00 / hour
SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Small Cell Wireless Permit Application
$500.00 for up to 5 Small Wireless Facilities
$100.00 for each additional Facility
Small Wireless Facitliy ROW Access Fee
$270.00 / year for each Small Wireless Facility
802 UTILITY FEES
WATER RATES
RESIDENTIAL NEW CONSTRUCTION
Monthly Base Fee
$13.89
Unit Rate per 1000 gallons
0-5000 gallons used
$2.10
5,001-10,000 gallons used
$2.26
10,001-15,000 gallons used
$2.47
15,001-20,000 gallons used
$2.71
20,001+ gallons used
$2.93
Residential new construction customers will not pay
any sewer charges until construction is complete.
RESIDENTIAL
Monthly Base Fee
$13.89
Unit Rate per 1000 gallons
0-5000 gallons used
$2.10
5,001-10,000 gallons used
$2.26
10,001-15,000 gallons used
$2.47
15,001-20,000 gallons used
$2.71
20,001+ gallons used
$2.93
COMMERCIAL
Monthly Base Fee
$16.98
Unit Rate per 1000 gallons
0-5000 gallons used
$2.10
5,001-10,000 gallons used
$2.26
10,001-15,000 gallons used
$2.47
15,001-20,000 gallons used
$2.71
20,001+ gallons used
$2.93
INDUSTRIAL
Monthly Base Fee
$81.40
Unit Rate per 1000 gallons
1,000-1,000,000 gallons used
$2.08
1,000,001-2,000,000 gallons used
$2.25
2,000,001-3,000,000 gallons used
$2.35
3,000,001-4,000,000 gallons used
$2.42
4,000,001+ gallons used
$2.47
SEWER RATES
MONTHLY BASE RATES
Meter Size
.75 and 1.0
$38.08
$1.50
$103.36
2"
$163.20
3"
$286.13
4"
$456.93
6"
$834.64
UNIT RATE PER 1000 GALLONS
$2.62
INDUSTRIAL SEWER CHARGES
Unit Rate Flow/MG
$807.07
Unit Rate BOD/100 lb
$39.41
Unit Rate SS/100 lb.
$38.33
GENERAL UTILITY FEES
Compost
$0.50/month
Stormwater Pond
$0.25/month
Water Reconnect-Delinquent
$120.00
Water, Bulk Rate
$0.01/gallon
Street Reconstruction Fee
$10.09/month
Sidewalks
$1.75/month
MN State Drinking Water Fee
$0.81/month
(This fee is listed as St. Chg on the water bills. The State collects this fee)