ORDINANCE NO. 1



AN ORDINANCE REGULATING PROCEEDINGS OF THE VILLAGE COUNCIL.

The Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs do ordain as follows:

SECTION 1.	REGULAR MEETINGS.

Regular meetings of the Village Council shall be held at such place in the Village as may be designated by resolution of the Council on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of each month at eight o'clock p. m. except when such day shall be a legal holiday when a regular meeting	shall be held on the first succeeding business day.

SECTION 2.	SPECIAL MEETINGS.

Special meetings of the Village Council may be called at the direction of the Mayor, or by request of any two trustees in writing	filed with the Clerk.	All members of
the Council shall be	easonably	notified of every such special meeting by the Mayor or the clerk.	Notice may be in person,
by telephone or by mail.	Any member of the Council not
present at a special meeting	shall be deemed to have waived notice thereof unless at the regular council meeting at which the minutes of said special meeting are read he shall notify the Council that he failed to receive seasonable notice of
the meeting.	In such event all proceedings of said special meeting shall be deemed valid	except those matters	specifically objected	to by such absent member at said time, which matters shall thereupon be reconsidered.

SECTION 3.	ORDER OF BUSINESS AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.

No specified order of business shall be required at Village Council meetings.	Business of the Council shall be taken up
in such order as the Mayor shall determine, unle9s the members
shall determine otherwise by motion.

SECTION I+.	BUSINESS NOT ACTED UPON AUTOMATICALLY	TABLED.

Any business brought before the Council, including hearings and matters adjourned or ref erred	to a specified meeting, and
not disposed of by motion or resolution or postponed	to a
definite date shall be deemed	indefinitely tabled and may be
acted upon at any subsequent meeting held within the same calendar year at which all members of the Council are present.

SECTI'ON 5.	COMMITTEES.

As soon as practicable after the first meeting	in each
year, the Mayor, with the approval of the Council, shall appoint
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1 (CON'T)


a member or members of thP Council to serve on the following
standing committees, which are hereby establisned:

Streets
Welfare and Ht-alth
F·inance


Persons serving on such committees shall familiarize themselves with	the operations or functions of the Village indicated	in the name of the particular committee	They shall sup rvise details of operation of the Village depart­
ments or functions so indicated; and they shall keep the Council advised of operations under their supervision, and shall bring before the Council all matters requiring the Council's
direction or authorization.

SECTION 6.	ROLL CALL VOTE

Roll call vote shall not be required	on matters before the Council unless demanded	by a member of the Council or required by the laws of the State of Minnesota; provided
that vote on verified	claims for payment of money shall be by roll call.

SECTION 7.	GENERAL RULES OF ORDER

The Village Council shall proceed	in accordance with Roberts Rules of Parliamentary Procedure, but no action of the Village Council, or any member	thereof shall be deemed invalid because not in conformity with such rules unless at the time the action is taken or promptly	thereafter a member of the Council or any person interested		therein shall object to the method	of procedure and point out to the Council the particular rule which it is claimed was not observed.

SECTION 8.	MOTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS

Motions shall be set down in writing by the Clerk in
his minutes and read by him before being submitted	to a vote by the Mayor.	Resolutions shall be in writing when presented to the Village Council for vote, and shall be preserved	by
the Clerk, indexed as to meeting dates unless copies in full in his minutes.

SECTION 9.	ORDINANCES

Ordinances shall be in writing when presented	to the Village Council for a vote.	Before an ordinance is submitted to a vote of the Council for final adoption if requested	by any member of the Council, or other person present, it shall be read	in full by   the Clerk and persons present shall be
given an opportunity to be heard on the merits of the ordinance.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1 (CON'T)




SECTION 10.

This ordin nce shall take effect from and after its publication.

·Adopted by the Village Council October 4, 1960.
·otto F.  Kirch Mayor

Attest:

 Robert J. Mccallum 	

Clerk
 
ORDI.NANCL    NO.	2



AN   0 RD INAN CE   REL AT I NC   T 0  M 1S D EM EA N < >  R '.·;  , H R EA C 11 E S   0 F   P EA C E
AND DTSOHDERLY CONDUCT.

The Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs ordains: SECTION 1.
Any person who shall hereafter be found lurking, lying in
wait, or concealed in any house or other building or in any yard, premises or street within the limits of the Village of Pine Springs with intent to do any mischief or to pilfer or
to commit any crime or misdemeanor whatever shall upon convic­
tion thereof be punished by a fine not exceeding $100 or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety	(90) days.

SECTION 2.

Any person or persons who shall make, aid, countenance or assist in making any noise, riot, disturbance ·or improper diversion and all persons who shall collect in bodies of
crowds in said Village for unlawful purposes or to the annoy­
ance or disturbance of the citizens or travelers shall for each offense on conviction thereof be punished by fine or imprisonment as provided	in Section 1 of this ordinance.

SECTION 3.

Any person who shall be found in a state of open or notorious drunkenness or intoxication in any street or public place within the limits of the Village of Pine Springs shall on conviction thereof be punished	by fine or imprisonment
as provided	in Section 1 of this ordinance.

SECTION 4.

	No person shall in any street or public	or exposed place
in	said Village indecently expose his or her	person or commit
any obscene, filthy, or lewd act or speak any indecent, lewd
or immoral language. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be liable upon conviction thereof to the punishment provided under Section 1 of this ordinance.

ECTION 5.

Any person who shall wilfully trespass upon the property of another and maliciously	damage any property	thereon shall on conviction thereof be punished by fine or imprisonment as provided by Section 1 of this ordinance.
 
ORDINANCE NO, 2 (CON'T)



SECTION 6.

This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its publication.

Adopted by the Village Council October 4, 1960.


Otto F. Kirch


Mayor Attest
Robert J. McCallum 	

Clerk
 
ORDINA ;CE   NO.	3



AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO PREVENTION OF FIRES AND PROVIDING A SERVICE CHARGE FOR FIRE DEPARTMENT CALLS.

Whereas, the Village Council has entered	into a contract with	the Village of Lake Elmo for furnishing its fire equip­ ment and personnel for the purpose of extinguishing	fires within the Village of Pine Springs at sti ulated rates to be paid by the Village to said Village of Lake Elmo for use of such equipment and personnel, and the Village Council deem it expedient to prevent, control and extinguish fires that provision be hereby made authorizing	the fire department of
the Village of Lake Elmo to enter upon private property within the Village of	Pine Springs for the purpose of extinguishing fires and obligating owners of property	involved within the
Village to pay the service charges	of	said	Village	of Lake
Elmo in case of fire, therefore,			·	

The Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs ordains:

SECTION 1.

The officers and employees and any members of a volunteer fire department of the Village of	Lake Elmo are hereby authorized to enter upon private property within the Village of Pine Springs for the purpose of extinguishing any fire in response to call.

SECTION 2.

In the event that the fire department of the Village of Lake Elmo shall respond to a call to extinguish a fire within the Village of Pine Springs and the Village of Pine Springs shall become liable to the Village of Lake Elmo for any service charge under its existing contract with the Village
of Lake Elmo, the owner or owners of property on which such fire occurs shall be obligated to reimburse the Village of
Pine Springs for such sum as the Village of Pine Springs shall be obligated under said contract to pay to the Village of Lake Elmo.	This provision shall apply with equal effect to any modifications or extension of said contract with the Village
of Lake Elmo or any contract hereafter entered into a substitu­ tion for said existing contract.	Any said sum due from property owners in said Village shall be due and payable	30 days after notice thereof specifying the amount chargeable, which notice
is to' be given in writing by the Village Clerk.

SECTION 3.

In th event that the Village Council shall determine that property	in the vicinity of a fire has been protected	or saved from damage by  the Lake Elmo fire department, the Village Council may allocate such portion of the cost of the service
 
ORDINANCE NOo	3 (CON'T)



charge made by the Village of Lake Elmo for such fire call to such property in the vicinity of the fire on such basis as it shall deem fair and just, and the owner or owners of
such property	shall be obligated	to reimburse the Village of Pine Springs for such sum as the Village Council shall allocate to such property, same to be payable as prescribed
in Section 2 hereof.	·

 
SECTION 4.	PENALTY FOR FALSE ALARM
 
,_  .
 

Any person who violates	the provisions of this ordinanc by falsely reporting a fire shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than One Hundred	($100) dollars or imprisonment of not more than thirty	(30) days
or botho

SECTION 5.


This ordinance shall take effect from and after its publication.


Adopted	by the Village Council October 4, 1960.

Otto F. Kirch Mayor

Attest:


Robert	I	McCallpm

Clerk
 
 

ORDINANCE NO. 3A


AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 3 RELATING TO FIRE PROTECTION, AND PROVIDING FOR PAYMENT AND COLLECTION OF CHARGES FOR PROVIDING FIRE DEPARTMENT SERVICE.

The Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs does hereby ordain as follows:

SECTION 1.

The wording "Village of Lake Elmo" and "Lake Elmo Fire Department" is amended to read Contract Fire Department.

SECTION 2.

The section numbered 2 in Ordinance No. 3 is hereby amended by adding to the end of said Section 2 the following new language:

"If any property owner billed	for fire service charges under the provisions of this ordinance fails to make payment as billed, the Clerk of the Village shall, no later than October 1st following such billing, certify to the County Auditor the amount of such fire service bill and the said
amount so certified shall be added to the property owners taxes
for the ensuing year and shall be collected in the same manner as taxes are collected.	Any money so collected by the
County Treasurer, together with the payment of the owner's taxes, shall remit to the Village the amount so certified by the Village Clerk and collected with the taxes.	Whenever
any fire service charge is certified by the Village Clerk
to the County Auditor	for collection pursuant hereto, the Clerk shall provide with such certification a certified copy of Section 2 of Ordinance No. 3 as hereby amended."

SECTION 3.

This ordinance shall take effect from and after passage and publication as   provided by statute.

Passed by the Council of the Village of Pine Springs this 7 day of	July, 1970.



Paul Linnerooth

Mayor Attest:
R. G. Zietlow



Clerk
 
ORDINANCE NO. q


AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE USE OF HIGHWAYS WITHIN THE VILLAGE OF PINE SPRINGS, MINNESOTA, INCORPORATING PROVISIONS OF THE STATE HIGHWAY TR.AFFI C REGULATION ACT BY REFERENCE, AND IMPOS ING
 
A PENA.LTY.
 
FOR THE VIO. LATION THEREOF.
 

The council of the Village of Pine Springs do ordain as follows:

SECTION 1.	HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATION ACT INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.

The regulatory provisions of Minnesota	Statutes 1957, Chapter 169, as amended by Laws 1959, are hereby adopted as a traffic ordinance regulating the use of highways, streets and alleys within the Village of Pine Springs and are hereby
incorporated	in and made a part of this ordinance as completely as if set out here in full.

SECTION 2.	PENALTY.

Any violation of the	tatutes adopted by reference in Section 1 is a violation of this ordinance when it occurs within the Village of Pine Springs.	Any person thus violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misde­ meanor and shall be punished	by a fine of not to exceed One Hundred Dollars	($100.00) or by imprisonment in the city (village or country) jail for a period	of not to exceed ninety
(90) days; but if a minimum	fine or imprisonment is prescribed
by the state highway traffic act for an offense, such penalty
shall apply to a   person convicted of the same offense under
this ordinance.

Passed this 4th day of April, 1961.
Otto F. Kirch Mayor

Attest:

Robert J. McCallum 	

Clerk
 

\_I
 
ORDINANCE NO. 4-A


AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 4 REGULATING THE OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES UPON THE STREETS AND HIGHWAYS OF THE VILI AGE OF PINE SPRINGS, WASHINGTON COUNTY, MINNESOTA, PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES  FOR  VIOLATION  THEREOF.

The Village Council of the Village of Pine.Springs does ordain: SECTION 1.	REGULATION OF OPERATION.
Except for Sections 169.10, 169.11, 169.66, 169.98,
Minnesota Statutes 1967, Chapter 169, known as the Highway Traffic Regulation Act as amended by the Laws 1967 and M.S.A.
171.2	and M.S.A. 171.22 are hereby adopted as a traffic regulations ordinance of the Village of Pine Springs, Washington County, Minnesota.	Every provision contained	in said statutes
is hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance by reference as if fully set forth herein.

SECTION 2.	EFFECTIVE DATE.	This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and publi­ cation according to law.

Passed by the Village Council this 8 day of October, 1968.


Paul Linnerooth

Mayor Attest:
R. G. Zietlow
 



Clerk









 



 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 4-B


AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 4 AND ORDINANCE NO. 4-A RELATING TO  OPERATION  OF  MOTOR VEllICLES UPON   THE   STREETS AND HIGHWAYS OF   THE.  VILLAGE OF   PINE   SPRINGS,   WASHINGTON	COUNTY, MINNESOTA, PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION THEREOF.

The Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs does hereby ordain as follows:

SECTION 1.

Section 1 of Ordinance No. 4-A is hereby amended	to read as follows:

"Section 1.	The highway	traffic regulatory provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 169 as amended by Laws of 1969, are hereby adopted as traffic ordinance regulating the use of highways, streets and alleys within the Village of Pine Springs.	The sections of Minnesota Statutes herein
referred to and the provisions thereof are hereby incorporated and made part of the ordinances of the Village of Pine Springs as completely as if set out in full."

SECTION 2.

Section 2   of Ordinance No. 4   is hereby amended to read as follows:

"Section 2,	Penalty.	Any violation of		the statutes adopted by reference in Section 1 is a violation of this ordinance when it occurs within the Village of Pine Springs. Any person thus violating any provision of	this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor	and shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) or by· imprisonment in the city	(village or county) jail for a period of not to exceed ninety	(90) days; but if a minimum fine or imprisonment is prescribed by the state highway traffic act
for an offense, such penalty shall apply to a person convicted
of the same offense under this ordinance."

SECTION 3.

This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from
and after its passage and publication as provided by   statute.
'
Passed by the Council of the Village of Pine Springs
this  7   day of Oct., 1969.

Paul Linnerooth

'-)	Mayor

Attest:
R. G. Zietlow
 
ORDH ANCE     NO.	r::

 
\_'
 

AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE LOCATION, SIZE, ANO USES OF BUILDINGS, THE ARRANGEMENT OF BUILDINGS ON LOTS AND THE USES OF LAND WITHIN THE VILLAGE OF PINE SPRINGS, AND PROVIDING FOR ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT AND IMPOSING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.

The Council of the Village of Pine Springs do ordain as follows:

SECTION 1.	TITLE.

This o_J'-d_inance shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of Pine Springs.

SECTION 2.	PURPOSE.

The regulations established	hereby have been made in accordance with a plan of land uses whose purpose is to protect	the health, safety, order, convenience and general
welfare and have been made with consideration of the character of the village area and its suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and land and incorporating the most appropriate use of land throughout the village.	All incorporated territory of the Village of
Pine Springs is hereby determined	to be Residential - Agricul­
tural in character.

SECTION 3.	RESIDENTIAL-AGRICULTURAL	DISTRICT ESTABLISHED.

All incorporated	territory of the Village of Pine Springs is hereby designated	as a Residential-Argricultural	district.

SECTION 4.	REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL - ARGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.

Subdivision 1. Use Regulations.

In the Residential - Agricultural	district no building
or premises shall be used, and no building shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, except for one or more of the following uses.

1.	One-family dwellings and their accessory building.
2.	Farming or other agricultural purposes.
3.	Nothing	in this ordinance shall be deemed to prohibit the construction or maintenance of any attractive stand or shelter for the sale of agricultural products produced on
the premises.
 

QRD! ANCE NO. 5 (CON'T)



S u b d 1 v i. :·;in n	2 •	Area   Regulations.

In the Residential - Agricultural district every building designed for the housing of one family together with accessory buildings shall be located on a building site having an area
of not less th n one acre, excluding water or swamp area
subjected to flooding.	Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than twenty - five (25)  feet and two side yards
of not less than twenty	(20) feet on each.side of the buildings.
On a corner lot abutting on two streets, the yards adjacent to the streets shall be not less than twenty-five	(25)	feet.

Subdivision 3.

Private single family dwellings shall have a floor area of not less than 800 square feet.

SECTION 5.	NON-CONFORMING USES.

Subdivision 1.

Any non-conforming use, except as provided herein, now in operation may be continued, except that any non-conforming use or building may not be:

1.	Changed to another non-conforming	use.

2.	Re-established	after discontinuance for more than one year.

SECTION 6.	ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS.

Subdivision 1.

The Village Council shall have the power to make adjust­ ments and exceptions to any of the provisions of this ordinance to the extent of the following and no further:

1.	To vary or modify	the strict application of any of the regulations or provisions contained	in this ordinance in cases in which there are practical difficulties in the way of such strict application.

2.	To permit public utility or public service uses or public buildings to be located	in any district when found to be necessary for the public health, safety, convenience or welfare.

Before making its decision upon any application for such adjustments or exceptions, the Village Council shall hold a public hearing thereon and shall thereafter make its decision. If the application is denied, no further action shall be taken
 
ORDINANCE NO. 5 (CONtT)



up on it, but if the Village Council believes that the applica­ tion  should  be   granted,	the Village  Council	shall   hy    resolution either  grant or  deny   such  applicatio11,	an<l	it may   attach  to  the grant  of	the application such conditions and guarantees as it may deem necessary	to carry out the purpose of this ordinance.

Subdivision 2.

The Village Council shall not grant any application unless they find from evidence submitted by the applicant, the following facts:

1.	That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land, building or use referred to in the application.

2.	That the granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights.

3.	That the granting of the application will not materially affect adversely the health or safety of persons residing or working	in the neighborhood	of the property of	the applicant
and will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood.

SECTION 7.	SPECIAL USE PERMITS.

Subdivision 1.

Special use permits may be issued for any of the following.

1.	Any	of	the uses or purposes for which	such permits
are required	or	permitted by  the provisions of	this ordinance.

2.	Public utility or public	service uses, or public building, in any district when found to be necessary for the public health, safety, convenience or welfare.

3.	Commercial excavating of natural materials used for building or construction purposes, in any district.

Subdivision 2.

Application for the issuance of special use permit shall be made to the Village Council and procedure shall thereafter be the same as for adjustments and exceptions, as in this ordinance provided.

SECTION 8.	AMENDMENTS.

This ordinance may be amended only by a two-thirds vote
of the Village Council after a public hearing on such amendment has been duly advertised and held.	Proceedings for such
 
ORDINANCE NO. 5 (CON'T)




amendment may be initiated by	(1)  the Village Council, (2)
the verified	petition of not less than fifty percent	(50%)
of those property owners within five hundred	(500) feet of the
proposed change."

SECTION 9.	ENFORCEMENT.

Subdivision 1.	It shall be the duty cif the building inspector to enforce the provisions	of this ordinance.

Subdivision 2.	It shall be the duty of the building inspector to determine, before any building permit is issued under Ordinance No. 6 (Building Code), that the provisions
of this ordinance are fully complied with.

SECTION 10.	PENALTIES.

Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor	and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed One Hundred Dollars	($100.00) or by imprisonment for not to exceed ninety	(90)   days for each offense.	Each day that a violation	is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.

SECTION 11.

This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication.

Passed by the Village Council this 6 day of June, 1961.
Otto F. Kirch Mayor

Attest:

Robert J. Mccallum 	 Clerk
 
ORDINANCE NO. 6


AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR FIRE LIMITS, AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, REMOVAL, DEMOLITION,
EQUIPMENT	USE	AND OCCUPANCY, LOCATION	AND MAINTENANCE OF
BUILDINGS	AND	STRUCTURES.	

Be it ordained by the Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs:

SECTION 1.	ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.

There is hereby adopted by	the Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance	of buildings and structures, including permits
and penalties, that certain building code known as the
National Building Code, Abbreviated	Edition, recommended by
the National Board of Fire Underwriters, being particularly
the 1955 edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except
such portions as are hereinafter	deleted, modified	or amended, of which not less  than three (3)  copies have been and now are filed in the off ice of the Clerk of the Village of Pine Springs and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as
if set out at length herein, and from the date on which	chis
ordinance shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be
controlling in the construction of	all buildings and other
structures within the corporate limits of the Village of Pine Springs.

SECTION 2.	ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.

(a)	The office of	building official is hereby created and the executive official in charge shall be known as the building official.

(b)	The building	official shall be appointed by the
Village Council of	the Village of Pine Springs.	His appointment
shall continue during good  behavior and satisfactory service.
He shall not be remov d from office except for cause after full opportunity has  been given him to be  heard on specific
charges.

(c)	During temporary absence or disability of the building official the appointing authority shall designate an acting building official.

SECTION 3.	DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.


                                           It shall be the duty of the building official to  enforce all laws relating to the construction,alteration,  removal,
and demolition of buildings and structures.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 6	(CQN'T)



SECTION 4	RIGHT OF EKTRY.

The building  official,	in  the di.scht-irge  of	his official
duties,	and uppn proper	Jdenti.ftcation,	;hall have Huthority
to   enter   any   bu	1ding, structure or  premises at any r (' n son ah l e
hour.

SECTION 5.	BUILDING PERMITS.

No person may erect or demolish any structure of any kind
or add to the outside dimensions thereof, nor relocate any building
already constructed or which may hereafter be constructed
when the work is to cost Five Hundred	($500.00) or more without
first procuring	from the clerk a permit to do so before such work is commenced.		The application	for the permit shall state the exact site to be occupied, the material, dimensions, and estimated cost of	the proposed	structure, the purpose for which the same is to be occupied and the probable time when the work will be completed.			Such application shall show affirmatively and in detail that all work will comply with every provision
of the ordinances of the municipality.

SECTION 6.	FEE FOR PERMIT.

The fees for building permits shall be One Dollar	($1.00) if the cost of the work is not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) and if the cost of the work is to exceed One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) the fee shall be One Dollar	($1.00)
plus Twenty-five Cents ($.25) for each additional thousand
dollars.

SECTION 7.	PENALTY.

Any building altered or erected		in violation of this ordinance shall be removed or made to conform thereto.	Tne erection or alteration hereafter of	any building	in viola­ tion thereof shall be a  misdemeanor, and any person convicted thereof shall be fined by a  fine of not less than One Dollar ($1.00) nor more than One Hundred Dollars	($100.00) and
costs of	prosecution, and shall be confined to the country
jail until such payment is made for a period of not to exceed ninety	(90)   days in any case.

SECTION 8.	DEFINITIONS.

(a)	Wherever	the word	"Municipality" is used	in the building code, it shall be held	to mean the Village of Pine Springs.

(b)	Wherever the term "Corporation Counsel" is used
in the building code, it shall be held	to mean the Attorney for the Village of Pine Springs.


 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 6 (CON'T)



SECTION 9.	FIRE LIMITS ESTABLISHED.

The fire iimits of the Village of Pine Springs are hereby established	as all areas within the Village of Pine
Springs which are now, or may hereafter be, zoned as Residential,
Commercial or Industrial under the Zoning Code	of the Village
of Pine Springs.

SECTION 10.	SAVING CLAUSE.

Nothing in this ordinance or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed	to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, nor any cause or causes of action accrued or existing under
any act or ordinance repealed hereby.	Nor shall any right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance.

SECTION 11.	VALIDITY.

The invalidity of any section or provision of this ordinance or of the code hereby adopted shall not invalidate other sections or provisions thereof.

SECTION 12.	DATE OF EFFECT.

This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication.

Adopted	by	the Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs, this 11 day of July, 1961.


Otto F. Kirch


Mayor Attest:
Robert J. McCallum 	

Clerk
 
ORDINANC:    NO.	7


AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE SETTING AND CONTROLLING OF THE FIRES WITHIN THE VILLAGE OF PINE SPRINGS.

The Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs, Washington County, Minnesota does ordain:

Whereas, indiscriminate and careless setting of grass and other fires and failure to control them endangers the safety of persons and property.

Section 1.

a)	No person shall start or allow to burn any outdoor fire for any purpose during any period which the Village Council has designated as hazardous.

b)	The Village Council may designate a period as hazardous for outdoor fires by resolution which shall be published	in the manner prescribed	by law.

c)	During such hazardous periods no outdoor burning shall be done unless a permit has first been obtained from the Mayor, Village Clerk or trustee of the Village.	The applicant shall furnish, and the permit shall show, the applicant's name and address and the name and address of the owner of the property where the burning is proposed, street address and legal description of such property, and the day and time of the proposed burning.	No fire shall be started
or continued at such times or in such places as to constitute
a menace or danger to the property or safety of persons starting the fire or adjacent	thereto.

Section 2.

Except when burning	is prohibited	without a permit as designated	in Section 1 hereof any person starting or allowing to burn any fire shall follow the rules set forth below.

a)	Ordinary rubhish burning on residential property
must be done in a burner which is so constructed	as to prevent flying ashes or embers, and wire type burners are not authorized.
Such burners shall be  located on the owner's land so as not
to constitute a menace or a nuisance to adjoining property owners, and such burners shall be used only at reasonable times and in reasonable manner.

b)	Any outdoor fire not in an incinerator, once kendled, must be  kept under immediate personal and constant super­ vision and control of	the person starting such fire until it
is extinguished.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 7 (CON'T)




c)	No leaves or other combustible material shall be burned nor shall any fires be started on the s rf ace of any bituminous, asphalt or oiltreated roadway at any time.

d)	No fire of any kind shall be started or continued
at such times or in such places as to constitute a menace or danger to the property of others or to the property of the person starting such fire.

Section 3.

Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor	punishable by a fine of
not less than Five Dollars ($5.00) nor more than One Hundred
Dollars	($100.00) or imprisonment up to 30 days or both.

Section 4.

This ordinance shall take effect and force from and after its passage and publication.

Passed by	the Village Council of Pine Springs, this 2nd day of April, 1963.


Stanley Herlick



Mayor Attest:

Richard Zietlow 	

Clerk



















\.....,_  .i
 
ORDINANCE NO. 8


AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 5 OF THE VILLAGE OF PINE SPRINGS AND REQUIRING	ISSUANCE OF A SPECIAL USE PERMIT FOR INSTALLATION OF TRANMISSION LINE, PIPES AND CONDUITS BY PUBLIC UTILITIES	IN THE VILLAGE OF PINE SPRINGS, WASHINGTON COUNTY, MINNESOTA, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.

The Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs, Washington County, Minnesota, does ordain:

Section 1.

Section 7, Subdivision 2 of Ordinance No. 5 of the Village of Pine Springs shall be amended	to add the following:

"Section 7, Subdivision 2.	Public utility or public service uses, or public building	in any district when found
to be necessary	for the public health, safety, convenience or welfare.	Lines, pipes or conduits for the transmission of electrical energy, gas, petroleum products or sound by public utilities shall be classified	as a special use in all districts and application for a special use permit shall be made pursuant to the procedure set forth herein before installation of the same.

"Such application shall show the proposed	location and construction specification of the proposed	installation.

"Location of such installation shall insofar as reasonably possible be made in such a manner to minimize interference with the present use and future development of properties affected
by such installation."

Section 2.

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and publication according to law.

Passed by the Village Council this 5th day of July, 1966.
Donald L. Kirch Acting Mayor

Attest:


 Richard Zietlow 	

Clerk
 
ORDINANCE NO. 9


AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE POSSESSION AND USE OF FIREARMS
AND WEAPONS IN THE   VILLAGE OF PINE SPRINGS, WASHINGTON COUNTY,
MINNESOTA AND PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION THEREOF.

The Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs, Washington County, doe ordain:

SECTION 1.	UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.

Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge a firearm of any kind within the limits of the Village of Pine Springs.

SECTION 2.	CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.

No person within the limits of the Village of Pine Springs shall have concealed about his person any pistol,
dagger, or knuckles of lead, brass or other metal, Bowie knife, Dirk knife, switch blade, razor or any sort or description of firearm or any dangerous or deadly weapons unless said person is an authorized	law enforcement officer or has a valid permit issued by Village Council.

SECTION 3.	POSSESSION BY MINOR.

It	shall be unlawful for a minor under the age of 18  to have in his possession any uncased	firearm beyond the presence
of a   parent or guardian within the Village of Pine Springs.	The
police officers of	the Village may confiscate any such weapon
found on any minor but shall return the weapon to the parent or guardian of said minor upon request.

SECTION 4.	ACTS PROHIBITED.

It  shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts:

1)	Recklessly handle or use a gun or other dangerous weapon or explosive so as to endanger the safety of another or destroy or harm public or private property.

2)	Intentionally point a gun of any kind capable of injuring or killing a human being whether	leaded or unloaded at or toward another person or property.

3)	Manufacture or sell for any unlawful purpose any weapon known as a sling shot ors-and club.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 9 (CON'T)


4)	Manufacture, transfer or possess metal knuckles or a switch blade knife opening automaticallyo
:•

5)	Possess any other dangerous article or substance for
the purpose of being used unlawfully	as a weapon against another.

6)	Sell or have in his possession any device designed to silence or muff le the discharge of a f irearmo

7)	To	furnish a child under 16 years o age, without the
consent	of	the parent or g ardian of said child or if parent or
guardian of said child permit such child to handle or use outside
of the parent's or guardian's presence a rifle, gun, or dangerous weapon of any kind or any ammunition or explosiveo

SECTION 5.	TRANSPORTING

Except as permitted	by special permit, it shall be unlawful to take any wild animal by means of discharging any firearms
or bow and arrow there at, from a motor vehicle or airplane, or snowmobile or to transport any f.irearm in a motor vehicle or airplane, or snowmobile, unless the same is unloaded	in both
barrels and magazine and contained in a gun case or disassembled or unless unloaded and contained in the trunk of a car with the
trunk door closed or bow and arrow unless unstrung or contained
in a case or unless contained in the trunk of a car with the trunk
door closed.

SECTION 6.	POSSESSION

No person shall possess the following:

1.	Fully automatic firearms
2.	Short gunds with a barrel less than 18 inches.
3.	Rifles with a barrel less than 16 incheso
4o Weapons made from a rifle or shot gun with an overall length of less than 26 inches.
So Semi-automatic pistols with shoulder stocks.
6.	Any silencer.
7.	Any unconventional weapon which is capable of being fired and can be concealed on the person.

SECTION 7.	EXCEPTIONS

The following uses of guns and weapons shall be considered to be exceptions to the provisions	contained herein and shall
be permitted	uses of guns and weapons in the Village of Pine Springsn

ao Discharge of a gun or firearm or other weapon of any kind for the purpose of self-defense.

 



'. 	
 
b. Discharge of a gun, firearm or weapon of any kind on a person's own property	if discharged	for the purposes of protecting said property, protecting	one's property shall include but not necessarily be limited to rodent or vermin control and/or the shooting of wild animals to save garden crops, gardens, or other propertyo
 
ORDINANCE NO. 9 (CON'T)



SECTION 8.	DISCHARGE PROHIRITED rlY STATE LAW.

Nothing contained	in this  ordinance shall be construed as allowing the discharge of any firearm or air gun or other
weapon if such discharge is now prohibited	by any law of th0   State of Minnesota or any of its s11bdivisions nor shall this ordinance enlarge the civil rights of any person.

SECTION 9.	SEPARABILITY.

Every section, provision, or part of this ordinance is declared separable from every other section, provision or part and if any section, provision or part thereof shall be held invalid it shall not affect any other section, provision or part hereof.

SECTION 10.	PENALTIES.

Any person, firm or corporation who shall do  any forbidden act or fail to perform any act required by this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall
be punished by a fine of not to exceed $100 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days.

SECTION 11.	EFFECTIVE DATE.

This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and publication according to law.

Passed by  the Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs, this 8 day of October, 1968.

Paul Linnerooth

Mayor Attest:
R. G. Zietlow


Clerk
 

I"'
 
ORDINANCE NO. 10



AN   ORDINANCE	INC REAS INC  THE  MAX 1.MllM  PENALTY	FOH   Vl OLAT [()NS OF    VILLAGE ORDINANCES	OF    THE    VJLLAGE    OF    PINE    SPRINGS.

The Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs does hereby
ordain as follows:

SECTION 1.


Increased Maximum Penalty.	Any ordinance of this Village which provides for a maximum	fine of $100 or imprisonment
for 90   days as a penalty for a violation shall be  deemed to provide for a maximum fine of $300 or imprisonment for 90
days, or both.

SECTION 2.

Effective date.	This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication as provided by   statute.


Passed by the Council of the Village of Pine Springs this 4th day of November 1969.
 


Paul Linnerooth

Mayor

Attest:

R.  G.  Zietlow Clerk
 
ORDINANCE NO. 11


AN     ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING     A     PJ.ANNrNC     COMMTSSTON    FOR    THE
VILLAGE OF PINE SPRINGS, WASHINGTON	COUNTY, MINNESOTA.

The Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs does hereby ordain as follows:

SECTION 1.

Establishment of a Commission.	A Village Planning Commission for the Village of Pine Springs is hereby established pursuant to Minnesota	Statutes.

SECTION 2.

Composition.		Said Planning Commission shall consist of five (5) members, and said members shall be appointed	by the Village Council.	The members of the Commission first appointed shall be as follows:	Two (2) for the term of one (1) year; two
(2) for the term of two (2) years; and one (1) for the term of three (3) years.	Their successors shall he appointed	for terms of three years.	Both original and successive appointees shall hold off ice until their successors are appointed and have qualified.	The members of the Commission shall elect one
member as Chairman and one member as Secretary of said Commission,
who shall be elected every year. Vacancies during a term shall be filled by the Village Council for the unexpired term of said vacancy.  Every appointed member shall, before entering upon
the disposition of his duties, take an oath that he will faith­ fully perform	the duties of his office.	All members shall
serve without compensation, and shall hold off ice at the pl asure of the Village Council.

The Village Council shall appoint one of the members of said Council to serve as an ex-officio member of said Planning
Commission and who shall not have a vote in any proceedings before
said Commission or hold any off ice.

SECTION 3.

Duties.	It shall be the duty of the Planning Commission
to study and make recommendations to the Village Council concerning all matters involving planning and zoning which are referred	to
it by the Village Council.	Among such duties shall he included:
(1) the development of a comprehensive plan for land use within the Village: (2) to consider and make recommendations to all
applications for rezoning, special use permits, and related matters;
(3) to conduct public hearings upon such matte s as are directed to it for hearing by the Village Council.
 
ORDINANCE NO.	11    (CON'T)



All matters referred	to the Planning Commission shall be considered h¥ said CommisRion an<l reported back	to    the Council within 90 days after the matter has been originally referred to it.	This time limit shall not affect long term studies such as the development of a comprehensive plan but shall apply to all matters that are required because of a petition made by a landowner.

SECTION 4.

For the purposes of appeals from administrative decisions or for variances, the Village Council shall act as such
Appeal Board and shall hear, consider and determine these appeals.	Such appellate matters may be referred by the Council acting as an Appeal Board	to the Planning Commission for factual studies and recommendation.	Any such appeal matter ref erred
to the Planning Commission shall he reported back to the Council within 45   days.

SECTION 5.

This ordinance shall take effect from and after passage and publication as  provided	by statute.

Passed by   the Council of the Village of Pine Springs this 7th day of October 1969.


Paul Linnerooth
-------------
Mayor

Attest:
R.   G. Zietlow

Clerk










 









_j
 
ORDINANCE NO ..  12


AN   ORDINANCE   H.ECULl\T i NC   THE   UPER/\T [ON  OF   SNOWMOB'I LES,   MJNl­
BIKES, AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.

The Village Council of the Village of PinE Springs ordains as follows:

Secticrn 1.	DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Ordinance the terms defined herein shall have the following meanings ascribed to them.

Subdivision 1.	"Person" includes an individual, partner­ ship, corporation, the state and its agencies and subdivisions, and any body of persons, whether incorporated or not.

Subdivision 2.	"Snowmobile, Minibike, or All-Terrain Vehicle" means a self-propelled vehicle designed for travel
on snow or ice or water or natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners.

Subdivision 3.	"Owner" means a person, other than a lien holder having the property in or title to vehicle entitled
to the use or possession	thereof.

Subdivision 4.	"Operate" means to ride in or on and control the operation of a vehicle.

Subdivision 5.	"Operator" means every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.

Subdivision 6.	"Roadway" means that portion of a high-
way improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular	trqvel, including the shoulder.

Subdivision 7.	"Street or highway" means the entire
width between boundary lines of any way or place when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right
for the purposes of vehicular	traffic.

Subdivision 8.	"Right of way" means the entire strip of land traversed by a highway or street in which the public owns the fee or an easement for roadway purposes.

Subdivision 9.	"Safety or deadman" throttle is defined as a device which, when pressure	is removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged from the driving track.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 12 (CON'T)


SECTION 2.	OPERATION ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
l	Subdivision 1.	No person shall operate a snowmobile,
minibike, or all-terrain vehicl@ upon the roadway	shoulder or inside bank	r slope of any trunk, county state aid, or county highway or street or highway within the Village of Pine Springs and, in the case of a divided	trunk or county highway, on the right-of-way between the opposing lanes of traffic, e cept as provided	in this Ordinance, nor shall operation on any such highway be permitted where the roadway directly abuts a public sidewalk or walkway or property used for private purposes.	No person shall operate a   snowmobile
minibike or all-terrain vehicle within the right-of-way of	any
trunk, county state aid or county highway between	the hours of
one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise except on the right hand side of such right-of-way and in
the same direction as the highway	taff ic on the nearest lane
of the roadway adjacent thereto.	No snowmobile, minibike, or
all-terrain vehicle shall be operated at any time within the right of way of any interstate highway or freeway within this Village.

Subdivision 2. A snowmobile, minibike, or all-terrain vehicle may make a direct crossing of a street or highway	except an interstate highway or freeway, provided;

(a)	The crossing is made at an angle of approximately
90  degrees to the direction of	the street or highway
and at a   place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing.

(b)	The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main traveled way of	the highway.

(c)	The driver yields the right of way to all on­ coming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard.

(d)	In crossing a divided	street or highway, the crossing is made only at an intersection of such street or highway with another public street or highway.

(e)  If the crossing	is  made between the hours of one­ half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions or reduced visibility, only if both front and rear lights are on.

Subdivision 3.	No snowmobile, minibike, or all-terrain vehicle shall be operated on streets or highways at a speed exceeding	thirty miles per hour.

Subdivision 4.	No snowmobile, minibike, or all-terrain vehicle shall enter any uncontrolled	intersection without making
 
ORDINANCE NO. 12 (CON'T)


a complete stop.	The operator shall then yield the right of way to any veh cles or pedestrians which constitute an immediate hazard.

Subdivision 5.	Not withstanding	any prohibition in the Ordinance, a snowmobile, minibike, or all-terrain vehicle may be operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile impractical.

SECTION 3.	OPERATION GENERALLY.

Except as otherwise specifically permitted	and authorized, it is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile, minibike, or all-terrain vehicle within the limits of the Village of Pine Springs.

Subdivision 1.	On a public sidewalk or walkway provided or used for pedestrian travel.

Subdivision 2.	On private property of another without lawful authority for consent of the owner or occupant.

Subdivision 3.	On any publicly owned lands and frozen water, including but not limited to school grounds, park property, playgrounds, recreation areas and golf courses, except areas previously listed or authorized for such use by the proper public authority, in which case such use should be lawful and vehicles may be driven in and out of such areas by the shortest route.	Authorized	areas in the Village of Pine Springs owned by the Village shall be designated by council resolution.

Subdivision 4.	At any place, while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics or habit forming drugs.

Subdivision 5.	At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all the surrounding circumstances.

Subdivision 6. At any place in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury or damage thereto.

Subdivision 7.	So as to tow any person or thing on a publi.c	street or highway except through use of a rigid tow bar attached_ to the rear of the vehicle.

Subdivision 8.	At a speed greater than ten miles an hour when within 100 feet of any lakeshore, except in channels, or of fisherman, ice house or skating rinks, nor shall operation
be permitted within 100 feet of any sliding area, nor where the operation would conflict with the lawful use of property or
would endanger other persons or property.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 12 (CON'T)


Subdivision 9.	1n a manner so  as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs, annoys or interferes with the peace.and	quiet of other persons.

Subdivision 10.	During the hours from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any day.

SECTION 4.	EQUIPMENT.

It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile, mini­ bike, or all-terrain vehicle any place within the limits of
the Village of Pine Springs unless it is equipped with the following:

Subdivision 1.	Standard mufflers which are properly attached and in constant operation, and which reduce the noise
of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. Mufflers shall comply with Regulation CONS. 55 which is hereby adopted by reference as it existed on September 1, 1970.	No person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass, straight pipe or similar device on a vehicle motor, and the exhaust system shall not emit or produce a sharp popping or crackling sound.

Subdivision 2.	Brakes adequate to control the movement
of and to stop and hold	the snowmobile, minibike, or all-terrain
vehicle under any conditions of operation.

Subdivision 3. A safety or so-called "deadman" throttle in operating condition, so that when pressure is removed from the accelerator or throttle, the motor is disengaged from the driving track.

Subdivision 4.	At least one clear lamp attached	to the front, with sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during		the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.	Such head lamp shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected	into the eyes of an oncoming vehicle operator.	It shall also be equipped with at least one red tail lamp having a minimum candle power
of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible
from the distance of 500 feet to the rear during the hours of
darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.	The equipment
to be installed and in operating condition when the vehicle is
operated between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one­
half hour before sunrise or at times of reduced visibility.

Subdivision 5.	Reflective material at least 16 square inches on each side, forward of the handlebars, so as to reflect or beam light at a ninety degree angle.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 12 (CON'T)


SECTION 5.	APPLICATION OF OTHER LAWS.

Village traffic ordinances shall apply to the operation
of a   snowmobile, minibike, or all-terrain vehicle upon streets
and highways, and Minnesota Statutes 1969, Sections 84.81 to 84.88, and Minnesota	Statutes 1969, Chapte 169 except for those provi ions relating	to required equipment, are hereby adopted by reference, except those provisions which by their nature have no application.

SECTION 6.	PERSONS UNDER 18.

Subdivision 1.	No person under 14 years of	age shall operate on streets or highways or make a direct crossing of a street or highway as the operator of	a snowmobile, minibike,
or all-terrain vehicle.	A person 14 years of	age or older, but
less than 18 years of age, may operate a snowmobile, minibike,
or all-terrain vehicle on streets or highways as permitted
under this Ordinance and make a direct crossing thereof only if
he has in his immediate possession a valid	snow obile, minibike, or all-terrain vehicle safety certificate issued by the com­ missioner of conservation as provided	by Minnesota	Statutes 1969, Section 84.86.

Subdivision 2.	It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile, minibike, or all-terrain vehicle to permit	the  vehicle to be operated contrary	to the provisions of this section.

SECTION 7.	CHASING ANIMALS FORBIDDEN

It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run or kill any animal, wild or domestic, with a snowmobile, minibike, or all-terrain vehicle.

SECTION 8.	LANDOWNERS AND LIABILITY.

Landowners who open their land for a snowmobile, minibike,
or all-terrain vehicle will not be liable to any injured operator or passenger on the landowner's premises as long as the land­ owner has not been paid	for the use of his land and so long as
the landowner has not intentionally failed to guard or warn against a dangerous condition or activity existing on the land.

SECTION 9.	VIOLATIONS

Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished	by a fine of not more than three hundred	dollars	($300) or by imprisonment for
a period	of not more than ninety	(90) days, or both but in either
case the costs of prosecution may be added.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 12 (CON'T)


SECTION 10.	SEVERABILITY

Should anx section, subdivision, clause or other pro­ vision of this Ordinance be held	to be	invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or of any part thereof, other than the part held	to be invalid.

SECTION 11.	EFFECT

This Ordinance shall be published	in the ''Stillwater Gazette" and shall be effective upon publication.

Adopted	by the Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs this 6th day of July, 1971.



Paul Linnerooth Mayor
Attest:
R.   G.   Zietlow Clerk
 
ORDINANCE NO. 13
l·
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING BURNINC OF TRASH, REFUSE, ETC.

Tl1e   Council of.the  Vi.llage  of	Pine  Springs dof:S  herE>hy orJa:in
as follows:

SECTION 1

Air Pollution Control Rules, Regulations, and Air Quality Standards of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, 1969 Edition, and subsequent amendments thereto are hereby adopted by reference, with exceptions set forth in this Ordinancee

SECTION 2	DEFINITIONS

Whenever used	in this Ordinance, words shall have meanings as follows:

(a)	OPEN FIRE shall mean any fire from which the products of combustion are emitted directly into the open atmosphere without passing	through an adequate
s t a ck , d.'i.1:_ t  or ch m n ey •

(b)	PERSON shall mean any individual, natural person, firm, company association, organization, partnership, business, trust, club, institution, corporation, or any Federal, State, County, or Local governmental agency.

(c)	REFUSE AND TRASH shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescilbe	solid wastes, including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, trash, ashes, street cleanings, leaves, brush, sweepings, junk, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial waste, paper, wrappings, cardboard, tin cans, wood, bedding, and all other waste materials which if burned	would produce or emit air contamination.

(d)	CONTROL EQUIPMENT shall mean any device, approved by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, which has the function of controlling or abating the emission of air contamination into the atmosphere.

(e)	RECREATIONAL FIRES are small fires started for cooking or other recreational purposes and not for
the purpose of disposing of any refuse or other materials. SECTION 3	OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED
No person shall cause, or permit the opening burning of
any trash, refuse, or rubbish, within the Village of Pine Springs.
 

.    t	.,
'-
 
ORDINANCE NO. 13 (CON'T)


SECTION 4.	TRASH BURNING REGULATED

Any of the materials described	in Section 2, may be burned within the Village of Pine Springs if such materials are burned	in an incinerator of sufficient size and capacity as approved by the Minnesota Pollution Con.trol Agency ..

SECTION 5.	EXCEPTIONS

The following open burning shall be excepted	from the regulations of this Ordinance, provided	that, an appropriate permit shall be first obtained.

(a)	Outdoor burning may be used for cooking, warmth, or recreational purposes provided, however, that such fires shall not be used for the purpose of refuse disposal.
 

(b) Fires	set for the instruction and	training of	public
and industrial

(c) Fires	fire fighting personnel.

set for the elimination of fire hazards	

which
cannot be abated by any other practical means.

(d) The burning of trees, brush in property clean up in
the clearing of land in the right of way maintenance	operations, and in agricultural crop burning.

SECTION 6	SPECIAL BURNING PERMITS REQUIRED

Burning pursuant	to Section 5 (b), (c), and	(d) shall only be permitted upon the issuance of a special permit by the Council members or the Village Clerk under the following conditions:

(a)	The permittee, or his authorized representative, will be present at any fire so allowed.

(b)	Such burning will be done only when weather conditions
are   such that the resultant smoke will be carried away
from neighboring	residences or other effected property owners or public roadways.

(c)	That such permit be subject to revocation at any time that the Village determines that there is a practical, available alternate method	for disposal
of the material	to be burned or that such burning would constitute a fire hazard, or health hazard, or that
a traf(ic hazard would result.
 
ORDINANCE 13 (CON'T)



SECTION 7.	PENALTY

Any person violating any provisions of this Ordinance shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine of not to exceed Three Hundred Dollars ($300)	or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety	(90)   days, or both, for each
offense.

SECTION 8.	EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its pass ge and publication.

Passed by the Council of the Village of Pine Springs July 5,   1972.
Paul Linnerooth Mayor

Attest:
R. G ..   Zietlow


Clerk














 
 


ORDINANCE NO. 14


AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A MORATORIUM ON THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND INTO LOTS OF LESS THAN 2-1/2 ACRES EACH.

The Villag Council of the Village of Pine· Springs does hereby ordain as follows:

SECTION 1.

No land in the Village of Pine Springs shall be subdivided so that any lot is less than two and one-half	(2-1/2) acres in size, excluding water or swamp area subject to high water flooding, during a period	commencing from and after the date
this Ordinance becomes effective and terminating 120 days there­
after or the date on which a new zoning ordinance adopted by
the Village Council becomes effective, whichever date is earlier.

SECTION 2.

The division of a parcel of land after the effective date of this Ordinance into two	(2)   or more lots or parcels, for the purpose of transfer of	ownership or building development, shall be deemed a subdivision within the terms of this Ordinance.

SECTION 3.

This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication.

Passed by the Village Council this 3rd day of	April 1973.

Paul Linnerooth Mayor

Attest:
R.   G.   Zietlow

Clerk








 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 15


AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING MINJNG REGULATIONS T<l PROVIDE FOR ORDERLY, ECONO IC AND SAFE REMOVAL OF SAND, GRAVEL, ROCK, SOIL AND OTHER NATURAL DEPOSITS AND TO PROMOTE THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, MORALS AND GENERAL WELFARE IN THE VILLAGE OF PINE SPRINGS, WASHINGTON  COUNTY, MINNESOTA.

The   Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs, Washington County, Minnesota, Ordains:

SECTION lu	ADOPTION OF MODEL MINING REGULATION CODE.

It  is hereby adopted for the purpose of regulating the removal of sand, gravel, rock, soil and natural deposits, the Model Mining Regulation Code for communities in Washington County as adopted on April 25, 1972, by the Washington County Planning Advisory Commission, of which at least one copy is
on file in the office of the Village Clerk.	That said Model Mining Regulation Code is hereby adopted in its entirety except as herein modified.

SECTION 2 ..	DEFINITIONS

A.	202.01 (1) Community.  Whenever the word "community" is used it shall mean the Village of Pine Springs, Washington County, Minnesota.

B.	202.02 (3) Governing Body.	Whenever	the words "governing body,, are  used	they shall mean the Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs, Washington County, Minnesota.

SECTION 3.	EXISTING CODES

The provisions of the Model Mining Regulation Code are in addition to and not in replacement of the provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance.	Any provisions of the Zoning Ordinance relating to mining shall remain in full force and effect
except as they may be contrary to the provisions of this Model
Mining Regulation Code.

SECTION 4.	EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance shall be and	is hereby declared	to be in full force and effect from and after its passage and publication according to law.

Passed hy the Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs, Washington County, Minnesota, this 31st day of May, 1973.

Attest:

Chairman/Mayor	Paul Linnerooth
 
ORDINANCE NO. 16


AN ORDINANCE FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROMOTING HEALTH, SAFETY, ORDER, CONVENIE CE AND GENERAL WELFARE, BY REGULATING THE SPECIFICATIONS, INSTALLATION, AND MAINTENANCE	OF DN-SITE SEWER
DISPOSAL AND WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS IN THE VILLAGE OF PINE SPRINGS, MINNESOTA.

The Village· Council of the Village of Pine ·springs, Washington County, Minnesota, Ordains:

SECTION 1.	TITLE

101 Short Title.	This Ordinance shall be known, cited
and ref erred to as the Pine Springs Pollution Control Ordinance; except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as, "This Ordinance."

SECTION 2.	INTENT AND PURPOSE

201 Purpose.	This Ordinance is adopted for the purpose of:

(1) Protecting	the health, safety and welfare of residents and future residents of the Village of Pine Springs.

(2)	Regulating	individual sewer disposal systems so as to prevent contamination of underground	bodies of water or of streams, lakes, rivers or other surface bodies of water.

(3)	Regulating	individual water supply systems so as to prevent contamination of water derived from such system and other health hazards.

(4) Preventing individual sewer disposal systems from creating a health hazard and/or nuisance for the general public or for individuals.

(5)   Making	it unnecessary	to provide central public sewage disposal systems and water supply systems for the Village of Pine Springs in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan for the Village.

SECTION 3.	ADOPTION OF WASHINGTON	COUNTY SANITARY SEWER DISPOSAL CODE.

There is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety, except as herein after modified, the Washington County Sanitary
Sewer Dispo al Code (herein after ca 11ed 'to de 11 )  adopted as a
model sanitary sewer disposal code for all communities in Washington County and recommended as a sanitary sewer disposal ordinance for unincorporated	areas in the County by the Washington County Planning Commission on June 21, 1972 and adopted as the County Sanitary Sewer Disposal Ordinance for
 
ORDINANCE NO. 16 (CON'T)



unincorporated areas by	the Washington	County Board	of Commissioners on July 6, 1972, of	which at least one copy is on file  in   the ·office of		the   Village Clerk.

SECTION 4.	MODIFICATIONS OF CODE.

The Washington	County Sanitary Sewer bisposal Code, here­ in adopted by reference, is hereby modified as follows:

A.	Delete Sections 101, 201, 301.01, 501, 502, 503, 601,
602, 701, 801, and 802.

B.	Delete Section 302.01 (4)   and insert in lieu thereof:

"(4) Inspector. A  person duly authorized by ordinance or resolution adopted by the Village Council to enforce all or some of the provisions of this Ordinance."

C.	Delete Section 401.01 of the Code and insert in lieu thereof the following:

"401.01.	All individual sewage disposal systems installed subsequent to the adoption of this Ordinance and all alterations, extensions and repairs to individual sewage disposal systems irrespective of the date of original installation shall be regulated	in accordance with all of the requirements of this Ordinance.		Any individual sewage disposal system or pertinent part thereof, irrespective of the date of original installation, must be corrected and must as far as practicable conform to
these standards within ninety	(90)  days after written notification,
where there is evidence of septic tank effluent percolating from the ground or of other inadequate control of sewage."

D.	Delete subsection 402.09 of the Code and insert in lieu thereof:

"402.09.	The system shall consist of a building sewer,
a  septic tank$ and a soil absorption unit.	The soil absorption
unit shall consist of a subsurface disposal field.	All sewage shall be treated in the septic tank and the septic tank effluent shall be discharged	to the disposal field.	The septic tank
drain field system shall be considered	the only acceptable system for installation unless it can be demonstrated	that the
system being proposed as an alternative will not create a pollution problem."

 
E.	Delete
Code and insert
 
the third	sentence of Section 403.01 of the
in lieu thereof:
 

"The buried or concealed portions of any building	sewer, building drain or branches thereof located less than fifty (50) feet from any well shall be constructed of standard cast iron soil pipe with rubber joints."
 
ORDINANCE NO. 16 (CON'T)


F. Delete Section 403.02 of the Code and insert in lieu thereof:

403.02. The portions of any buried	sewer or buried	suction line shall be adequate size and constructed of cast iron.	No building drain or building sewer shall be less than four (4) inches in diameter."
G. Delete Section 403.03 and insert in lieu thereof: "403.03. Construction of the line shall be such as to
secure water	tight and root tight joints, free of	obstructions,
and shall provide a grade of not less than 1/8 inch per foot. The ten (10) feet of sewer immediately preceding	the septic tank shall not slope more than 1/4 inch per foot.		No 90° ells
shall be permitted, and where the direction of the sewer is changed in excess of 22 1/2°, accessible cleanouts shall be provided."

G. Delete Section	405.01 (1) of the Code and insert in lieu thereof:

"(l) Any water supply well or buried water suction pipe
75 feet."

SECTION 5.	REGULATION OF ON-SITE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS.

A.	Each water supply system shall be so located and constructed	that it will not be contaminated by any existing
or future sewage disposal system.	It shall also be constructed
to minimize the possible contamination of the well from all possible external sources within the geological strata surrounding the well.

B.	Wells shall be located in a manner to be free from flooding and the top shall be so constructed and located as to be above all possible sources of pollution.	No well shall be located closer than three (3) feet to the outside basement wall
of a dwelling.	The outside basement	footing shall be continuous across the opening of the well alcove.	No well shall be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to a property	line.	The following minimum distances between a well and possible sources of contamination shall be complied with:

(1)	Buried or concealed	standard cast iron sewer or drain lines with a rubber air tested joints - 30 feet.

(2)	Vitrified	clay or concrete sewers (or cast iron sewers not of construction described	above), septic tanks -
50  feet.

(3)	Dry wells, seepage pits, cesspools, and subsurface disposal fields - 75 feet.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 16 (CON'T)


C.	No well shall hereafter be installed	in a pit below the surface of the ground unless such well pit is an alcove opening directly into the main basement area  of	the building being served by the well.	The well pit floor shall be constructed according to the requirements for pumproom floors
outlined in this Ordinance.

D.	No well constructed	in the Village of Pine Springs shall terminate in the Decorah Shale, Platteville Limestone or Shakopee Oneota Dolomite.		No existing well shall be increased in depth to terminate in those formations.

E.		The minimum diameter of any finished well casing shall be four	(4)   inches.	Well casings shall be constructed of
welded or coupled steel or wrought iron and shall conform to the following specifications for weight and thickness:













The casing of any well constructed	entirely in unconsolidated earth formations shall extend	to a depth of 150 feet below established	ground level or through the first impervious soil formation encountered, whichever	is deeper, and at least 5
feet below pumping level (level below ground level to which the water surface is lowered in the well during pumping) •.
Where a water-bearing	formation is encountered during well construction at a depth which satisfies these minimum require­ ments, the acceptability	of the formation for well development shall be based on the satisfactory results of analysis of the water by a competent laboratory.	Any water-bearing	formation yielding water which is contaminated, as evidence by the presence of chemicals or bacteria of sewage original, shall be regarded
as unsatisfactory	for well development.

F.	All wells for domestic use, hereafter constructed in the Village of Pine Springs shall produce a   minimum	initial supply of 600  gallons of sandfree water per hour.

G.	The pump and equipment shall be installed in a manner satisfactory	to the Village of	Pine Springs and shall conform to the following:

(1) Pump and equipment shall be designed	to assure a pollution proof and frost proof installation.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 16 (CON'T)

 
(2)	The pump base shall be constructed	so as to permit installation of a water tight mounting.

(3)	A well seal shall be usede	Such well seal shall be of simple construction, eaRily installed, removal and reinstalled	should it become necessary to remove the drop pipe for repair.

(4)	The top of well casing shall be a minimum of 18 inches above the basement floor level and the seal shall be so constructed and installed as to maintain its water tight feature, should flooding occur.	The pump room floor shall be at least
6 inches above the surrounding grade and the concrete platform shall be minimum 4 inches above grade at the edgee

(5)	Suction lines installed through the well casing, or where otherwise installed less than 10 feet below grade, shall be provided with an outline, protective casing.	Such protective
casing shall be set watertight	into the well casing.	The suction line shall be caulked into the protective casing to provide a watertight joint which will permit easy removal.	The suction
line shall slope upward	toward the pump.	Where a suction line is brought into a basement from a well located some distance from the basement, the pump shall be located at least 18 inches above the basement floor.

(6)	Provisions shall be made in the well seal for future measurements of static and pump levels.

H.	After final installation of the pumping	equipment, the well shall be pumped continuously until the water is free of turbidity, then chlorinated heavily	in accordance with the following procedure:

(1)	Introduce into the well one pound of high test (70% or equivalent) calcium hypochlorite (chlorinated lime) by scatter­ ing same over the surface of the water in the well so that
the powder will sink to the bottom	thereby permeating	the supply.

(2)	If powder cannot be introduced directly, then mix one pound of calcium hypochlorite, high test	(70% or equivalent), with five gallons of water and pour	the mixture into the well.

(3)	Allow the chemical to remain in the well for at least twelve hours, then pump to waste until the odor and taste of the chemical have practically	disappeared.

 



l'-:
 
(4)	Where calcium hypochlorite tablets meeting	the above requirement& are used, they shall remain in the well for a minimum period of 48 hours before the water is pumped	to waste as described above.
 

ORDINANCE NO. 16 (CON'T)


(5)	Wells 1arger than four inches in diameter require proportionally	larger doses of the chemical for chlorination but shall not have a concentration of applies solution less than 150 parts per million for twelve hours.

I. All commercial wells shall comply with the require­ ments of the Minnesota State Department of Health for public water supplies.

J.	Upon completion of drilling a well, a pumping	test of sufficient duration to determine the yield and maximum
drawdown shall be conducted.	Within fifteen days after inspection of the well, the permit holder shall file an affidavit with
the Village Clerk setting forth the results of the pumping
test, the capacity of the well, the pumping level, the depth of casing from grade, and length and size of screen if one is used.

A geological log of the formation encountered	in drilling each well shall be kept by the driller.	A copy of said log, typed on 8-1/2 X 11'' paper shall be filed along with the well affidavit and such log shall specifically state where impervious formation is encountered.	Failure to provide such a log or affidavit, or willful failure to provide accurate information with respect thereto shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance.

K.	The construction of a well for the purpose of dispos­ ing of any liquids, including surface waters, air conditioning or commercial wastes, shall be prohibited	in the Village of Pine Springs.

L.	The following terms used in this Ordinance are clarified as follows:

(1)  Drawdown - The change in surface elevation of a body of water as the result of the withdrawal of water therefrom.

(2)	Glacial Drift - An assemblage of deposits left by the melting of an ice sheet or glacier.	It is composed of an accumulation of unstratified material of all sizes which formed at the margin of the ice.

(3)	Grout - A    thin mortar consisting of portland	cement and water or portland	cement, sand and water in the following proportions:

(a)	one sack cement to 4-1/2 to 5-1/2 gallons of water.
 
01\.DlNANCL NU. 16 (CON'T)


(b)	one part cement, one pure	clean sand and 4-1/2 to six  gallons  watE•r.	The   s.1nd   grout	shall  he  usPd  on.ly  where abnormal loss Qf	grout to crevices or faults occurs.

(4)	Log - A chronological record of the soil and rock formations  encountered	in the operation of drilling a well, with either their thickness, or the elevation of the top and bottom of		ach formation given.	It also includes statements as to the composition and water bearing characteristics of each formation ..

(5)	Porosity - An index of the void characteristics of a soil as it pertains to percolation.

(6)	Turbidity - A condition of a liquid due to fine visible material in suspension, which may not be of sufficient size to
be seen as individual particles by the naked	eye. but which
prevents the passage of light through the liquide

(7)	Yield - The quantity of water flow (gallons per minute or per hour) which can be collected	(pumped) from the well.

SECTION 6.	ADMINISTRATION.

601 Enforcing	Officer.

601.01	The Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs shall be responsible for the administration of this Ordinance, provided	that the Village Council may appoint an individual to assist it in carrying out any such duties and powers and to lawfully delegate to him such functions as are appropriate
for this purpose.

602.	Issuance of Permits.

	No building permit for any building requiring an onsite sewage disposal system or water supply system shall be issued until the permit, as required by this Ordinance has
been issued.

603.	Inspection.

603.01		A person duly authorized by the Village Council by Ordinance or resolution shall make such inspection or inspec­ tions as are necessary	to determine compliance with this Ordinance.	No part of the onsite sewage system shall be
covered until it has been inspected and accepted by such inspec­ tor.	It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for the permit		to install such system to notify the inspector that the job is ready for inspection or reinspection and it shall be
the duty of the inspector to make the indicated inspection
within twenty-four	(24) hours after such notice has been given.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 16 (CON'T)


It shall be the duty of	the owner or occupant of	the property
to give the in pector free access to the property at reasonable
times for the purpose of making such inspections.

603.02.	If upon inspection the inspector discovers
that any part of the system is not constru ted	in accordance with the minimum standards provided	in this Ordinance, he shall give the applicant written notification describing	the
defects.	The applicant shall pay an additional fee as determined by resolution of the Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs for each reinspection that is necessary.	The applicant shall be responsible for the correction or elimination of all defects, and no system shall be placed or replaced in service until all defects have been corrected or eliminated.	The applicant may	take an appeal to the Village Council of any decision or determination made by any inspector.

SECTION 7.	LICENSES

701..	Licensing.

701.01. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of installing and constructing sewer disposal systems or water supply systems within the Village of Pine Springs without first obtaining a license to carry ori such occupation from the Village Council or such person as is
duly authorized by the Village Council to issue such licenses. Applicant	shall file with the Village Council policies of public liability and property damage insurance which shall
remain in force and effect during the entire term of said license and which shall contain a  provision	that they shall not be cancelled without ten (10) days written notice to the Villa e. Public liability insurance shall not be less than One Hundred Thousand	($100,000) Dollars for injuries including accidental death to any one (1)  person and subject to the same limit
for each person in an amount not less than Three Hundred Thou­ sand	($300,000) Dollars on account of any one (1) accident,
and property damage insurance in the amount of not less than
Fifty Thousand	($50,000) Dollars for each accident and not
less than One Hundred Thousand	($100,000) Dollars aggregated. In addition the applicant shall file with the Village Council
a bond	in the amount of Two Thousand	Five Hundred	($2,500) Dollars in favor of the Village and the public, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contracts and compliance
with this Ordinance.	No work shall be done under license until said insurance policies and performance bond have been filed and approved	by the Village Council or its designated administrator.
Said license.shall be renewable annually and may be revoked
or refused renewal for cause.	Any  installation, construction, alteration or repair of a sewage disposal system or water supply system by licensee in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or refusal on the part of the licensee to correct such
 
ORDINANCE NO. 16 (CON'T)


defective work performed	by sucl1   Licensee shall be cause for revocation of or refusal to renew the license.

701.02. Before any license issued under the provisions of this section may be revoked or its renewal refused, the licensee shall be  given a hearing by the Village Council to
show cause	hy such license should not be revoked or refused.
Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be in	writing.	The annual license fee shall be Twenty-five	($25)
Dollars.	Application	for such license shall be made annually
on a form furnished by the Village.	Licenses shall he effective from July 1 to June 30 of the following yeare

SECTION 8.	SANITARY SEWER AND WATER PERMITSe

801.01 No person, firm or corporation shall install	alter, repair, or extend any individual sewage disposal system or
water supply system in the Village of Pine Springs without first obtaining a permit	therefor from the Village for the specific installation alteration, repair or extension; and at the time
of applying for said permit, shall pay a fee as determined	by
resolution of the Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs.

801.02. Applications for permits shall be made in writing upon printed	blanks or,,....forms	furnished by the Village and shall be signed by the applicant.

801.03 Each application for a permit	shall have thereon the correct legal description of the property on which	the proposed	installation, alteration, repair or extension is
to take place, and each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan of the land showing the location of any proposed	or existing buildings	located on the property , with respect to the boundary	lines of the property and complete
plans of the proposed	system and percolation	tests, if applicable, attesting	to the compliance with the minimum	standards of this Ordinance.		A complete plan shall include the location, size,
and design of all parts of the system to be installed, altered,
repaired or extended.	The application shall also show the present or proposed	location of the water supply system or sewage disposal system, as the case may be, and shall provide such further information as shall be required by the Village Council or its designated administrator.

SECTION 9.	ENFORCEMENT.

901. Violations and Penalties.

	It is declared unlawful for any person to violate any of the terms and provisions of this Ordinance.	Violation thereof shall be a misdemeanor.	Each day that the violation
is permitted	to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 16 (CON'T)


	In the event of a violation or a threatened violation of this Ordinance, the Village Council, or any member thereof,· in addition to other remedies, may institute
appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate such violations and	it is the duty of the Village Attorney	to institute such action.

	Any taxpayer of the Village may institute mandamus proceedings in District Court to compel specific performance
by the proper official or officials of any duty required by this Ordinance.

SECTION 10.	EFFECTUATION.

1001. Separability.

	It is hereby declared	to be the intention that the several provisions of this Ordinance are separable in accordance with the following:

	If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Ordinance to be invalid such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this Ordinance not specifically included in said judgment.

	If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any portion of this Ordinance to a particular property, judgement shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building
or structure not specifically	included in said judgement.

	Nothing contained in this Ordinance repeals or amends any ordinance requiring a permit or license to enga e in any business or occupation.

1002.	Effective Date.

	This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication.

Passed by  the Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs
this 31st day of May, 1973.


Paul Linnerooth
----------- ----
Mayor

Attest:
R ..     G.    Zietlow


Clerk
 
ORDINANCE NO. 17


AN ORDINANCE FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROMOTING HEALTH, SAFETY, ORDER, CONVENIENCE AND GENERAL WELFARE, BY REGULATING THE USE OF LAND, THE LOCATION AND THE USE OF BUILDINGS AND THE
ARRANGEMENT OF BUILDINGS ON LOTS, AND THE DENSITY OF POPULA­ TION, FOR THE ORDERLY FUTURE DEVELOPMENT OF THE AREA OF THE VILLAGE OF PINE SPRINGS, MINNESOTA.

The Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs, Washington County, Minnesota, Ordains:

SECTION 1.	ADOPTION OF WASHINGTON COUNTY ZONING CODE.

,.......D.1. ! e is her eby ado p t ed by r e f er enc e in it s en t ir e t y , except as hereinafter modified, the Washington County Zoning Code (hereinafter called "Code") adopted as a model zoning code for all communities in Washington County and recommended as a zoning ordinance for unincorporated	areas in the County by the Washington County Planning Commission
on June 21, 1972, and adopted as the County Zoning Ordinance
for unincorporated	areas by the Washington County Board of Commissioners on July 6, 1972, of which at least one copy is on file in the off ice of the Village Clerk.

SECTION 2.

In addition to the purposes of the Code as set forth in Section 2 thereof, it is the overriding purpose of the Village Council in adopting such Code to facilitate the development
of the Village in a manner consistent with its comprehensive
plan and to provide standards which are applicable for low
density rural-residential development and, which, in the event
any portion of the Village should ever be required to be
serviced by a central sewer system, would also be applicable for development	involving higher residential densities and more diverse compatible land uses.

SECTION 3.	GENERAL MODIFICATIONS OF CODE.

A.	Delete the title of the Code and insert in lieu thereof the tit ! of this Ordinance.

B.	Whenever	the words "Washington County" or "Community" or "County" are used	in the Code, they shall be deemed and
are hereby deleted and the words "Village of Pine Springs"
are hereby inserted in lieu thereof, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance or unless otherwise clearly indicated by
the context to mean Washington County even if the Code were
adopted by	eference for a single municipality.

C.	Whenever the words "County Board of Commissioners of Washington County" or "County Board" or "Board" are. used in the Code, they shall be deemed and are hereby deleted
and the words "Village Council of Pine Springs 0 are hereby
 
ORDINANCE NO. 17 (CON'T)


inserted in lieu thereof.

D.	Whenever	the words "County Development Code" are used	in the Ccide, they shall be deemed and are hereby
deleted and the words ''Village Ordinance adopted	to implement the Comprehensive Plan'' are	ereby	inserted in lieu thereof.

E.	All references in the Code to ''c°hapter 4  of the Washington County Development Code shall be deemed and are hereby deleted, and the words "Ordinance No. 16 relating to the control of water pollution" are hereby inserted in lieu thereof.

F.	Any references in the Code to "townships, town boards or township planning	commissions" shall be deemed and are hereby deleted.

G.	Whenever the words "Board of Adjustment and Appeals" are used in the Code, they shall mean the Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs.

H.	An area shall be deemed "required to be serviced by a central sewer system" as those words are used	in this
ordinance if, and only if (1)  the Village Council determines by a two-thirds vote of its members that for reasons of
health such area should be served by a  public central sanitary
sewer system included in or connected	to the metropolitan disposal system as provided	in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter
473C, or for reasons outside the control of the Village Council
such a central sewer system with capacity to serve the area
is extended	into the Village or ordered in accordance with
law to be  extended	into the Village,	(2)  the Village or owners
of the land in such area will be held liable for all or a portion of the cost of such central sewer system and	(3)	the Village Council determines that it is not economically feasible for the Village or the property owners in the area to incur
such liability without allowing for a higher density and more varied	land use.

SECTION 4.	SPECIFIC MODIFICATIONS OF CODE

A.	Delete	Section 201 and insert in lieu	thereof:
"201 - Purpose.	This Ordinance is adopted for	the purpose
of:		

(1) Protecting	the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare.

 




\_·
 
(2)   Rescricting	and regulating	the location, and use of structures and land in the Village.
 
ORDINANCE  NO.	17    (CON'T)


(3) Promoting orderly development of the Village of Pine Springs consistent witl1 the development needs of the region
as a whole.

(4) Providing adequate light, air and convenience of access to property.

(5)  Limiting congestion in the public right-of-way.

(6) Preventing overcrowding of land and undue concentra­ tion of structures by regulating the use of land and buildings and the bulk of buildings in relation to the land and
buildings	surrounding them.

(8)	Protecting and guiding the development of rural areas.

(9)	Conserving and developing natural resources, and maintaining	a high standard of environmental quality.

(10)	Fostering agriculture and other enterprises compatible with a rural residential environment.

(11)	Conserving the natural and scenic beauty and attrac­ tiveness of the countryside.

(12)	Preserving the capacity of flood plains to carry and discharge regional floods.
                                                      (13)  Guiding wise development of shorelands of public water.
(14)	Preserving and enhancing the quality of surface water.

(15)	Providing for the administration of this Ordinance and amendments thereto.

(16)	Defining the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies, as provided hereinafter.

(17)  Prescribing penalties for the violation of the pro­ visions of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto."

B.	Delete Section 301.01

C.	Delete the second sentence in Section 301.02.

D.	Delete Section 302.01 (3) and insert in lieu thereof: "302.01 (3) Administrator.	The Village Council, or any duly appointed person charged by separate resolution or ordinance
of the Village Council with enforcement of certain provisions of this Or<iinance."

E.	Delete the last sentence in Section 302.01 (5) and insert in lieu thereof:
 
ORDTNANCE NO.	17     (CON'T)



"The raising of domestic farm animals, roadside stand for sale of products, processing	or packaging operations,
or similar uses may be permitted	by issuance of a conditional
use permit."

F.	Delete Section 302.01 (35) and insert in lieu thereof: "(35) Comprehensive Plan.	Unless otherwise stated, it is the general p an for land use, transportation-, and community facilities adopted by the Village Council of the Village of
Pine Springs."

G.	Delete Section 302.01 (126) and insert in lieu thereof: "(126) Planning Advisory Commission or Planning Advisory Commission or Planning Commission.	The Village Council, or the duly appointed planning commission of the Village of Pine Springs charged by state law (Sections 503.02 and 503.03 and 507) or by separate ordinance or resolution
of the Village Council with carrying out certain provisions
of this Ordinance as provided	in the Code."

H.	Delete Section 402.04 and insert in lieu thereof: "402.04 - Restoration.	Whenever a lawful non-conforming building		or structure shall have been damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot, or act of God, it may be reconstructed and used as before if it is reconstructed with­ in twelve (12) months after such calamity."

I.	Delete the reference in Section 403.01 to "sixty per cent		(60%) of the requirements of this Ordinance" and
insert in lieu thereof "forty per cent (40%) of the require­ ment of this Ordinance."

J.	Delete Section 403.08 (1).

K.	Delete the first sentence in Section 403.08 (2) and insert in lieu thereof:

"(2) In areas without public sanitary sewer, the following rules shall apply regardless of any more lenient regulations."

L.	Delete Section 403.08 (6) and insert in lieu thereof: ''(6) In areas which are required to be serviced by a central sewer system, sewer extension policies are encouraged which enhance the timing and location of platted developments on property contiguous to existing municipal services."

 






\
'---
 
M.	Delete Section 403.08 (10) and insert in lieu there­ of:	''(10) Regardless of the nature of the development, all
on-site sewage disposal systems shall have access to an average of at least 2-1/2 acres for a septic tank drain field per dwelling unit."




'
 
ORDINANCE NO. 17 (CON'T)



N.	Delete Section 405.08.

O.	Delete Section 405.10 (a) and insert in lieu there­ of:	"(a) On a lot of less than .5   acres, there shall be not more than one detached private garage and two other detached accessory buildings."

P.	Delete the first sentence in Section 405.10 (c).

Q.	Delete Section 412.03-3(2) (c) and insert in lieu thereof:		"(c) In areas which are required to be serviced by a central sewer system, the proposed development	shall be
served by the public water and sewer system,. and fire hydrants shall be installed according	to a plan approved by the appropriate fire chief as to type and location.	In all other areas the proposed development shall be approved by the appropriate fire chief regarding possible fire hazards."

R.	Delete Section 414.01 (12) and insert in lieu thereof: "(12) No townhouse project shall be permitted	to exceed the following percentages in dwelling unit types:"

 
1	bedroom units
2	bedroom units
3	bedroom units
3+ bedroom units
 
80%
50%
30%
30%
 

S.	Delete Section 414.01 (20) and insert in lieu thereof: "(20) All townhouses in areas which are required	to be
serviced by a central sewer system shall have public water and sewer."	.

T.	Delete Section 410.01 (4) and insert in lieu ther of: ''(4) Time and expenses for zoning administrator and any other professional	consultant	••• fee plus actual expenses."

U.	Delete Sections 501 and 502 and insert in lieu thereof: "501 - Enforcement.

501.01 The Village Council shall assume responsibility for enforcement of this Ordinance, including all duties and powers otherwise delegated to a Zoning Administrator by the
Code, provided	that the Village Council may appoint an individual to assist it in carrying out any such duties and powers and to lawfully delegate to him such functions as are.approp iate
for this purpose."

V.	Delete Section 503 and insert in lieu thereof:

"503.	Appeals and the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.

503.01	The Village Council shall constitute the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.	It shall act upon all questions
 





 


 













 























'\ ·.
-; '!
 
(_,
 

ORDINANCE NO. 17 (CON'T)


as they may arise in the administration of	this Ordinance, including the.interpretation of	the provisions of	this Ordinance, and it shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement,decision, or determination made by an administrative official charged with enforcing the Ordinance.	Such appeal may be taken by any aggrieved
person.	The reasons for the Board's decision shall be stated.

The decision of such Board shall not be final and any person having an interest affected by such decision shall have the right to appeal to district court as otherwise provided by law.

503.02.	The appeal shall be in writing and shall be referred to the Planning Commission with £if teen (15)   days
after the date the appeal is filed with the Board.	The Planning Commission shall thereafter have no more than sixty (60)   days
to review and report to the Board upon the appeal.	Upon
receipt of	the report of the Planning Commission, or expiration
of the sixty (60) days, which ever occurs sooner, the Board shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) days thereafter, upon at least seven days written notice to all known interested parties.	The board shall within a reasonable
time make its order deciding the matter and shall serve a copy of	such order upon the  appellant by mail."

W.	Delete Section 504.03 and insert in lieu thereof: "504.03. The request for a variance shall be handled in the. same procedural manner as is an appeal as provided in Sections 503.01 and 503.02."

X.	Delete Section 504.07.

Y.	Delete Section 506.16.

Z.	Delete the second sentence in Section 508.03 and insert in lieu thereof:

"Such system must conform to all of the requirements of the State of Minnesota Sanitary Code, and Ordinance No. 16 relating to the control of water pollution."
AA.	Delete Section 508.10 and insert in lieu thereof: '508.10	The Zoning Administrator may refuse to issue a
permit for  the construction for any residential dwelling
located on a lot that does not have frontage on an improved public.street."

BB.	Delete Section 511.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 17 (CON'T)


.f
\_.	CC. Delete Section 601.02 and insert in lieu thereof:

"601.02 For the purposes of this Ordinance the Village of Pine Sprirrgs is hereby zoned entirely an R-1 Zoning District, except that if and when any area in the Village
shall hereafter be required to be serviced by a central sewer system, such an area shall automatically become an R-3 Zoning District,. provided however that any use bf   the land in sueh
an R-3 District of a density prohibited	in an R-1 District shall only be permitted by special use permt."

DD. Delete from Section 602.01 the minimum requirements for all zoning districts except R-1 and R-3 Zoning Districts.
EE. Delete Section 603.01 and insert in lieu thereof: "603.01 The boundaries of the R-1 District as established
by this Ordinance are the political boundaries of the Village as shown on the map published herewith and made part of this Ordinance which is designated	as the "Village of Pine Springs" which map is properly approved and filed with the Village
Clerk and is incorporated here in as fully as if set forth herein at length."

FF. Delete from Section 604 the uses for all zoning districts except R-1 and R-3 Zoning Districts.

GG. Delete Section 719-01 and	(5) and insert in lieu thereof:

"(5) Animals.	Any building	in which domestic farm animals are kept shall be a distance of fifty (50) feet or more from the lot line."

HH. Delete Section 902.

SECTION 5. REPEALED EXISTING ORDINANCE

Ordinance No. 5 entitled "An Ordinance Regulating The Location, Size, and Uses of Buildings, The Arrangement Of Buildings On Lots, And The Uses Of Land Within The Village Of Pine Springs, And Providing For Administration And
Enforcement And	Imposing Penalties For Violations'' is hereby repealed.

SECTION 6. EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance shall be and is hereby declared	to be in full force and effect from and after its passage and publica­ tion according	to law.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 17 (CON'T)



Passed by the Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs, Washington Cou ty, Minnesota, this 31st day of May, 1973.


Isl	Paul Linnerooth

Mayor

Attest:
Is/	Richard	Zietlow

Clerk
 
ORDINANCE NO. 18


AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING PLATTING AND SUBDIVISION REGULA­ TIONS TO PROVIDE FOR ORDERLY, ECONOMIC AND SAFE DEVELOPMENT OF LAND AND TO PROMOTE THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, MORALS AND GENERAL WELFARE IN THE VILLAGE OF PINE SPRINGS, WASHINGTON COUNTY, MINNESOTA.

The Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs, Washington County, Minnesota, Ordains:

SECTION 1	ADOPTION OF MODEL SUBDIVISION REGULATION CODE.

There is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety, except as hereinafter modified, the Model Subdivision Regula­ tion Code for Communities in Washington County	(hereinafter called "Code") as adopted on April 27, 1971, by the
Was ington County Planning Advisory Commission, of which at
least one copy is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.

SECTION 2	DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.

In addition to the purposes of the Code as set forth in Section 101 thereof, it is the overriding purpose of the
Village Council in adopting such Code to facilitate the develop­ ment of the Village in a manner consistent with its comprehen­
sive development plan and to provide standards which are applicable for low density rural residential development and which, in the event any portion of the Village should ever be required to be serviced by a central sewer system, would also be applicable for development involving higher residential densities and more diverse compatible land uses.

SECTION 3	DEFINITIONS.

A.Community.	Whenever	the word	"community" is used	in
the Code, it shall mean the Village of Pine Springs, Washington County, Minnesota.

B.	Governing Body. Whenever the words "governing body" are used in the Code, they shall mean the Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs, Washington County, Minnesota.

C.	Central Sewer System.	Whenever	the words "central sewer system" are used in this Ordinance, they shall mean a public central sanitary sewer system in the Village including
or connected	to the metropolitan disposal system as provided	in
Minnesota	Statutes, Chapter 473C.

D.	Pollution Control Ordinance.	Whenever the words "Pollution Control Ordinance" are used in this Ordinance, they shall mean any ordinance or regulation adopted by the Village Council to prevent the contamination of water.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 18 (CON'T)


SECTION 4	RURAL RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT

Except for areas of the Village which are required	to be serviced by· a central sewer system, no subdivision shall consist of lots, the average lot size of which is less than two and one-half	(2-1/2) acres.	No area shall be deemed
required to be serviced by a central sewer system unless (1) the Village Council determines by a two-thirds	(2/3) vote
of its members that for reasons of health, such area should be served by a central sewer system, or for reasons outside
of the control of the Village Council, a central sewer system with capacity to serve such area is extended	into the Village or ordered	in accordance with law to be extended	into the Village;	(2) the Village or owners of the land in such area will be held liable for all or a portion of the cost of such central sewer system; and	(3) the Village Council determines
that it is not economically feasible for the Village or property
owners to incur such liability without allowing for a higher density and more varied	land use.

SECTION 5	STAGED DEVELOPMENT.

Notwithstanding	any of the provisions	in this Ordinance to the contrary, the Village Council may decline approval of
a subdivision or prohibit	the issuance of any building permits
for lots in a subdivision in any area which th re is, or is
anticipated will be within five (5) years, required to be
serviced by a central sewer system until such time as an adequate central sewer system, public water main system, storm drainage system and highway system are available for the subdivider to connect to under the provisions of this Ordinance.

SECTION 6	EXISTING ORDINANCES

The provisions of this Model Subdivision Regulation Code are in addition to and not in replacement of the provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance and the Pollution Control Ordinance. Any provisions of the Zoning Ordinance relating to platting shall remain in full force and effect, except as they may be in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance.

SECTION 7	ADDITIONAL MODIFICATIONS OF CODE.

A.	Delete Section 101 (2) and insert in lieu thereof: ''(2) Provide for the health and safety of residents by requir­ ing properly designed	streets and adequate on site or central sewer and water systems, as the case may be.''

 


( '
'---
 
B.	Delete Section 301.04 and insert in lieu thereof: "301.04 Prior to consideration of the proposed	plan by the community authorities, the subdivider shall pay a fee as set forth below.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 18 (CON'T)


AREA NOT REQUIRING CENTRAL SEWER

(1)	For a minor subdivision resulting in three (3) or less lots, the fee shall be $30.00.

(2)	For major subdivision where the entire property to be subdivided abuts an existing platted or dedicated public
street and for which a concept plan may not be required under
Section 614.17, the fee shall be as follows:

 
(a)	4 to 15 lots
(b)	15 to 30 lots
(c)	over 30 lots
 
$60.00 80.00
100.00
 

(3)	For a major subdivision which would require a new platted or dedicated	street, but for which a concept plan may not be required under Section 614.17, the fee shall be
$100.00 plus $2.00 for each lot in the subdivision.

(4)	For a major subdivision which would require a new platted or dedicated street and which may require a concept plan under Section 614.17, the fee shall be $600.00 plus
$4.00 for each lot in the subdivisiou.

AREA REQUIRING CENTRAL SEWER

(1)	For a minor subdivision resulting in three (3) or less lots, the fee shall be $60.00.

(2)	For major subdivision where the entire property to be subdivided abuts an existing platted	or dedicated public
street and for which a comprehensive plan may not be required under Section 614.18, the fee shall be as follows:

(a) 4 to 15 lots	$120.00
(b) 15 to 30 lots	160.00
(c) over 30 lots	200.00

(3)	For a major subdivision which would require a new platted	or dedicated	street, but for which a comprehensive plan may not be required under Section 614.18, the fee shall be $200.00 plus $4.00 for each lot in the subdivision.

(4)	For a major subdivision which would require a new platted	or dedicated	street and which may require a comprehen­ sive plan under Section 614.18, the fee shall be $900.00 plus
$6.00 for each lot in the subdivision.

This fee will be used to cover public expenses incurred in connection with the review of the plan, and the subdivider shall be reimbursed for any portion of the fee not expended for such purpose.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 18 (CON'T)


\.._...:	C • De 1et e  the ref P r c· n c c :--:.	t n "f j f t e c:· n  (L )) nay : "	i n
S e c t  o n   3 0 2 • 03  a n din s e r t in   lie u	t h 1.:• r 'o f	" t h ir t y	( J 0 )   d a y s " •

D.	Delete the reference to "forty-five (45) days" in Section 302.04 and insert in lieu thereof "thirty (30) days".
E.	Delete Section-501.02(9) and insert in lieu thereof: "(9) ·In areas not required to be ser iced by a central
sewer system, a percolation	test and soil boring is required for each lot."

F.	Delete the second sentence in Section 501.03(1) and insert the following additional subsection to Section 501.03:

"(8) A property numbering system consistent with the Washington County Property Numbe.ring	System.,"

G.	Delete the second sentence in Section 602.01 and insert in lieu thereof:

"No plan shall be approved	if the site is not suitable for purposes of the kind proposed	by reason of potential flooding, topography, or adverse earth or rock formation or by reason of any need for an adequate and safe on-site sewer and water system."
H.	Delete Section 601.10 and insert in lieu thereof: "Private streets and reserve strips may be permitted
except in areas which are required to be serviced by a
central sewer system, provided	that adequate provision	is made entitling the Village to later acquire the street as a public right-of-way for nominal consideration and without the approval of the affected property	owners.	No public improvements shall be approved for any private street.	All streets for which public	improvements are approved shall be dedicated for pub 1ic use •''
I.	Delete Section 605.01 and insert in lieu thereof: "605.01. Minimum right-of-way widths and pavement widths
(face to face of curb) for each type of public street or
road shall he as follows:
 
TYPE
 
RIGHT-OF-WAY	ROADWAY
 
OF STREET
 
 	WIDTH
 
--W--I--DMT.H.--.
 
Thoroughfare

Collector Street Commercial or Indus-
trial Service Street Minor Street
Marginal Access Str. Cul-de-sac
 
120 feet	as determined by
traffj.c needs
80 feet	44 feet

60 feet	32 feet
60 feet	32.feet
60 feet	45   feet
turnaround	tU'rnaround
radius	radius
 
ORDINANCE NO. 18 (CON'T)



A similar requirement may be imposed with respect to
a   private street or road."

J. Delete- Section 605.13 and	insert	in	lieu	thereof:

"605.13 Curb and Gutter.	Curb and gutter shall be in­ cluded as part of the required street surface improvement in any area which is required to be   serviced.by a central sewer system an shall thus be designed for installation along both sides of all roadways."

K.	Delete Section 611.01.

L.	Delete the third sentence in Section 612.01.

M.	Delete Section 614.05 and insert in lieu thereof:

"614.05 Building Sites.	In any area required to be serviced by a central sewer system, each lot shall provide an adequate building site at least one (1)   foot above the street grade."

N.	Delete Section 614.16 and insert in lieu thereof:

"614.16 Large Lot Planning.	In any area which is to
be platted	into lots in excess of	40,000 square feet  or 160
feet in width at the building	set back line, a preliminary resubdivision plan may be required showing a potential and feasible way in which the lot or lots may be resubdivied	in future years for more intensive use of the land	The placement of buildings or structures upon such lots shall allow for such potential resubdivision.,"

O. Add	this following subdivision to Section 614:

"614.17 Concept Plan for Potential Development.,	In any area which is not required	to be serviced by a central sewer system, if the subdivision exceeds twenty	(20) acres or is part of a larger parcel of land which is in excess of
twenty	(20) acres and is under substantially	the same owner­ ship, a concept plan may be required	to demonstrate that the proposed	subdivision will not prevent		the entire parcel of land from being	further developed as a feasible and potential planned unit development at an average density of at least
two dwelling units per acre in the event that the area should
ever in the future be required to be serviced by a central sewer system.	Such a concept plan may be required to contain any and all components contemplated	in Part VI of the Comprehensive Development Plan for such a concept plan and
in the planned unit development provisions of the Village Zoning Ordinance.	No such plan shall be required if the subdivision is included in a concept plan submitted	in con­ nection with another subdivision previously	approved within four years.	The placement of buildings or structures on
 
ORDINANCE NO. 18 (CON'T)



lots in the subdivided area and the provisions in the sub­ division plan for utility easements and public rights of way shall be consistent with such concept plan.

614.18 Comprehensive Plan for Proposed Development.	In any area which is required to be serviced by a central sewer system, if the subdivision exceeds twenty	(20)   acres or is part of a .larger parcel which is i.n exces·s of twenty	(20)
acres and under substantially	the same ownership, a comprehen­ sive plan may be required to show a potential	nd feasible
way in which the entire parcel may be developed	Such a comprehensive plan may be required	to cont in any and all components which may be required	in a concept plan as provided in Section 614.17.	No such plan shall be required if the subdivision is included in a concept plan previously	submitted under Section 614.17 in connection with another subdivision previously approved within four (4)   years or is consistent
with a comprehensive development plan of the Village hereafter
adopted by the Village Council providing	for development of the density and character contemplated	in the subdivision request."

P. Delete the first two sentences in Section 702.05 and insert in lieu thereof:

"If concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed	on
both sides of streets, the construction shall be in accordance with Standard Specification for Highway Construction, M.H.D. Spec. No. 2531."

Q. Delete Section 702.07.

R.	Delete the first sentence in Section 703.01 and insert in lieu thereof:

"A minimum water main of six-inch cast iron pipe or other approved pipe shall be required for all common water systems."

S.	Delete the first sentence in Section 703.02 and insert in lieu thereof:

"Unless otherwise required, a sanitary sewer of 8 inch vitrified	clay pipe or other appropriate pipe for all common sewer systems shall be installed as the minimum	size placed at grades approved by the engineer."
T.	Delete Section 704.02 and insert in lieu thereof: "704.02.	Any subdivision in an area which is not re-
quired to be serviced by a central sewer system must be such
that each lot will accommodate or have access to an on-site
eptic	system in conformity with the Pollution Control Ordinance. Tests to demonstrate the suitability of each lot or a common drainage field shall be made at the expense of the subdivider,
 
ORDINANCE NO. 18 (CON T)



and a sketch map shall be submitted to identify the specific locations where tests were made."

U.	Delete  the words  "WaHhington County" in Section 704.03 ..

V.	Add an additional sentence to Section 705.01:

"Such we 11 sha 11 a 1so comp 1y  wit h a 11 app 1i. cab 1e p ro- visions of the Pollution Control Ordinance."

W.	Delete Section 801.01(7) and insert in lieu thereof:

"(7) Water Mains. In any area required to be serviced by a central sewer system or in any case where mains from a public water system are available, the subdivider shall be
required	to install water mains to serve each lot in the sub­ division and to connect the same to such available public water system.	If no such system is available, the developer
shall be required to cap the water mains and connect the same as service becomes available, in which event the Village Council
may provide that no building permits shall be issued for the development of the subdivision until such public water system becomes available."

X.	Delete Section 801.01(8) and insert in lieu thereof:

"(8) Central Sewer System.	In any area required to be serviced by  a central sewer system, the subdivider shall be required to install sanitary sewers, including laterals	to serve each lot in the subdivision and to connect the same to any available central sewer system.	If no such system is available, the developer shall be required	to cap the sewers and connect the same as service becomes available, in which event the Village Council may provide that no building permits shall be issued for the development of the subdivision until such central sewer system becomes available, or that the developer install adequate on-site disposal units.	If such disposal units are installed, the developer shall (1)	locate them as to permit easy and the least expensive connection as service becomes available; (2) provide that underground plumbing	extend	three (3) feet beyond		the footing which plumb­ ing shall be plugged; and	(3) provide that the area around
the stack be scored so that the septic tank line can be dis­
connected and connection made with the central sewer system. In any area which it is anticipated will be required to be serviced by a central sewer system within five (5) years,
the Village Council may also impose on the subdivider the
foregoing requirements set forth in this section SOL 01 (8)."

Y.	Delete the first sentence of Section 808.02 and insert in lieu thereof:

"It is hereby the announced policy of the community that full and complete utility systems be installed	in all areas
 
ORDINANCE NO. 18 (CON'T)


which are required to he serviced	by  a central sewer system as soon as is practicably and feasibly  consistent with the orderly and staged development of such areas."

SECTION 8	EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance shall be and is hereby declared to be in full force and effect from and after its passage and  publica­ tion acco ding to law.

Passed by the Village Council of the Village of Pine Springs, Washington County, Minneosta, this 31st day of May,	1973.


Isl Paul Linnerooth

Mayor

Attest:
Isl Richard Zietlow


Clerk
 
.1


01\.DINANCE NO. 19


AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING REGULATIONS FOR THE CONTROL OF SHADE TREE
DISEASES, PRIMARILY DUTCH EL AND OAK WILT DISEASES.

The Council of the City of Pine Springs, Washington County ordains:

SECTION 1.

Minnesota	Statues Chapter 18.023, Section 66 and Minnesota Department of Agriculture rules and regulations, Chapter 4, Agr.
101-106 pertaining	to shade tree disease control are hereby incorporated by reference to apply to the entire area within the City limits.

SECTION 2.

The Cotincil has created the position of Tree Inspector to carry out the control and prevention of Dutch Elm Disease and Oak Wilt Disease and other epidemic diseases of shade trees.	The Tree Inspector or his duly authorized agent may enter upon any private premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out the duties assigned him under this ordinance.

SECTION 3.

Property owners in the City of Pine Springs having diseased trees on   their property shall cause the infected tree to be removed and destroyed by chipping, burning, burial, or bark removal so as
to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of the Dutch
Elm and Oak Wilt Fungus, and the bark beetles related to these diseases.

SECTION 4.

Removal and disposal of diseased trees on private property
shall be at the expense of the property owner.	If removal and disposal
are not completed within the allotted time limit, the City may.have
the tree or trees removed and disposed as special assessment levied against the property owner payable with interest in insta.llments
not to exceed five years from the date of the assessment.

SECTION 5.

This Ordinance shall take effect ·and be in force from and after its passage and publication.









Clerk; R/ G. Zietlow
 


Reply  to
RICHARD ZIETLOW
Clerk
:i.,_	3060     Oakdale    Drive
\. :..o. St Paul. Minnesota SS109
 
City of	Pine Springs WASHINGTON        COUNTY MINNESOTA
 





 

An  ardin'lnce  rep'?.1.li"1g  Crd. l!l'F1C9   Nu:"'.b r  19 est!!:,lis ing
regulations for the Control	f Sh3de T 9e	iseqses.

The  Council  of  the City of  Pine Sprb s, \T sh:. .t:;n  · ou t,.r ordains:

Section 1.	 

O:rdinanca Num8'3"" 19,  :1!1  Ordiriance estg,blishinq  "!'"e ,.1 :1:1:..icns   fo
t11e  cont ol of  .:3h.,ds  T:ree  Dis9q_.:;es,  prbarily .u,1t;	l am
O k  Wilt  .1..11.se ses,    p s ed	-!overrih:>r 5 1974 is e?3'.'.?.le'i e::-...fec"':.ive
Cece bgr Jl,1981.

Pas:::ed  by tl-:e  Council of th<?.  City o:' Pbe Sp:rfoc-s,  '!.'!1.s,.ri17
County,	innesota this 4 t . day of August 1981.



 





Clerk




























777-57'1A
 

'-	ORDINANCE NO. 20

AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO ANIMAL CONTROL






20.	Animals

20.1	Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms are defined as follows:

I) "Owner" means any person owning, harboring or keeping an animal of any kind,
domestic, or non-domestic.
2)	"Animal" means an animal of any kind, domestic, or non-domestic.
3)	"Domestic Animals" means all dogs and cats, male and female, spayed or unspayed, of
any age.
4)	"At large" means any licensed or unlicensed domestic animal within the City, except:
a)	any licensed domestic animal on a leash when under the physical control of any person;
b)	any licensed domestic animal within any motor vehicle and
c)	any licensed domestic animal upon the premises of the owner or harborer thereof
5)	"Dog" means all male and female, spayed or unspayed of any age.
6)	"Animal Control Officer" means any person or persons appointed by the City Council
as Animal Control Officer or Deputy to enforce the provisions of Ordinance 20 - Animals.
7)	"Kennel" means any place where 4 or more of any single type of domestic pets, over 4 months of age, are owned, boarded, bred or offered for sale.
8)	'Wild Animal,, means any mammal, amphibian, reptile or bird that is of a species not
usually domesticated, and which, due to size, wild nature or other characteristic, is or may be dangerous to humans.  The term includes animals and birds, the keeping of which is licensed or prohibited by the State or Federal government, including, but not limited to wolves, raptors, and pheasants.  By way of example and not of limitation, the term "wild animal,, includes snakes, eagles, ocelots, jaguars, cougars, weasels, ferrets, badgers, monkeys, chimpanzees, deer, bison, skunks, and raccoons. The term also includes crossbreeds, such as a cross between a dog and a coyote, a cross between a dog and a wolt: and a cross between a cat and any member of the family Felidae.

20.2	Keeping of Certain Animals Absolutely Prohibited
1.	Prohibitions.   A person must not own, stable, keep, harbor, hold or maintain within the City any of the following:
A Any wild animal: or
B.	Any hoofed animal or
C.	Any hive or other facility for the housing of bees on less than a 3-acre site.
D.	Any chicken.
2.	Exceptions.   Section 20.02 does not apply to the following:
 
A.	Animals which are brought into the City solely for participating in any circus or show; or
'-	B. Any public zoo; or
C.	Any bonafide re ch institution or veterinary hospital, provided that such institution
or hospital employs protective devices adequate to prevent such animal(s) from escaping or injuring the public; or
D.	Pot bellied pigs kept by an owner as a pet.
E.	Any animals prohibited in section 20.02 (1) that are owned, ·stabled, kept, harbored, held or maintained within the City as of the date the City Council adopts this Chapter, and
that are reported to the City in writing by the Owner on or before May 1, 2000.  The purpose of this exception is to allow the City to collect information about prohibited animals within the City so that the City can properly determine how such animals should
be treated under the provisions of this Chapter.

20.3	Domestic Animals Running At Large. The running at large of any domestic animal in the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is hereby prohibited. No person owning or harboring a domestic animal shall permit the same to run at large in the City licensed or taxed in accordance with this chapter, or not.

20.4	License and Registration Required. All domestic animals over 4 months of age kept, harbored or maintained by their owners in the City shall be licensed and registered. Domestic animals licenses shall be issued by the Administrator upon payment of a license tax to be established by Council resolution for each domestic animal. The owner shall state at the time application is made for such license and upon printed forms provided for such purpose the name, address, and signature of the owner declaring the owner to be 18 years of age or older; and the name, breed, color, and sex of each domestic animal owned or  kept and shall provide evidence of compliance with the requirements of vaccination in Section 20.07.  The provisions of this section shall not be intended to apply to domestic animals whose owners are visitors temporarily within the City for a period of less than 60 days, nor to domestic animals brought into the City for the purpose of participating in any domestic animal show, nor to "seeing eye" dogs properly trained to assist blind persons when such dogs are actually being used by blind persons for the purpose of aiding them in going from place to place.
All licenses shall be valid for one year from each June 1 to the following May 31. License applications may be made from May 1 through May 31 each year without penalty. When application is made after May 31 for any animal subject to licensing prior to that date, an additional fee shall be charged for the license. The additional fee herein prescribed is assessed to cover the additional costs of administration and not as a penalty and the payment of such a fee shall not exempt any owner for any penalties imposed for any violation of this ordinance.

20.5	Tag. Upon payment of the license fee, the Administrator shall issue to the owner a license certificate and a metallic tag for each domestic animal so licensed. The tag shall have stamped thereon the number corresponding with the number on the certificate. Every owner shall see that the tag is constantly worn by the domestic animal.  In case a
 


'-·.
 
tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by the Administrator  upon presentation of a receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year, and the payment of a fee for such duplication.  Tags shall not be transferable from one domestic animal to another and no refunds shall be made on any license fee because of death of the animal or the owners' leaving the City before expiration of the license period.

20.6	Impounding.  The Animal Control Officer may, when necessary, apprehend any domestic animal· found running at large and impound, or cause a ·notice of violation of this order to be issued to the owner.  The poundmaster, upon receiving any domestic animal, shall make a complete registry, entering the breed, color, and sex of such and whether licensed.  Iflicensed, the poundmaster shall enter the name and address of the owner and number of the license tag.

Notice to Owner and Redemption. Forthwith upon the impounding of any licensed domestic animal, the owner shall be notified. The owner of any domestic animal so impounded may reclaim such upon payment of any unpaid license fee, any fine, and all costs and charges incurred for impounding, maintenance, or treatment of such domestic animal.  If,at the expiration of seven days from the date of notice, or of impoundment, if ownership cannot be ascertained or such domestic animal shall not have been redeemed, it may be disposed of according to law.

20.7	Vaccination. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any domestic animal to keep or maintain such unless it shall have been vaccinated by a licensed veterinary surgeon with anti-rabies vaccine, currently valid for the license period for which such is kept or maintained. No license provided for herein shall be issued except upon compliance with this section.

20.8	Animal Control Officer and Deputies. The City Council is hereby empowered to contract for Animal Control Officer and impounding service to enforce Sections 20.01 through 20.23. The City Council shall designate the Animal Control Officer and deputies. and they shall have police powers to cite owners of animals for violations of this Code, in addition to their power of impounding.

20.9	Nuisance. Every owner of a domestic animal shall exercise proper care and control of the animal to prevent the animal from becoming a public nuisance. Excessive or untimely barking, molesting passersby, chasing persons, vehicles, bicycles, skateboarders, roller skaters, etc., attacking persons or other domestic animals, damaging property, running at large, or similar acts performed by animals, shall be deemed a nuisance.
 

 








.'\.. 	
 
20.10	Cleaning Litter. Every person who takes a domestic animal off the property where it is boarded shall have on his/her person materials to remove excretory matter that the domestic animal may deposit, and that person is also responsible to see that such matter is picked up and pr perly disposed of, and a failure to have such material on his/her person or to pick up excretory matter so deposited shall be deemed a nuisance .
 
20.11	Officers May Kill Animals. Police Officers are hereby authorized and empowered to kill any animal found in violation of this chapter whenever such animal cannot be safely taken up and impounded. No impounding or killing of any animal shall exempt the owner or harborer of such   mal from the penalties provided  in this Code.

20.12	Biting Animals/Quarantine. It is unlawful for an owner to fail to restrain an animal from biting any person, whether or not the owner is present at the time of the bite. Whenever any person owning an animal within the City shall learn that such animal has bitten any human being, such person shall immediately impound said animal in a place of confinement where it cannot escape or have access to any human being or other animal and shall also immediately notify the Animal Control Officer.
The Animal Control Officer when informed that an animal has bitten any human being shall ascertain the identity of such animal and the person owning or harboring and shall immediately direct such person to immediately impound such animal as herein required. The Animal Control Officer shall also immediately notify the Administrator of the place
where the animal is impounded.
Any animal which has bitten a human being shall be impounded continuously for 10 days.
The Animal Control Officer, or designee shall inspect said animal from time to time during its period of confinement and determine whether such animal is infected with rabies. If, on or before the tenth day the animal shows signs suggestive of rabies, the Animal Control Officer may destroy the animal and submit the carcass to an appropriate person for rabies
examination.   During the ten day quarantine period the Animal Control Officer shall have
access to the premises where such animal is kept at all reasonable hours and may take possession of the animal and confine it in the City pound or other suitable place at the
expense of the owner. The owner or person in possession or harboring such animal shall immediately notify the Animal Control Officer or designee of any evidence of sickness or disease in the animal during its period of confinement and shall promptly deliver its carcass to the Animal Control Officer or designee in case of its death during such period.

20.13	Potentially Dangerous Animals.
Subdivision I. Definitions:  "Potentially dangerous animal" means any animal that:
a)	when unprovoked inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal on public or private property; or
b)	when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person, including a person on a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, or the like, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property, other than the dog owners' property, in an apparent attitude of attack; or
c)	has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked,  causing injury
or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic animals.
Subdivision 2. Attack by Animal. It shall be unlawful for an owner to fail to restrain an animal from biting, chasing, or attacking any person or domestic animal on public or private property, whether or not the owner is present at the time of the incident. Subdivision 3. Requirements. The owner of a potentially dangerous animal shall:
a)	keep the animal, while on the owner's property, in a proper enclosure or kennel. Ifthe
animal is outside the enclosure, it must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or
\_	leash and under the physical control of a responsible person. The muzzle must be made in
 
a manner that will prevent the animal from biting any person or animal but will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiratio and
b)	post clearly visible warning sign to inform that there is a potentially dangerous animal
on the property. The sign must include a warning symbol to warn children of the presence of a potentially dangerous animal on the property.
Subdivision 4. Non-compliance. The owner of an animal which has been declared as potentially dangerous by the animal control authority shall comply with the above requirements within fourteen (14) days after receipt of notice that the animal is potentially dangerous. The animal control authority shall immediately seize any potentially dangerous animal whose owner has failed to comply with this section. An animal may be reclaimed by its owner upon a showing of compliance and payment of impounding ,boarding fees, and fines. An animal not claimed within seven (7) days may be destroyed, and the owner is liable to the animal control authority for costs incurred in confining and disposing of the animal.
Subdivision 5. Exemption. Animals may not be declared potentially dangerous if the threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person:
(I) who was committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises
occupied by the owner of the animal
(2)	who was provoking, tonnenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal or who can be
shown to have repeatedly, in the past, provoked, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal; or
(3)	who was committing or attempting to commit a crime.

20. 14 Dangerous Animals.
Subdivision I. Attack by an Animal. It shall be unlawful for an owner to fail to restrain an animal from inflicting or attempting to inflict bodily injury to any person or other animal whether or not the owner is present. The Court upon a finding of the defendant's guilt hereunder, is authorized to order, as part of the disposition of the case, that the animal be destroyed based on a written order containing one or more of the following findings of fact:
I) The animal is dangerous as demonstrated by a vicious attack, an unprovoked attack, an attack without warning, or multiple attacks, or
2)	The owner of the animal has demonstrated an inability or unwillingness to control the
animal in order to prevent injury to persons or other animals.
If the Court does not order the destruction of the animal, the Court shall, as an alternative, order the defendant to provide, and show proof to the Court ot: public liability insurance
in the minimum amount of $300,000.
Subdivision 2. Destruction of Dangerous Animals. The Animal Control Officer, or designee, shall have the authority to order the destruction of a dangerous animal.
I)	Definition. A Dangerous Animal is an animal which has:
a.	Caused serious bodily injury or disfigurement to any person, or
b.	Engaged in any attack on any person under circumstances which indicate danger to personal safety, or,
c.	Exhibited unusually aggressive behavior, such as an attack on another animal, or
d.	Bitten one or more persons on two or more occasions.
 
2) Procedure. The Animal Control Officer or designee, after having been advised of existence of a dangerous animal may proceed in the following manner:
a.	The Administrator or designee shall cause the owner of the animal to be notified in
writing or in person that the animal appears to be dangerous.  This owner shall be notified as to dates, times, places, and parties bitten, and shall be given ten days to request a hearing before the City Council for detennination as to the dangerous nature of the animal
i.	Ifno owner requests a hearing within ten days of said notice, the City Council shall  make such order as he/she deems proper. The City Council may order the Animal Control
Officer to take the animal into custody for destruction. Ifthe animal is ordered into
custody for destruction, the owner shall immediately make the animal available to the Animal Control Officer, and failure to do so shall be a misdemeanor.
ii.	Ifan owner requests a hearing for determination  as to the dangerous nature of the
animal, the hearing shall be held before the City Council, who shall set a date for hearing not more than four weeks after demand is received.  The records of the City shall be admissible for consideration without further foundation.  After the hearing, the City Council shall make such orders as the evidence directs. The order may require that the Animal Control Officer take the animal into custody for destruction.
b.	Nothing in this section shall prevent the Animal Control Officer or designee from
ordering the immediate destruction of a rabies suspect animal pursuant to Section 20.12.
c.	Any person who harbors an animal after it has been found by the Animal Control Officer or designee to be dangerous and ordered into custody for destruction shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Subdivision 3. Stopping an Attack. Ifany police officer or Animal Control Officer is witness to an attack by an animal upon a person or another animal, the officer may take whatever means the officer deems appropriate to bring the attack to an end and prevent further injury to the victim.
Subdivision 4. Exemption. Animals may not be declared dangerous ifthe threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person:
(l) who was committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal;
(2)	who was provoking, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal or who can be
shown to have repeatedly, in the past, provoked, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal; or
(3)	who was committing or attempting to commit a crime.

20.15	Interference with Officers and Animal Control Officers. No person shall take or attempt to take from any officer or Animal Control Officer any animal taken up in compliance with this Chapter, or in any manner, interfere with or hinder such officer or Animal Control Officer in the discharge of duties under this Chapter.

20.16	Gifts of Certain Animals Prohibited. No person not duly licensed to operate a pet shop by the Council shall give away baby chickens, baby ducks, other unmatured small fowl or baby ra bits as prizes or pets.
 
20.17	Other Animals Running At Large. No person who owns or has custody of any
horse, mule, goat, swine, poultry, cattle, monkey, domesticated snake, or other animal that creates a public nuisance shall pennit the same to run at large in the City.
Any such animals or fowl found running at large shall be impounded, and a notice of impounding posted as provided in Section 20.06.
Animals may be redeemed prior to their sale or disposition by the owner upon payment to the Administrator of a fee to be detennined by Council Resolution.

20.18	Humane Care. All owners shall provide their animal with sufficient food and water, proper shelter, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment. No person shall poison, ill treat, or abandon any animal. Unwanted animals may be given to the Animal Control Officer at no cost to the owner.

20.19	Whenever the Animal Control Officer encounters a stray animal suffering pain, he/she shall act promptly to notify the owner. If unable to ascertain or locate the owner, he/she may take the animal to a veterinarian for treatment or to the pound for disposition. The cost of any care or treatment shall be borne by the owner.

20.20	Animal Control Officer Authorized to Contract for Pounding Services. The Animal Control Officer, upon approval of the City Council, is authorized to contract for necessary pounding services on behalf of the City. Such services shall only be used by the City where necessary for proper enforcement of the law or where a safety haz.ard exists.

20.21	Lien for Pounding and Transportation Costs and Notice. The City may impound any animal where necessary for the proper enforcement of the law or where a safety hazard exists. No animal which has been impounded shall be released to the owner or custodian until all fines, reasonable pounding and transportation costs have been paid and the authorized person having charge of the impounded animal shall have a lien for such costs.
In all cases where an animal is impounded the owner, ifknown, or the custodian, if the owner is unknown, shall be immediately notified. Ifthe owner or custodian be unknown, and cannot by reasonable effort be ascertained, or shall not, within five (5) days
after Notice, redeem such animal by paying the expenses incurred as aforesaid, it may be
treated as a stray, and be dealt with as such.

20.22	Kennels, License Required. No person shall maintain a kennel where animals are kept without a license. Application for a license shall be made to the Administrator. The Council shall, after due consideration, grant or deny each application.
License Fee. The license fee for a kennel license shall be set by Council resolution. Such license fee shall be in addition to the fees payable for individual licenses for animals kept in the kennel.
All licenses shall be valid for one year from each June 1 to the following May 31.

20.23	Violation/Penalty.   Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
 
20.24	Effective Date.  This ordinance shall be and is hereby declared to be in full force and effect from and after its passage and publication according to law.

Passed by the Pine Springs City Council, Washington County, Minnesota, this 2nd day of November,  1999



Frank Bastyr (by signature) Mayor


Karen Pirozzoli (by signature) City Administrator
 
Pine  Springs  Zoning  Code	Tower  (Jtdinance  #  21	November 7, 2000
















Ordinance # 21


City of Pine Springs Zoning Code


Section 21


Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Ordinance and
Tower Overlay District

For


The City of Pine Springs Washington County, Minnesota




Approved by the City of Pine Springs November 7, 2000
 
Pine Springs Zoning Code	Tower Oldinance # 21	November 7, 2000







City of Pine Springs Ordinance No. 21 City of Pine Springs Zoning Code
Section 21 - Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower Overlay District



Section 21 -- Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower Overlay District.


21.1	Purpose and Intent.
The Commercial Wireless Telecommunications Tower Overlay District (or Tower Overlay District) is hereby established. The purpose and intent of the
district is to:


1.	Reasonably accommodate the provision of Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Services to the general public;
2.	Minimize adverse visual effects of Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Towers, Antennae, or accessory equipment through careful design and siting standards;
3.	Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failures through structural standards and setback requirements; and,
4.	Maximize the use of existing and approved towers structures and/or buildings for the location of new Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Towers or Antennae in order to reduce the number of such structures needed to accommodate Commercial Wireless Telecommunication services.
5.	Provide additional standards above and beyond the standards of the underlying zoning district.


21.2	Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall mean:

1.	Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower. Any pole, spire, structure or combination thereof, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna or to serve as an antenna for commercial purposes.





2
 
Pine Springs Zoning Code	Tower Ordinance# 21	November 7, 2000

2.	Antennae. That portion of any equipment used to radiate or receive radio frequency energy for transmitting or receiving radio or television waves. Antennae may consist of metal, carbon fiber, or other electromagnetically conductive rods or elements.
3.	Tower Accessory Equipment. A structure located at the base of a
tower housing radio receiving/transmitting equipment and other associated electronic equipment necessary for a communications facility.
4.	Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Facility. The combination of a Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower, Antennae and Tower Accessory Equipment.


21.3	Tower Overlay District Boundaries, Authority.
The boundaries of the Tower Overlay District shall be as illustrated on attached Exhibit A or as adopted from time to time by the City Council and depicted on the Official Zoning Map of the City. The Tower Overlay District standards shall supercede the standards for the underlying zoning district only as such standards apply to Commercial Wireless Telecommunication  Facilities.


21.4	Conditional Use Permit Required.

1.	No person shall install a Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Facility or any portion thereof, at a height greater than is allowed for structures in the underlying zoning district without first being issued a Commercial Wireless Telecommunication  Conditional Use Permit. Permits will only be issued for locations within the Tower Overlay Districts.
2.	Ifthe property or any portion of the Commercial Wireless
Telecommunication Facility changes ownership, the City must be informed immediately of the name and address of the new owner(s).
3.	The Conditional Use Permit, once granted for a particular site, will serve as the operating authority for any future co-located antennae and ground facilities located on the same site. The owners of any co-located
facilities shall be subject to any and all conditions of the Conditional Use Permit granted for the site.










3
 
Pine Springs Zoning Code	Tower Ordinance# 21	November 7, 2000



21.5	Building Permits Required
Building Permits are required for the construction of any tower, placement of antennae, and ground facilities of the initial installation .. Building Permits are also required for any future co-location of antennae and additional ground facilities. The process for applying for a Building Permit for Wireless Communication Facilities shall be consistent with the Building Permit Process and general policies of the City in effect at the time of application.





21.6	Applications for Conditional Use Permit.
Applications submitted to the City for a Conditional Use Permit for a Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower shall include the following information:


1.	A sketch drawn to scale acceptable to the City and the City Engineer which illustrates:

a.	The parcel of land on which the tower and accessory ground facilities are to be located
b.	The buildings located and to be located on the tower parcel.
c.	The buildings located within 100 feet of the perimeter of the tower parcel.
d.	Access easements as necessary to the tower parcel.



2.	A sketch drawn to scale or a photo image acceptable to the City Planner and City Engineer which illustrates the relative size of the proposed Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower or existing structure on which the Antenna will be located compared to structures located within 100 feet of the perimeter of the parcel on which the tower is located and which illustrates the visibility of such tower from adjoining parcels located within 100 feet of the perimeter of the parcel on which the tower is located. The City may also require a visual impact demonstration including mockups and/or photo montages and plans for painting the tower.








4
 
Pine  Springs  Zoning  Code	Tower Ordinance  # 21	November 7, 2000



3.	A report from a qualified licensed professional engineer which:


a.	Describes the commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower height and design including a cross-section and elevation.
b.	Certifies the Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower's compliance with structural and electrical standards.
c.	Documents the height above grade for the mounting positions, which can be used for co-location and the minimum separation distances between such co-location positions.
d.	Describes the Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower's capacity to support Antennae, including an example of the number and type of antennas that can be accommodated on !he Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower.

4.	A two (2) year plan for Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Facilities to be located within the City shall be submitted by the applicant. The City acknowledges that such plans are fluid and in all likelihood will change depending upon market demands for the service. The City will maintain an inventory of all existing and reasonably anticipated cell site installations. The applicant shall provide the following written information in each two-year plan and the plan must be updated with each submittal for a new Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower Permit as necessary:


a.	A description of the radio frequencies to be used for each technology.
b.	A list of all existing sites to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed cell sites within the City for these services by the applicant.
c.	A presentation size map of the City, which shows the two-year plan for cell sites, or if individual properties are not known, the geographic service areas of the cell sites.
d.	The cost of mailing addresses for all property owners of record located within 1,000 feet of the subject property to be complied by the City.











5
 
Pine Springs Zoning Code	Tower Ordinance# 21	November 7, 2000







e.	An application· fee or escrow in an amount prescribed from time to time by City Council resolution as necessary to reimburse the City for costs incurred to process the Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower Permit Application. Any amount in escrow not needed for reasonable costs once the Permit process is complete will be returned to the applicant.
f.	Confirmation that the applicant is properly licensed by the FCC, or is the authorized representative of a Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Provider properly licensed by the FCC.
g.	Written authorization from the property owner describing the area which will be subject to the tower lease and acknowledging that the owner of the Tower and Facilities will be responsible for removal of the Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower, Antennae, and Tower Accessory Equipment which is unused or abandoned for twelve ( 12) consecutive months, as provided for in this ordinance.

h.	Documentation of the steps to be taken by applicant to avoid causing destructive interference to co-located previously established public safety communications facilities.
1.	A detailed landscape plan, which indicates how Tower Accessory Equipment, if any, will be screened.
J.	A bond or escrow of an amount recommended by the City Engineer for removal of abandoned Towers and associated Facilities, or portions thereof.


21.7	Planning Commission Review.
Upon receipt of a completed application, the City shall schedule a hearing before the Planning Commission, which shall be preceded by ten days mailed notice to the record owners of property located with 1,000 feet of the parcel on which the tower will be located. The Planning Commission shall make recommendations to the City Council regarding the issuance of the  Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower Permit and, in particular, in regard to the following:



1.	Compliance of application with the City regulations, development standards, and other reasonable engineering criteria the City may establish.

6
 
Pine Springs Zoning Code	Tower Ordinance # 21	November 7, 2000


2.	Proposed  conditions,  as necessary,  to prevent  the Commercial Wireless  Telecommunication   Tower,  Antennae  and  Tower  Accessory Equipment  from  becoming  a nuisance  to  surrounding  property  owners.



21.8	City Council Review.
Upon receipt of Planning Commission recommendations, the City Council shall review the application. The City Council may approve the application subject to conditions, table its review until a date certain, or deny the application for a Commercial Wireless Telecommunication  Tower Permit. Ifthe application is approved by the City Council, a Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower Conditional Use Permit shall be issued upon the execution of a Commercial Wireless Telecommunication  Tower Ground Use
Agreement. The agreement shall be signed by the applicant and property owner
and the terms of the agreement shall include the following:


1.	A list of the conditions of approval to the Commercial Wireless Telecommunication  Tower Permit.
2.	A statement indicating that failure to comply with the conditions of approval shall result in the removal of the Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower, Antennae or Tower Accessory Equipment.
3.	A statement indicating that the expenses incurred by the City to enforce the provisions of the Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower Agreement shall be reimbursed by the applicant.
4.	A statement which requires the applicant to utilize the procedures established by the FCC to resolve any reasonable complaints received relating to interference allegedly caused by the Commercial Wireless Telecommunication  Tower.
5.	A statement indicating that a Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower which has not been used for twelve (12) consecutive months shall be deemed abandoned and may be required to be removed as provided for in this ordinance or in the same manner and pursuant to the same procedures as for hazardous and substandard buildings (Minn. Stat. 463.15 through 463.261 and amendments thereto).






7
 
Pine Springs Zoning Code	Tower Ordinance# 21	November 7, 2000





21. 09 Co- Location Requirements.


Except as hereinafter provided, antennae utilized to provide Commercial Wireless Telecommunication services shall be located on existing towers or structures. In the event that co-location is not possible, the. applicant must demonstrate that a good faith effort was made to co-locate on existing towers and structures within 1/2 mile of the City limits, but an agreement could not be reached.



21.10	Exceptions to Co-Location Requirements.


The City Council may waive any or all of the co-location requirements and allow additional Towers to be erected, but only within the Tower Overlay District, if it is determined that:


1.	The Antennae and/or Tower Accessory Equipment would cause the structural capacity of an existing or approved tower or building to be exceeded, as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower or building cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate such Antennae or Tower Accessory Equipment at a reasonable cost.
2.	The Antennae and/or Tower Accessory Equipment would cause
interference materially impacting the usability of existing Antennae or Tower Accessory Equipment as documented by a qualified radio frequency engineer and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
3.	Existing or approved towers and buildings within the applicant's search radius cannot or will not accommodate the Antennae and/or Tower Accessory Equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified radio frequency engineer.
4.	Other unforeseen reasons make it infeasible to locate the Antennae and/or Tower Accessory Equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building.









8
 
Pine Springs Zoning Code	Tower Ordinance # 21	November 7, 2000



21.11	Construction Permits - Building Permits.
All Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Towers erected, constructed, or located within the City, and all wiring therefore, shall comply with the requirements set forth in the Uniform Building Code.


21.12	Tower Standards.
Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Towers shall comply with the following standards unless the City Council grants a variance as necessary to reasonably accommodate the Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower. Variance procedures shall be processed according to the appropriate provisions of the Pine Springs Municipal Code.

1.	Design.
a.	To blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color and architectural treatment.
b.	To be of a monopole design unless the City Council determines that an alternative design would better blend into the surrounding environment.
c.	All proposed Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least three additional users.
d.	Where possible, all proposed Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at various heights.


2.	Setbacks From Lot Lines.
The proposed setbacks of each application for the locations of Wireless Communication Towers and Facilities shall be subject to review, revision, and approval by the City Planning Commission and City Council.


3.	Height.
The maximum height of any Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower, including all antennas and other attachments, shall not exceed 150 feet.





9
 
Pine Springs Zoning Code	Tower Ordinance # 21	November 7, 2000





21.13	Lighting.
At night, Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means, unless required by the FAA, FCC, or other government agency with authority over such matters.


21.14	Signs and Advertising.
The use of any portion of a Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Tower for signs other than warning or equipment information is prohibited.


21.15	Interference with Public Safety Telecommunication.
No Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Facility shall interfere with public safety telecommunications. All Commercial Wireless telecommunication towers/antennas shall comply with FCC regulations and licensing requirements.

21.16	Accessory Utility Buildings, Ground Maintenance Equipment.
All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment, and shall be surrounded by a perimeter fence and screened with sufficient trees and shrubs as determined by the City to reduce the visual impact of the installation.


21.17	Abandoned or Unused Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. All abandoned or unused towers, antennae, and associated above­ ground structures, equipment, or facilities shall be removed within twelve ( 12) months of the cessation of operations of a Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Facility, unless a time extension is approved by the City Council. In the event the tower or other facility is not removed as required, the tower and facilities may be removed by the City and the costs of removal assessed against the bond or escrow held by the City for such purposes.

21.18	Penalties. Penalties for violating this ordinance shall be as stipulated by the penalty provision of the City Building Code in force at the time of violation.






-
10
 
Exhibit  A





Pine Springs




-





























 
r..:·.=·.···=···m···.m···:·t·l
 
Tower
 
[ &=$h Over ay
District




s

 

...n••	...  .,
 
ORDINANCE NO. 22


ILLICIT DISCHARGE ORDINANCE




Section 1	Purpose of Ordinance

The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Pine Springs through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the MS4 permit issued to the City of Pine Springs by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this ordinance are:

(1)	To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater discharges by any user.
(2)	To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
(3)	To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this division.

Section 2	Definitions

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Illegal discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in Section 8 of this ordinance.

Illicit connections is defined as either of the following:

a.	Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but no limited to sewage, process wastewater, wash water and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
b.	Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system that has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.

Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Stormwater Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14).

Municipal separate storrrt' sewer system (M54) means the system of conveyances  (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
 
channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the City of Pine Springs and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit means a permit issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency that authorizes the discharge of pollutant to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wise basis.

Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

Person means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation, or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent.

Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.

Storm drainage system means publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention systems, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.

Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.

Stormwater management plan means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater
conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.

Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.

Watercourse means a ditch, stream, creek, or other defined channel intended for the conveyance of water, runoff, groundwater discharge or similar hydraulic or hydrologic purpose.

Section 3	Applicability

This ordinance shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the City of Pine Springs.

Section 4	Responsibility for Administration
 
The City of Pine Springs shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any "-·	powers granted or duties imposed upon the City of Pine Springs may be delegated in writing by the city
clerk to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city.

Section 5	Compatibility with Other Regulations

This ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control.

Section 6	Severability

The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this ordinance.

Section 7	Ultimate Responsibility

The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance are minimum standards; therefore, this ordinance does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.




Section 8	Discharge Prohibitions

(a)	Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any pollutants·or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
a.	The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this
ordinance: water line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater  infiltration, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and street wash water.
i.	Discharge of swimming pools, crawl spaces, sump pumps, footing drains, and other sources that may be determined to contain sediment or other forms of pollutants may NOT be discharged directly to a gutter or storm sewer. This discharge must be allowed to flow over a vegetated area to allow filtering of pollutants, evaporation of
 
chemicals, and infiltration of water consistent with the stormwater requirements of the City of Pine Springs.
b.	Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the City of
Pine Springs as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
c.	Discharges associated with dye testing; however, this activity requires a verbal notification to the City of Pine Springs prior to the time of the test.
d.	The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the MPCA, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
(b)	Prohibition of illicit connections.
a.	The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
b.	This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
c.	A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the person connects a line
conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
d.	Improper connections in violation of this ordinance must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the City of Pine Springs.
e.	Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the City of Pine Springs requiring that such locating shall be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the City of Pine Springs.

Section 9	Watercourse Protection

Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, yard waste, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.

Section 10	Right of Entry
 
The City of Pine Springs shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this ordinance as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance.

Section 11	Requirement to Prevent, Control, and Reduce Stormwater Pollutants by the Use of Best Management Practices

The City of Pine Springs will adopt requirements identifying best management practices (BMPs) for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of such activity, operation, or facility shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs.

Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non­ structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater management plan (SWMP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.

Section 12	Violations and Penalties

Any person violating any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(a)	Emergency cease and desist orders. When the City of Pine Springs finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are likely to recur, and the person's violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the state which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health ·or welfare of persons or to the environment, the City of Pine Springs may issue an order to the violator directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations.
(b)	Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation  of this ordinance may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. Such suspension may also be imposed if it is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger.
(c)	Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense; and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
-
 
Section 13 Remedies not Exclusive

The remedies listed in this division are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or loc l law and it is within the discretion of the City of Pine Springs to seek cumulative remedies. The City of Pine Springs may recover all attorney's fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses.




Passed by the Pine Springs City Council, Washington County, Minnesota, this 5th day of May 2015.




Frank Bastyr, Mayor

Karen Pirozzoli, City Administrator
 
CITY OF PINE SPRINGS WASHINGTON  COUNTY, MINNESOTA

ORDINANCE NO. ;A3


AN ORDINANCE OPTING-OUT OF THE REQUIREMENTS OF MINNESOTA  STATUTES, SECTION 462.3593



WHEREAS, on May 12, 2016, Governor Dayton signed into law the creation and regulation of temporary family health care dwellings, codified at Minn. Stat. § 462.3593, which permit and regulate temporary family health care dwellings;

WHEREAS, subdivision 9 of Minn. Stat. § 462.3593 allows cities to "opt out" of those regulations;

THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PINE SPRINGS, ORDAINS as follows:

The City Code of the City of Pine Springs, Washington County, Minnesota, is hereby amended to add  the following:



OPT-OUT OF MINNESOTA STATUTES, SECTION 462.3593.

Pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593, subdivision 9, the City of Pine Springs opts-out of the requirements of Minn. Stat. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings.  This Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon its passage and publication.



ADOPTED this 2nd day of August, 2016, by the City Council of the City of Pine Springs.








ATTEST:

 
