City of Princeton Table of Contents
TOC - 1
PRINCETON, MINNESOTA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
TITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. General Provisions
TITLE 2. ADMINISTRATION
200. Election
205. Salaries
210. City Administrator
215. Emergency Management
220. Municipal Airport Advisory Board
225. Park and Recreation Advisory Board
230. Cemetery
240. Abandoned Property
250. Use of Criminal History Data
255. Economic Development Authority and District
260. Housing and Redevelopment Authority
265. Planning Commission
270. Park and Recreation Facilities Hours
275. Overnight Camping in Riverside Park
280. Motor Vehicle Accidents; Fire Department Responses
285. Administrative Offense Procedures
TITLE 3. LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
300. Circus, Carnivals, Shows and Other Entertainment
310. Junkyards
320. Garbage Haulers
330. Recycling Facilities
340. Taxi-Cabs
350. Tobacco Regulations
360. Rummage Sales
370. Heritage Preservation Advisory Committee
380. Securing and Registration of Vacant Buildings
390. Pawn Shop
TITLE 4. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
400. Liquor Dispensary and Sports and Convention Facilities
405. Off-Site Delivery of Liquor
410. Liquor Licensing Regulations
411. Consumption of Liquor – Social Hosting
412. Sale of Liquor by Caterers
City of Princeton Table of Contents
TOC - 2
TITLE 5. ANIMALS
500. Animals
510. Horses, Colts and Ponies
TITLE 6. NUISANCES AND OFFENSES
600. Health and Safety; Nuisances
605. Signs and Display of Commercial Merchandise in Public Rights-of-Way
610. Sidewalks
615. Weeds
620. Garbage
625. Discharge of Firearms
630. Curfew
635. Crimes on School Property
640. Open Burning
645. Other Nuisances
650. Fireworks
655. Nuisances Caused by Sound
660. Hours of Operation for City Parks and Recreation Facilities
665. Alcoholic Beverages in Riverside Park and Campground
670. Peddlers, Hawkers, Solicitors, Transient Merchants, and Food Vendors
675. Alcoholic Beverages in Mark Park Softball Field Areas
685. Adult Establishments
TITLE 7. TRAFFIC/VEHICLES
700. Traffic Regulations
710. Self Propelled Motor Vehicles
720. Parking Regulations
730. Truck Parking
740. Bicycles, Skateboards and the Like
750. Recreational Motor Vehicles
760. Motorized Golf Carts
TITLE 8. STREETS/SIDEWALKS
800. Right-of-Way Regulations
TITLE 9. SEWER AND WATER
900. Sewer and Water
910. Charges
920. Sewers
925. Fats, Oils and Grease (FOG)
930. Certification of Past Due Accounts
940. Water
950. Storm Water
City of Princeton Table of Contents
TOC - 3
960. Storm Sewer Utility
TITLE 10. BUILDING/HOUSING
1000. Building Code
1010. Demolition
1020. Electrical Inspections
1025. Plumbing Inspections
TITLE 11. ZONING
[Reserved]
APPENDIX
A. Franchises
B. Rezonings
C. Annexations
D. Street Names
E. Fee Schedule
F. Discharge of Firearms Areas Map
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to Minnesota Rules
INDEX
City of Princeton Title 1 General Provisions
1-1
TITLE 100. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1 General Provisions
Chapter 1 - General Provisions
100.01 Title of Code.
(A) All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as revised, codified,
rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters,
and sections, shall be known and designated as the “city code,” for which
designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances” or “code” may be
substituted. Code title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of
the law as contained in the code.
(B) All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to the components of the
code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be referred to and
cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.” Sections may be referred to and
cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§ 100.0100.”
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and section
numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part
of the text of any section.
100.02 Rules of Interpretation.
(A) Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
(B) Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances of this city
shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the
intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
(1) And or or. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written “and/or,”
whenever the context requires.
(2) Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance requires
an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by
an authorized agent or deputy.
(3) Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words
in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include
the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
City of Princeton Title 1 General Provisions
1-2
(4) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is
not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
100.03 Application to Future Ordinances. All provisions of this chapter compatible with
future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or
supplement this code unless otherwise specifically provided.
100.04 Captions. Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a
part of the text of any section.
100.05 Definitions.
(A) General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and
usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical
import.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(1) “City” means the City of Princeton, Minnesota. The term “city” when used
in this code may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized
representatives.
(2) “Code, this code or this code of ordinances” means this city code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.
(3) “County” means the county or counties in which the city is located.
(4) “May” means the act referred to is permissive.
(5) “Month” means a calendar month.
(6) “Oath” means an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words swear and
sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed. All terms shall
mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an individual
authorized by state law.
(7) “Officer, office, employee, commission, or department” means an officer,
office, employee, commission or department of this city unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
City of Princeton Title 1 General Provisions
1-3
(8) “Person” extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, co-partnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms person or whoever,
as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
(9) “Preceding or following” means next before or next after, respectively.
(10) “Shall” means the act referred to is mandatory.
(11) “Signature or subscription” includes a mark when the person cannot write.
(12) “State” means the State of Minnesota.
(13) “Written” means any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
(14) “Year” means a calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
100.06 Severability. If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions
that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.
100.07 Reference to Other Chapters. Whenever in one chapter reference is made to another
chapter hereof, that reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
100.08 Reference to Offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to
any office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or functions
contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the
official title of the functionary.
100.09 Errors and Omissions. If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling
of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or words
supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the
provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
100.10 Official Time. The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city business.
City of Princeton Title 1 General Provisions
1-4
100.11 Reasonable Time.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or
requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to
mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of
the notice.
(B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by
excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day is a legal holiday or a
Sunday, it shall be excluded.
100.12 Ordinances Repealed. This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of
the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be
deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
100.13 Ordinances Unaffected. All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
100.14 Effective Date of Ordinances. All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring
publication shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
100.15 Repeal or Modification of Ordinance.
(A) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by
a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or
modified shall continue in force until the publication of the ordinance repealing or
modifying it when publication is required to give effect to it, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
(B) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given,
secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be
affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered
as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly
provided.
(C) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision shall be
itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance,
clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
100.16 Ordinances Which Amend or Supplement Code.
(A) If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this
code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or
section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its place.
City of Princeton Title 1 General Provisions
1-5
(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or
section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper
number of the chapter or section. In addition to this indication as may appear in
the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise
form above the ordinance.
100.17 Preservation of Penalties, Offenses, Rights and Liabilities. All offenses committed
under laws in force prior to the effective date of this code shall be prosecuted and remain
punishable as provided by those laws. This code does not affect any rights or liabilities
accrued, penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code.
The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway right-of-ways, contracts
entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any
highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if
this code had not been enacted.
100.18 Copies of Code. The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Administrator for public inspection. The Administrator shall provide a copy for sale for
a reasonable charge.
100.19 Adoption of Statutes and Rules by Reference. It is the intention of the City Council
that, when adopting this code, all future amendments to any state or federal rules and
statutes adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted
by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this code was
adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary.
100.20 Conflicts. If any part of this code is found in conflict with itself or any other law or
ordinance, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
100.99 General Penalty.
(A) Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code for which
another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any crime which is a
misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted
by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not more
than $1,000.00, or both, or the maximum amount permitted by law.
(B) Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code, including
Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is designated to be a
petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The
penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which is a petty misdemeanor
shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.00 or the maximum amount
permitted by law.
City of Princeton Title 1 General Provisions
1-6
(C) In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of
prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
(D) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty
imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty
imposed for a violation.
2-1
TITLE 2. ADMINISTRATION – Ord #785, amended 12-12-19
Chapter 200 Election
Chapter 205 Salaries
Chapter 210 City Administrator
Chapter 215 Emergency Management
Chapter 220 Municipal Airport Advisory Board
Chapter 225 Park and Recreation Advisory Board
Chapter 230 Cemetery
Chapter 240 Abandoned Property
Chapter 250 Use of Criminal History Data
Chapter 255 Economic Development Authority and District
Chapter 260 Housing and Redevelopment Authority
Chapter 265 Planning Commission
Chapter 270 Park and Recreation Facilities Hours
Chapter 275 Overnight Camping in Riverside Park
Chapter 280 Motor Vehicle Accidents; Fire Department Responses
Chapter 285 Administrative Offense Procedures
Chapter 290 Public Utilities Commission
Chapter 200 - Election
200.01 Regular Election. The regular annual election in the City of Princeton, Minnesota will
henceforth be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November.
200.02 Counting Absentee Ballots.
(A) Title. The following sections from the date of their adoption shall be known as the
Absentee Ballot Counting Board Ordinance of the City of Princeton.
\(B) Purpose. The purpose of these sections is to authorize the counting of all absentee
ballots cast in state and federal elections in the City of Princeton by the county wide
Absentee Ballot Counting Board established by Sherburne County and Mille Lacs
County.
(C) Legal authority. These sections are enacted pursuant to M.S. § 203B.13, as it may
be amended from time to time.
200.03 Authorization of County Auditor.
(A) The County Auditor is authorized to direct that all absentee ballots obtained by
residents of the city be returned to the County Auditor for safe and secure storage
until election day.
(B) The County Auditor shall deliver the absentee ballots directly to the Absentee Ballot
Counting Board on election day.
2-2
200.04 Designation of Absentee Ballot Counting Board. The city hereby appoints the Sherburne
County Absentee Ballot Counting Board as the election judge for the sole purpose of
tallying absentee ballots in the city located in Sherburne County, and Mille Lacs County
Absentee Ballot Counting Board as the election judge for the sole purpose of tallying
absentee ballots in the city in Mille Lacs County
200.05 Compensation to Absentee Ballot Counting Board Members. Absentee Ballot
Counting Board members will be paid a reasonable compensation by the County Board for
services rendered during each election. Based on the number of absentee ballots cast, the
city will pay a pro-rated share of the total cost, as billed by the County Auditor.
Chapter 205 - Salaries
205.01 Salaries Established. The annual salary of the Mayor of the City of Princeton shall be
$3,600.00. The annual salary of each member of the Council of the City of Princeton shall
be $3,090.00. In addition to the annual salary, $25.00 will be paid to the Mayor and each
Council member attending the Board of Equalization meeting.
205.02 Per Diem. In addition to the annual salary of the Mayor and Council Members of the City
of Princeton, a per diem of $40 per meeting shall be paid for each of the first ten (10) duly
noticed special meetings of the City Council held to transact official city business. In the
event that said special meeting is held at the request of someone other than the Mayor or
City Council member(s), the per diem cost for said meeting may be charged back to the
requester.
Chapter 210 - City Administrator
210.01 City Administrator. The position of City Administrator is hereby created in the City of
Princeton, Minnesota. The City Administrator shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of
the city and shall perform the duties set forth herein and all duties as may be assigned to
him or her by the City Council. He or she shall be directly responsible only to the City
Council in performance of these duties.
210.02 Qualifications and Appointment.
(A) Selection of the City Administrator shall be based on education and administrative
experience and not on residence and/or other political considerations.
(B) The City Administrator shall be appointed by a majority vote of the City Council and
shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. Removal from the position shall be by
affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the City Council.
210.03 Authority and Responsibility. The City Administrator shall have the authority to perform
and the responsibility to perform the following duties:
(A) The general supervision of all departments and personnel of the city;
(B) Coordination of administrative functions and operations of the various departments
2-3
for the maximum use of personnel and equipment for the most efficient operation of
city affairs;
(C) Recommend to the City Council such programs, policies, measures, resolutions, and
ordinances as he or she may consider necessary for the welfare of the citizens in the
efficient administration of the city;
(D) Ensure that policies and directives of the Council are carried out and that ordinances,
resolutions, and other laws are enforced;
(E) Advise the Council as to the financial condition and needs of the city, the status of
funds and the investment of idle funds;
(F) Prepare and submit the annual budget recommendations to the Council and enforce
the budget after its adoption by the Council;
(G) Recommend the appointment and removal of all employees, including department
heads. Coordinate all department heads and resolves any department problems;
(H) Respond to citizen calls and complaints and answer communications addressed to the
Council; and
(I) All statutory duties assigned to the City Administrator, including, but not limited to,
the signing of official documents, the keeping of the city minutes, ordinances,
resolutions and other records, keeping of the City Seal, publication of official
notices, and administration of regular and special elections.
210.04 Reference. M.S. §412.111, as it may be amended from time to time, authorizes the
creation of this position by the City Council. As per M.S. § 412.591, as it may be amended
from time to time, the office of City Treasurer is hereby reestablished and said duties
imposed on the City Treasurer, and the office of City Administrator is hereby reestablished
and said duties imposed on the City Administrator.
Chapter 215 - Emergency Management
215.01 Policy and Purpose. Because of the possibility of disasters of unprecedented size and
destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado, blizzard, destructive winds or other natural
causes, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of
catastrophic measure; and in order to insure that preparations of this city will be adequate
to deal with those disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense and to
protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the
people of this city, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary:
(A) To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for city planning
and preparation for emergency government operations in time of disasters;
(B) To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and disasters;
2-4
(C) To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other political
subdivisions of this state and of other states with respect to the carrying out of
emergency-preparedness functions;
(D) To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to
time, which requires that each political subdivision of the state shall establish a local
organization for emergency management.
215.02 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) “Disaster” means a situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to
the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in or is likely to
result in catastrophic loss to property and for which traditional sources of relief and
assistance within the affected area are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.
(B) “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent a disaster from developing or occurring.
(C) “Emergency management” means the preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from
disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado, and other acts of nature, or from sabotage,
hostile action, or from industrial hazardous material mishaps. These functions
include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, emergency medical
services, engineering, warning services, communications, radiological, and chemical,
evacuation, congregate care, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned
functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and
other functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities necessary
or incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions. Emergency management
includes those activities sometimes referred to as “civil defense” functions.
(D) “Emergency management forces” means the total personnel resources engaged in
city-level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or any rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from city
departments, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and agencies.
(E) “Emergency management organization” means the staff responsible for coordinating
city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This organization provides
city liaison and coordination with federal, state, and local jurisdictions relative to
disaster preparedness activities and assures implementation of federal and state
program requirements.
215.03 Establishment of Emergency Management Organization. There is created within the
city government an emergency management organization which shall be under the
supervision and control of the City Emergency Management Director, called the Director.
The Director shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term and may be
removed by the Council at any time. The Director may serve with a salary as established
by the City Council and shall be paid his or her necessary expenses.
2-5
215.04 Powers and Duties of Director.
(A) The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state conference for
emergency management. The Director shall develop proposed mutual aid
agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for reciprocal emergency
management aid and assistance in an emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted
and shall present these agreements to the Council for its action. These arrangements
shall be consistent with the State Emergency Plan.
(B) The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human resources, industries,
resources, and facilities of the city as deemed necessary to determine their adequacy
for emergency management and to plan for their most efficient use in time of an
emergency or disaster. The Director shall establish the economic stabilization
systems and measures, service staffs, boards, and sub-boards required, in accordance
with state and federal plans and directions subject to the approval of the Mayor.
(C) The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the emergency
preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the Council for its approval.
When the Council has approved the plan, it shall be the duty of all city agencies and
all emergency preparedness forces of the city to perform the duties and functions
assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from
time to time. The Director shall coordinate the emergency management activities of
the city to the end that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the
emergency plans of the federal government and the state and correlated with
emergency plans of the county and other political subdivisions within the state.
(D) In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the Director shall institute
training programs, public information programs and conduct practice warning alerts
and emergency exercises as may be necessary to assure prompt and effective
operation of the City Emergency Plan when a disaster occurs.
(E) The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment, supplies, and facilities
of existing departments and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable.
The officers and personnel of all city departments and agencies shall, to the
maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and extend services and facilities to the
city's emergency management organization and to the Governor upon request. The
head of each department or agency in cooperation with the Director shall be
responsible for the planning and programming of those emergency activities as will
involve the use of the facilities of the department or agency.
(F) The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments and agencies affected,
assist in the organizing, recruiting, and training of emergency management
personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis, to carry out the emergency
plans of the city and state. To the extent that emergency personnel are recruited to
augment a regular city department or agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned
to the departments or agencies and shall be under the administration and control of
the department or agency.
2-6
(G) Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director shall coordinate the
activity of municipal emergency management organizations within the city and assist
in establishing and conducting training programs as required to assure emergency
operational capability in the several services as provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may
be amended from time to time.
(H) The Director shall carry out all orders, rules, and regulations issued by the Governor
with reference to emergency management.
(I) The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency preparedness activities
when requested.
215.05 Local Emergencies.
(A) A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or her legal successor.
It shall not be continued for a period in excess of three days except by or with the
consent of the Council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or
terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall
be filed in the office of the City Administrator.
(B) A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of the response
and recovery aspects of applicable local or inter-jurisdictional disaster plans and may
authorize aid and assistance thereunder.
(C) No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency unless expressly
authorized by the agreement under which the agency functions. However, an interjurisdictional
disaster agency shall provide aid and services in accordance with the
agreement under which it functions.
Penalty, see § 215.99
215.06 Emergency Regulations.
(A) Whenever necessary to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for an emergency
for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor or the
Council, the Council may by resolution or ordinance promulgate regulations,
consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation, respecting: the conduct
of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair, maintenance, and
safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health, fire, and safety
regulations, drills or practice periods required for preliminary training, and all other
matters which are required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in declared
emergencies.
(B) Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing, shall be dated, shall
refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed
in the office of the City Administrator. A copy shall be kept posted and available for
public inspection during business hours. Notice of the existence of these regulations
and their availability for inspection at the City Administrator's office shall be
2-7
conspicuously posted at the front of the city hall or other headquarters of the city or
at other places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the resolution or
ordinance. By resolution or ordinance, the Council may modify or rescind a
regulation.
(C) The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution or ordinance at any time. If
not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after its
effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it relates, whichever comes
first. Any resolution, rule, or regulation inconsistent with an emergency regulation
promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during the period of time and to the
extent conflict exists.
(D) During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions of M.S. § 12.31, as it
may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding any statutory or Charter
provision to the contrary, empowered, through its Council, acting within or without
the corporate limits of the city, to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary
to combat the disaster by protecting the health and safety of persons and property and
providing emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster. The city may exercise
these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without compliance with
the time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the
performance of public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of
supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and
expenditure of public funds, including, but not limited to, publication of resolutions,
publication of calls for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions
relating to low bids, and requirement for bids.
Penalty, see § 215.99
215.07 Emergency Management a Government Function. All functions and activities relating
to emergency management are hereby declared to be governmental functions. The
provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to
which he or she would otherwise be entitled under this chapter or under the worker's
compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive any
benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.
215.08 Participation in Labor Disputes or Politics. The emergency management organization
shall not participate in any form of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or
indirectly for political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.
215.99 Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation adopted
thereunder relating to acts, omissions, or conduct other than official acts of city employees
or officers is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Chapter 220 - Municipal Airport Advisory Board
220.01 Purpose Created; Composition; Appointment; Term of Office.
(A) It is the purpose of the City Council to provide a municipal airport facility in order to
2-8
enhance the economic viability of the community by providing a safe, efficient,
quality, and proper access to the nation's airways for residents and businesses of the
community.
(B) In order to educate and inform the Council and the public on aviation matters, to
secure support for a sound and viable airport, and to provide feedback to
management decisions and operations of the airport, there is hereby created and
established an advisory board to the City Council to be known and designated as the
Princeton Airport Advisory Board.
(C) Such Board shall consist of five members appointed by a majority of the City
Council at the first meeting in January of each year. Terms of office shall be three
years, or until qualified successors have been appointed. The Board shall be
representative of diverse local interests.
220.02 Filling of Vacancies; Compensation. Vacancies on the Board shall be reported to the
City Council and filled by like appointment for the unexpired term. Board members shall
receive $25 for each Airport Board meeting they attend.
.
220.03 Officers; By-laws. The Board shall present an organization plan and by-laws to the
Council for approval and elect one of its members as Chair. The Chair shall be responsible
for calling and presiding at all meetings. The Board shall also elect one of its members as
Vice-Chair, who shall perform the duties of the Chair in the absence of or incapacity of the
Chair. The Board shall also elect one of its members as Secretary. The City Administrator
may provide a city employee to record the proceedings of the Board.
220.04 Powers and Duties. The Board shall advise and assist the City Council:
(A) In preparing a sound financial plan for the operation and maintenance of the facilities
and for the growth and development of the airport;
(B) In recommending the development and use of airport property;
(C) In promoting and attracting and otherwise encouraging the development of aviation
related trades;
(D) In creating and implementing public relations and information programs of the
airport;
(E) In reviewing and directing the annual maintenance programs and the facility
development programs;
(F) In maintaining a high-quality environment in the maintenance and upkeep of both
public and private facilities at the airport;
(G) In determining, creating, and maintaining the proper local access to the nation's
airways for the community.
2-9
220.05 Removal from Office or Appointment. The City Council may remove, for proper cause,
any member or officer of the board and fill the vacancy; but, such removal must be by a concurrent
vote of the majority of the City Council, at a meeting of whose time, place, and object the charged
member or officer has been duly notified, with the reasons for such proposed removal and after the
opportunity to be heard in defense against the removal. Just cause includes, but is not limited to,
insubordination, engaging in conduct in violation of the City’s Social Media Policy or engaging in
conduct in violation of Section 7.2 (Discipline, Suspension, and/or Dismissal) of the City’s
Personnel Policy.
Chapter 225 - Park and Recreation Advisory Board
225.01 Purpose Created; Composition; Appointment; Terms of Office.
(A) It is the purpose of the Council of the City of Princeton to provide a high quality of
life for the residents of Princeton by protecting the natural resources, safe-guarding
historic sites and developing and maintaining park and recreational facilities for
public enjoyment.
(B) For said purpose, there is hereby created and established in and for the city a board to
be known and designated as the Park and Recreation Advisory Board. Such board
shall consist of seven members appointed by the City Council at the first meeting in
January of each year. Terms of office shall be three years staggered to provide
selection of three members in one year and two members in each of the next two
years.
225.02 Filling of Vacancies; Compensation. Vacancies on the Board shall be reported to the
City Council and filled by like appointment for the unexpired term. Board members shall
receive $25 for each Park Board meeting they attend.
225.03 Officers; By-Laws. The Board shall organize itself and elect one of its members as Chair.
The Chair shall be responsible for calling and presiding at all meetings. The Board shall
also elect one of its members as Vice-Chair, who shall perform the duties of the Chair in
the absence of or incapacity of the Chair. The Board shall also elect one of its members as
Secretary. The City Administrator may provide a city employee who may record the
proceedings of the Board. The Board shall also adopt its own by-laws for the conduct of its
business.
225.04 Powers and Duties. The Board shall advise and assist the City Council in matters relating
to the natural resources and historic facilities in Princeton, including all park and recreation
programs in which the city is involved, all playgrounds, playfields, parks, golf courses,
swimming pools, and other recreational facilities in which the city is involved. The Board
shall have no power to incur dept for which the city or any department thereof shall be
liable and it shall have no power or authority to make any improvement, alterations or
changes in any of the parks or city facilities without the consent of the City Council. The
Board will perform the following functions:
(A) To develop and maintain a comprehensive plan for the Princeton park system which
categorizes park and recreation areas and facilities. To make recommendations for
2-10
the development and maintenance of these areas and facilities based on said plan;
(B) To review proposed plot plans for new subdivisions and recommend to the City
Council parkland dedicated or cash equivalent for consideration in conjunction with
the plat approval process;
(C) To propose to the City Council rules and regulations for the use of any parks,
recreational or leisure facilities. Review all requests for the special use of such
facilities and make recommendations to the City Council regarding such requests;
(D) To consider proper names for park and recreation areas and facilities and make
recommendations to the City Council for such titles; and
(E) To conduct studies and investigations as specifically directed or delegated by the
City Council. To represent the City Council at appropriate meetings, hearings and
other events when so directed.
225.05 Removal From Office or Appointment. The City Council may remove, for proper cause,
any member or officer of the board and fill the vacancy; but, such removal must be by a concurrent
vote of the majority of the City Council, at a meeting of whose time, place, and object the charged
member or officer has been duly notified, with the reasons for such proposed removal and after the
opportunity to be heard in defense against the removal. Just cause includes, but is not limited to,
insubordination, engaging in conduct in violation of the City’s Social Media Policy or engaging in
conduct in violation of Section 7.2 (Discipline, Suspension, and/or Dismissal) of the City’s
Personnel Policy.
Chapter 230 - Cemetery
230.01 Location.
(A) A cemetery has been established upon land owned by the City of Princeton and
described as follows: Blocks 1 - 4, Original Plat; Blocks 5 - 14, Enlargement of
Original; Blocks 15 - 26, 1895 First Addition; Blocks 27 - 30, 1910 Addition; Blocks
1 - 9, Second Addition; Blocks 10 - 12 and Blocks 16 - 18, Third Addition; Blocks 2
- 4, Fourth Addition; Blocks 1 - 3, Fifth Addition; and Blocks 1 - 3, Sixth Addition.
(B) A map of the cemetery is on file in the office of the City Clerk and is hereby adopted
as the official map of the cemetery which shall be called Oak Knoll Cemetery.
230.02 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
definitions.
(A) “Gravesite” means a fraction of a lot and shall be a burial site for up to one person
and one cremation remains, or two cremation remains in a full-size grave, or one
cremation in a cremation lot
(B) “Lot” means a fraction of a block of contiguous gravesites, containing one to eight
gravesites, as surveyed, identified, and numbered on the official map of Oak Knoll
Cemetery.
2-11
(C) “Block” means contiguous lots of gravesites as surveyed, identified, and numbered
on the official map of Oak Knoll Cemetery.
(D) “Addition” means contiguous lots and blocks of gravesites as surveyed, identified,
and numbered on the official map of Oak Knoll Cemetery.
230.03 Conditions of All Purchases. All lots and gravesites shall be sold subject to these rules
and regulations or those hereafter adopted by the Princeton City Council. The purchaser
shall expressly agree in the deed conveying the lot or gravesite that his or her rights are
subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as the City Council may adopt. No
gravesite shall be used for any purpose other than burial of human remains and the placing
of appropriate memorials.
230.04 Purchase of All Lots and Gravesites.
(A) Upon full payment of the purchase price of a lot or gravesite, the City Clerk shall
issue a cemetery deed to the purchaser.
(B) The price of gravesites will be established from time to time by resolution of the City
Council. All money received from the sale of lots, gravesites, or other services shall
be paid to the City Treasurer who shall issue a receipt.
230.05 Transfer of Lots or Gravesites. No cemetery lot or gravesite may be resold or otherwise
disposed of, but the city agrees to repurchase cemetery lots or gravesites for the original
purchase price less the amount paid for perpetual care. Gravesite owners may transfer their
lots by contacting the City and providing a notarized letter with the grave information and
who they are deeding the lots to. Gravesite owners may not allow interments to be made on
their gravesites for remuneration.
230.06 Perpetual Care and Cemetery Upkeep.
(A) Overall maintenance and upkeep of the cemetery shall be the responsibility of the
city. In order to help pay for maintenance and upkeep, a fee schedule shall be set
from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Perpetual care shall
automatically be included with the purchase of any gravesite(s). No additional
annual upkeep fee shall be charged.
(B) All gravesites sold prior to adoption of this chapter shall be perpetually maintained
by the city without additional cost.
230.07 Handling of Funds. All money received from the sale of lots and gravesites shall be
placed in the Cemetery Fund, which Fund shall be used to purchase additional cemetery
property and for maintenance and improvements and for no other purpose. All money
received for perpetual care shall be placed in a separate fund. This money shall be invested
and the earnings transferred to the Cemetery Fund. The Treasurer shall keep an account of
all receipts and disbursements of money belonging to the Cemetery Fund and the Perpetual
Care Fund and shall make disbursements from the Fund only on orders approved by the
2-12
City Council.
230.08 Cemetery Records. The City Clerk shall be the record keeper of the cemetery transactions
and shall, in addition to other records and duties in relation to the cemetery, keep a register
of all interments and disinterment, including the name, age, date of death, date of burial,
place of death, undertaker and person providing these facts and place in interment
(gravesite, lot and block numbers).
230.09 Interment.
(A) All interments must be made by the city or its representative. All adult or children
remains (not babies) must be encased in a vault.
(B) Fees will be set from time to time by ordinance of the City Council. No services will
be performed until all fees are paid in full.
230.10 General Rules and Regulations.
(A) All rules and regulations regarding placement, size, and type of markers and
monuments, trees, shrubs, flowers, setting of cemetery hours, access to cemetery,
traffic control within the cemetery and any other rules will be set from time to time
by City Council.
(B) The City Council reserves the right to amend these rules, regulations and charges in
order to promote the general objects and best interest of the cemetery and the City
Council is not required to give notice to gravesite owners of such intended action.
230.99 Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished as provided by §100.99.
Chapter 240 - Abandoned Property
240.01 Disposition of Abandoned Property.
(A) Procedure. All lawful property coming into possession of the city, including
abandoned and junked vehicles, shall be disposed of according to the procedures of
this chapter.
(B) Storage. The department of the city acquiring possession of the property shall
arrange for its storage. If city facilities are unavailable or inadequate, the department
may arrange for storage at a privately-owned facility.
(C) Claim by owner. The owner may claim the property by exhibiting satisfactory proof
of ownership and paying the city any storage or maintenance costs incurred by it. A
receipt for the property shall be obtained upon release to the owner.
(D) Sale. If the property remains unclaimed in the possession of the city for 60 days, the
property shall be sold to the highest bidder at a public auction conducted by the City
Administrator or his or her designee after two weeks published notice setting forth
2-13
the time and place of the sale and the property to be sold.
(E) Disposition of proceeds. The proceeds of the sale shall be placed in the General
Fund of the city. If the former owner makes application and furnishes satisfactory
proof of ownership within six months of the sale, the former owner shall be paid the
proceeds of the sale of the property less the costs of storage and the proportionate
part of the cost of published notice and other costs of the sale.
240.02 Findings and Purpose. M.S. Ch. 168B, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7035, as they may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference. This chapter is adopted
under the authority of M.S. § 168B.09, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time. If
any of these provisions are less stringent that the provisions of M.S. Ch. 168B or Minn.
Rules Ch. 7035, as it may be amended from time to time, the statute or rule shall take
precedence.
240.03 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) “Abandoned vehicle” means:
(1) A motor vehicle, as defined in M.S. § 169.01, as it may be amended from time
to time, that:
(a) Has remained illegally:
1. For a period of more than 48 hours on any property owned or
controlled by a unit of government, or more than 4 hours on that
property when it is properly posted; or
2. On private property for a period of time, as determined under
§240.05(B), without the consent of the person in control of the
property; and
(b) Lacks vital component parts or is in an inoperable condition that it has
no substantial potential for further use consistent with its usual
functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building.
(2) A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. §168.10, as it may be amended
from time to time, is not considered an abandoned vehicle.
(3) Vehicles on the premises of junk yards and automobile graveyards that are
defined, maintained, and licensed in accordance with M.S. §161.242, as it may
be amended from time to time, or that are licensed and maintained in
accordance with local laws and zoning regulations are not considered
abandoned vehicles.
(4) A vehicle being held for storage by agreement or being held under police
authority or pursuant to a writ or court order is not considered abandoned, nor
2-14
may it be processed as abandoned while the police hold, writ or court order is
in effect.
(B) “Department” means the Minnesota Department of Public Safety.
(C) “Impound” means to take and hold a vehicle in legal custody. There are two types of
impounds: public and nonpublic.
(D) “Impound lot operator” or “operator” means a person who engages in impounding or
storing, usually temporarily, unauthorized or abandoned vehicles. “Operator”
includes an operator of a public or nonpublic impound lot, regardless of whether tow
truck service is provided.
(E) “Junk vehicle” means a vehicle that:
(1) Is three years old or older;
(2) Is extensively damaged, with the damage including things such as broken or
missing wheels, motor, drive train or transmission;
(3) Is apparently inoperable;
(4) Does not have a valid, current registration plate; and
(5) Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of
the scrap in it.
(F) “Motor vehicle” or “vehicle” has the meaning given “motor vehicle” in M.S.
§ 169.01, as it may be amended from time to time.
(G) “Motor vehicle waste” means solid waste and liquid wastes derived in the operation
of or in the recycling of a motor vehicle, including such things as tires and used
motor oil, but excluding scrap metal.
(H) “MPCA” or “agency” means the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
(I) “Nonpublic impound lot” means an impound lot that is not a public impound lot.
(J) “Public impound lot” means an impound lot owned by or contracting with a unit of
government under §240.11.
(K) “Unauthorized vehicle” means a vehicle that is subject to removal and impoundment
pursuant to §240.05(B), or M.S. §169.041, as it may be amended from time to time,
but is not a junk vehicle or an abandoned vehicle.
(L) “Unit of government” includes a state department or agency, a special purpose
district, and a county, statutory or home rule charter, city or town.
(M) “Vital component parts” means those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to the
2-15
mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including such things as the motor, drive train
and wheels.
240.04 Violation to Abandon Motor Vehicle. Any person who abandons a motor vehicle on any
public or private property, without the consent of the person in control of the property, is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
Penalty, see §100.99
240.05 Authority to Impound Vehicles.
(A) Abandoned or junk vehicles. The City Administrator or designee or any police
officer employed or whose services are contracted for by the city may take into
custody and impound any abandoned or junk vehicle.
(B) Unauthorized vehicles. The City Administrator, or his or her designee or any police
officer employed or whose services are contracted for by the city may take into
custody and impound any unauthorized vehicle under M.S. §169.041, as it may be
amended from time to time. A vehicle may also be impounded after it has been left
unattended in one of the following public or private locations for the indicated period
of time:
(1) In a public location not governed by M.S. §168B.035, as it may be amended
from time to time:
(a) On a highway and properly tagged by a police officer, four hours;
(b) Located so as to constitute an accident or traffic hazard to the traveling
public, as determined by a police officer, immediately; or
(c) That is a parking facility or other public property owned or controlled by
a unit of government, properly posted, four hours; or
(2) On private property:
(a) That is single-family or duplex residential property, immediately;
(b) That is private, nonresidential property, properly posted, immediately;
(c) That is private, nonresidential property, not posted, 24 hours; or
(d) That is any residential property, properly posted, immediately.
240.06 Sale; Waiting Periods.
(A) Sale after 15 days. Pursuant to § 240.10, an impounded vehicle is eligible for
disposal or sale 15 days after notice to the owner, if the vehicle is determined to be:
(1) A junk vehicle, except that it may have a valid, current registration plate and
2-16
still be eligible for disposal or sale under this subdivision; or
(2) An abandoned vehicle.
(B) Sale after 45 days. An impounded vehicle is eligible for disposal or sale 45 days
after notice to the owner, as provided in § 240.10, if the vehicle is determined to be
an unauthorized vehicle.
240.07 Notice of Taking and Sale.
(A) Contents; notice given within five days. When an impounded vehicle is taken into
custody, the city or impound lot operator taking it into custody shall give notice of
the taking within five days. The notice shall:
(1) Set forth the date and place of the taking; the year, make, model and serial
number of the impounded motor vehicle if the information can be reasonably
obtained; and the place where the vehicle is being held;
(2) Inform the owner and any lien holders of their right to reclaim the vehicle
under §240.08; and
(3) State that failure of the owner or lien holders to exercise their right to reclaim
the vehicle and contents within the appropriate time allowed under §240.08
shall be deemed a waiver by them of all right, title and interest in the vehicle
and contents and a consent to the transfer of title to and disposal or sale of the
vehicle and contents pursuant to §240.10.
(B) Notice by mail or publication. The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered
owner, if any, of an impounded vehicle and to all readily identifiable lien holders of
record. The Department makes this information available to impound lot operators
for notification purposes. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty
the identity and address of the registered owner and all lien holders, the notice shall
be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor
vehicle was towed from or abandoned. Published notices may be grouped together
for convenience and economy.
(C) Unauthorized vehicles; notice. If an unauthorized vehicle remains unclaimed after
30 days from the date the notice was sent under division (B) of this section, a second
notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered
owner, if any, of the unauthorized vehicle and to all readily identifiable lien holders
of record.
240.08 Right to Reclaim.
(A) Payment of charges. The owner or any lien holder of an impounded vehicle shall
have a right to reclaim the vehicle from the city or impound lot operator taking it into
custody upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from taking the
vehicle into custody within 15 or 45 days, as applicable under §240.06, after the date
of the notice required by §240.07.
2-17
(B) Lien holders. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair any lien of a
garage keeper under the laws of this state or the right of a lien holder to foreclose.
For the purposes of this section, “garage keeper” is an operator of a parking place or
establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle storage facility or an operator of an
establishment for the servicing, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles.
240.09 Operator's Deficiency Claim; Consent to Sale.
(A) Deficiency claim. The nonpublic impound lot operator has a deficiency claim
against the registered owner of the vehicle for the reasonable costs of services
provided in the towing, storage and inspection of the vehicle minus the proceeds of
the sale or auction. The claim for storage costs may not exceed the costs of:
(1) Fifteen days storage for a vehicle described in §240.06(A); and
(2) Forty-five days storage for a vehicle described in § 240.06(B).
(B) Implied consent to sale. A registered owner who fails to claim the impounded
vehicle within the applicable time period allowed under §240.06 is deemed to waive
any right to reclaim the vehicle and consents to the disposal or sale of the vehicle and
its contents and transfer of title.
240.10 Disposition by Impound Lot.
(A) Auction or sale.
(1) If an abandoned or unauthorized vehicle and contents taken into custody by the
city or any impound lot is not reclaimed under § 240.08, it may be disposed of
or sold at auction or sale when eligible pursuant to §§ 240.08 and 240.09.
(2) The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The
receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a
certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership. Before a
vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety
check.
(B) Unsold vehicles. Abandoned or junk vehicles not sold by the city or public impound
lots pursuant to division (A) of this section shall be disposed of in accordance with
§240.12.
(C) Sale proceeds; public entities. From the proceeds of a sale under this section by the
city or public impound lot of an abandoned or unauthorized motor vehicle, the city
shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and
all administrative, notice and publication costs incurred in handling the vehicle
pursuant to this chapter. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for
the owner of the vehicle or entitled lien holder for 90 days and then shall be
deposited in the treasury of the city.
2-18
(D) Sale proceeds; nonpublic impound lots. The operator of a nonpublic impound lot
may retain any proceeds derived from a sale conducted under the authority of
division (A) of this section. The operator may retain all proceeds from sale of any
personal belongings and contents in the vehicle that were not claimed by the owner
or the owner's agent before the sale, except that any suspected contraband or other
items that likely would be subject to forfeiture in a criminal trial must be turned over
to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
240.11 Disposal Authority. The city may contract with others or may utilize its own equipment
and personnel for the inventory of impounded motor vehicles and abandoned scrap metal
and may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the collection, storage and
transportation of these vehicles and abandoned scrap metal. The city may utilize its own
equipment and personnel only for the collection and storage of not more than five
abandoned or unauthorized vehicles without advertising for or receiving bids in any 120-
day period.
240.12 Contracts; Reimbursement by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).
(A) MPCA review and approval. If the city proposes to enter into a contract with a
person licensed by the MPCA pursuant to this section or a contract pursuant to
§240.11, the MPCA may review the proposed contract before it is entered into by the
city to determine whether it conforms to the MPCA's plan for solid waste
management and is in compliance with MPCA rules. A contract that does so
conform may be approved by the MPCA and entered into by the city. Where a
contract has been approved, the MPCA may reimburse the city for the costs incurred
under the contract that have not been reimbursed under §240.10. Except as
otherwise provided in §240.11, the MPCA shall not approve any contract that has
been entered into without prior notice to and request for bids from all persons duly
licensed by the MPCA to be a party to a disposal contract pursuant to M.S. §116.07,
as it may be amended from time to time; does not provide for a full performance
bond; or does not provide for total collection and transportation of abandoned motor
vehicles, except that the MPCA may approve a contract covering solely collection or
transportation of abandoned motor vehicles where the MPCA determines total
collection and transportation to be impracticable and where all other requirements
herein have been met and the unit of government, after proper notice and request for
bids, has not received any bid for total collection and transportation of abandoned
motor vehicles.
(B) The city may perform work. If the city utilizes its own equipment and personnel
pursuant to its authority under §240.11, and the use of the equipment and personnel
conforms to the MPCA's plan for solid waste management and is in compliance with
MPCA rules, the city may be reimbursed by the MPCA for reasonable costs incurred
which are not reimbursed under §240.10.
(C) The city required to contract work. The MPCA may demand that the city contract
for the disposal of abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal pursuant to the
MPCA's plan for solid waste disposal. If the city fails to contract within 180 days of
the demand, the MPCA, through the Department of Administration and on behalf of
the city, may contract with any person duly licensed by the MPCA for the disposal.
2-19
Chapter 250 - Use of Criminal History Data
250.01 Applicants for City Employment. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized Criminal
History information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment background checks
for all full time positions and selected part-time positions.
250.02 Criminal History Employment Background Investigations. The Princeton Police
Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the City, to do a criminal
history background investigation on the finalist applicant(s) for all regular part-time or fulltime
positions of the City of Princeton and other positions that may have contact with
children or vulnerable adults within the city, unless the city’s hiring authority concludes that
a background investigation is not necessary:
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen employment
applicants, the Police Department is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota
Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History information system in
accordance with BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at
the Police Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or
his or her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal History data
may be released by the Police Department to the hiring authority, including the City
Council, the City Administrator, or other city supervisory staff directly involved in the
hiring process.
Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police Department,
by written consent, to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply
with the provisions of Minn. Stat. Chap. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of
the information. Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.09, the
city will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant’s prior
conviction unless the crime is directly related to the position of employment sought and the
conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the
City rejects the applicant's request on this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in writing
of the following:
(A.) The grounds and reasons for the denial.
(B.) The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota Statutes
Section 364.06.
(C.) The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment.
(D.) That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
250.03 Applicants for City Licenses. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized Criminal
History information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing background checks.
250.04 Criminal History License Background Investigations. The Princeton Police Department
2-20
is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the City, to do a criminal history
background investigation on the applicants and/or their employees before the issuance of
certain licenses by the city. Those licenses shall include, but shall not be limited to: Any
license for doing business within the city limits of Princeton as that business is related to the
sale of alcoholic beverages, the sale of tobacco products, peddlers, hawkers, solicitors and/or
transient merchants
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen license
applicants, the Police Department is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota
Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History information system in
accordance with BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at
the Police Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or his
or her designee. A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal History data may
be released by the Police Department to the licensing authority, including the City Council,
City Administrator, City Clerk, or other city staff involved the license approval process.
Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police Department
by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply
with the provisions of Minn. Stat. Chap. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of
the information. Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.09, the
city will not reject an applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction
unless the crime is directly related to the license sought and the conviction is for a felony,
gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the City rejects the applicant's
request on this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
(A.) The grounds and reasons for the denial.
(B.) The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota Statutes
Section 364.06.
(C.) The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment.
(D.) That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.
Chapter 255 - Economic Development Authority and District
255.01 Background; Findings.
(A) The city is authorized by M.S. Ch. 469 (Act), as it may be amended from time to
time, to establish an Economic Development Authority (EDA) to coordinate and
administer economic development and redevelopment plans and programs of the
city.
(B) It is found and determined by the City Council that the encouragement and financial
support of economic development and redevelopment in the city is vital to the
orderly development and financing of the city and in the best interests of the health,
safety, prosperity and general welfare of the citizens of the city.
(C) It is further found and determined that the economic development and redevelopment
2-21
of the city can best be accomplished by the establishment of an EDA and establishing
an Economic Development District as authorized by the Act.
255.02 Enabling Resolution.
(A) The Economic Development Authority of the City of Princeton (EDA) is established.
(B) An Economic Development District is created that encompasses the corporate limits
of the City of Princeton as they may be amended from time to time.
(C) The EDA consists of a governing body of seven commissioners. Two of the
commissioners shall be members of the City Council and two commissioners may be
residents of area townships. All commissioners shall be appointed by the City
Council at the first meeting in January of each year. The terms for those initially
appointed shall be appointed for one, two, three, four, five and two members for six
years. Thereafter, all commissioners shall be appointed for six-year terms. The EDA
has all the powers and duties set forth in M.S. §§ 469.090 to 469.108, as these
sections may be amended from time to time, and other law, except as limited by this
chapter.
(D) The following items apply to the EDA and its operation:
(1) The sale of bonds or other debt obligations of the EDA must be approved by
the City Council;
(2) The EDA must follow the budget process for the city departments in
accordance with city policies, ordinances and resolutions;
(3) Development and redevelopment actions of the EDA must be in conformance
with the City Comprehensive Plan and official controls implementing the
Comprehensive Plan;
(4) The EDA must submit work plans for development and redevelopment to the
City Council for approval on a minimum of an annual basis and report
activities to the City Council upon request;
(5) The administrative structure and management practices and policies of the
EDA must be approved by the City Council;
(6) All activities of the EDA must comply with all local ordinances, including all
applicable zoning laws;
(7) The EDA may enter into any agreements necessary to administer the
Revolving Loan Fund;
(8) The EDA may acquire and dispose of real estate/property in order to carry-out
the development and redevelopment activities detailed in the plan presented to
the City Council;
2-22
(9) The proceeds of land sales should first be applied to any obligation of the city
related to the property. Any proceeds beyond the city’s costs may be retained
by the EDA to further the development and redevelopment activities detailed
in the annual EDA plan presented to the City Council.
(E) As provided in the Act, it is the intention of the City Council that nothing in this
chapter nor any activities of the EDA are to be construed to impair the obligations of
the city under any of its contracts or to affect in any detrimental manner the rights
and privileges of a holder of a bond or other obligation heretofore issued by the city.
255.03 Implementation.
(A) The City Council will from time to time and at the appropriate time adopt such
ordinances and resolutions as are required and permitted by the Act to give full effect
to this chapter.
(B) The Mayor, City Administrator and other appropriate city officials are authorized and
directed to take the actions and execute and deliver the documents necessary to give
full effect to this chapter.
(C) Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent the city from modifying this enabling
resolution to impose new or different limitations on the EDA as authorized by the
Act.
255.04 Filling of Vacancies; Compensation. Vacancies on the Board shall be reported to the City
Council and filled by like appointment for the unexpired term. Board members shall
receive $25 for each Economic Development Authority meeting they attend.
255.05 Removal From Office or Appointment. The City Council may remove, for proper
cause, any member or officer of the board and fill the vacancy; but, such removal must be
by a concurrent vote of the majority of the City Council, at a meeting of whose time, place,
and object the charged member or officer has been duly notified, with the reasons for such
proposed removal and after the opportunity to be heard in defense against the removal.
Just cause includes, but is not limited to, insubordination, engaging in conduct in violation
of the City’s Social Media Policy or engaging in conduct in violation of Section 7.2
(Discipline, Suspension, and/or Dismissal) of the City’s Personnel Policy.
Chapter 260 - Housing and Redevelopment Authority
260.01 Housing and Redevelopment Authority.
(A) The Housing and Redevelopment Authority of the city, created by Resolutions 66-
33, 67-4 and 67-7 is hereby continued. The Authority shall have all of the powers
and duties provided by M.S. §§ 469.001 to 469.047, as they may be amended from
time to time, which are hereby adopted by reference.
(B) The Authority shall consist of five members appointed by the City Council at the first
meeting in January of each year and shall serve for five-year terms. Members at the
2-23
time this code is adopted shall continue in office until their term expires.
260.02 Removal from Office or Appointment. The City Council may remove, for
proper cause, any member or officer of the board and fill the vacancy; but, such removal
must be by a concurrent vote of the majority of the City Council, at a meeting of whose
time, place, and object the charged member or officer has been duly notified, with the
reasons for such proposed removal and after the opportunity to be heard in defense against
the removal. Just cause includes, but is not limited to, insubordination, engaging in
conduct in violation of the City’s Social Media Policy or engaging in conduct in violation
of Section 7.2 (Discipline, Suspension, and/or Dismissal) of the City’s Personnel Policy.
Chapter 265 - Planning Commission
265.01 Establishment. Pursuant to M.S. §462.354, as it may be amended from time to time, there
is hereby established a Planning Commission for the City of Princeton.
265.02 Composition. The Planning Commission shall consist of five regular members who shall
be residents of the city, except that one of the members may be a person who owns a
business located within the City of Princeton, so long that person lives within the 55371 zip
code and/or lives within the ISD #477 Princeton School District. In addition, three
ex-officio members who shall each be a member of the Municipal Board or Municipal
Planning Commission and be from the Municipalities of Baldwin, Greenbush and
Princeton.
265.03 Appointment.
(A) Regular members. The five regular members shall be appointed by the City
Council at the first meeting in January of each year for staggered three-year terms.
Any vacancy shall be filled by the appointing authority for the remainder of the term.
(B) Ex-officio members. The three ex-officio members shall be appointed by their
respective municipal boards and shall serve staggered three-year terms. Any vacancy
shall be filled by the appointing authority for the remainder of the term.
265.04 Officers. At the first meeting of each year, the Planning Commission shall appoint from
its regular members a Chair, Vice-Chair and such other officers as it deems advisable.
265.05 Powers. The Planning Commission shall have the following powers:
(A) Adopt bylaws and rules for its procedure;
(B) Conduct all public hearings required by law and other public hearings it deems
appropriate or directed by the City Council;
(C) Provide recommendations to the City Council on any item related to planning,
zoning or development;
(D) Other powers contained in M.S. Ch. 462, as it may be amended from time to time,
2-24
which it may exercise unless limited by this chapter or other ordinance;
(E) Conduct such reviews, investigations and studies which are related to its duties,
provided all such work shall be done within funding levels approved by the City
Council;
(F) Form standing or ad hoc committees. Membership on committees may consist of
regular and ex-officio members.
265.06 Duties. The Planning Commission shall have the following duties:
(A) Conduct at least one regular meeting per month;
(B) Maintain a record of its proceedings;
(C) Exercise the powers conferred in M.S. §462.354, as it may be amended from time to
time, except it shall be advisory in the following actions:
(1) Rezoning;
(2) Zoning ordinance adoption or amendment;
(3) Subdivision ordinance adoption or amendment;
(4) Comprehensive plan adoption or amendment.
265.07 Staff. The City Council shall ensure staff support is provided to the Commission to assist
with the duties required of the Commission.
265.08 Compensation. Filling of Vacancies; Compensation. Vacancies on the Board shall be
reported to the City Council and filled by like appointment for the unexpired term. Board
members shall receive $25 for each Planning Commission meeting they attend.
265.09 Removal From Office or Appointment. The City Council may remove, for proper cause,
any member or officer of the board and fill the vacancy; but,such removal must be by a concurrent
vote of the majority of the City Council, at a meeting of whose time, place, and object the charged
member or officer has been duly notified, with the reasons for such proposed removal and after the
opportunity to be heard in defense against the removal. Just cause includes, but is not limited to,
insubordination, engaging in conduct in violation of the City’s Social Media Policy or engaging in
conduct in violation of Section 7.2 (Discipline, Suspension, and/or Dismissal) of the City’s
Personnel Policy.
Chapter 270 - Park and Recreation Facilities Hours
270.01 Definitions.
(A) “Park” means city-owned real estate leased, purchased, dedicated or otherwise
used by the public for recreation or leisure activities.
(B) “Recreation facilities” means city-owned buildings or equipment purchased,
2-25
constructed, leased or dedicated for use by the public for recreation or leisure
activities.
270.02 Hours of Operation.
(A) All city park and recreation facilities shall be open and available for public use from
sunrise until 10:00 p.m., at which time they shall be closed to all people and
activities.
(B) The following exceptions are hereby made:
(1) Riverside Park – open at sunrise; close at 10:00 p.m., except that overnight
camping in the campground is permitted.
(2) Triangle Park - open at sunrise; close at 10:00 p.m.,
(3) Mark Park – open at sunrise, close at 10:00 p.m., except to accommodate
league softball and baseball games only.
(4) Civic Center – by reservation and payment of rent, open at sunrise and close
at 1:00 a.m.
270.99 Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by §100.99.
Chapter 275 - Overnight Camping in Riverside Park
275.01 Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of Riverside Park for overnight
camping, to promote the availability of campsites, enhance tourism in the city, and prevent
the use of Riverside Park for residential purposes.
275.02 Regulations and Fees.
(A) No person or persons shall be permitted to leave refuse or an unsightly campsite in
Riverside Park. Litter created by campers will be the responsibility of the campers.
(B) No open fires shall be permitted in the camping area. Only charcoal grills and gas or
electric heating devices may be used in the campsite area. Open fires must be
contained in the city-installed fire ring east of the campsite area.
(C) Fees may be reviewed annually and are listed on the City’s Fee Schedule in
Appendix E.
275.03 Termination of camping privileges. The City reserves the right to immediately terminate
any person’s or organization’s camping privilege in the event of any violation of the
regulations contained in this ordinance or in the event of any alleged violation of any city,
state or federal law.
275.99 Penalty. Any person or organization violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
petty misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided by § 100.99.
2-26
Chapter 280 - Motor Vehicle Accidents; Fire Department Responses
280.01 Purpose.
(A) Whereas, the City Council of the City of Princeton has determined that a significant
amount of activity of the Princeton Fire and Rescue Department (PFRD) is in
response to motor vehicle accidents;
(B) Whereas, most of the expense of providing fire and rescue services falls primarily on
the property tax, which is not paid by motor vehicles; and
(C) Whereas, the city desires to recover a portion of the cost of responding to those
motor vehicle accidents.
280.02 Service Charges.
(A) There shall be imposed a service charge as listed in Appendix E Fee Schedule when
the Department responds to motor vehicle accidents or other emergencies involving a
motor vehicle. The Council may change the amount of the service charge by
adopting an ordinance setting the new fee. The fee is intended to recover a portion of
the cost of responding to motor vehicle accidents.
(B) The service charge shall only be imposed at motor vehicle accidents where the PFRD
actually renders aid or assistance to those involved in the motor vehicle accident.
(C) In the event that multiple motor vehicles are involved, the service charge shall be
divided up among the motor vehicles requiring assistance from the PFRD in the
accident as equally as practical.
(D) The City Administrator shall have the authority to develop procedures to implement
the intent of this chapter. An administrative fee of up to 10% may be credited to the
Finance Department for billing purposes. The balance of the money must be credited
to the city’s portion of providing fire protection or other fire-related expenses.
(E) Amounts past due over 60 days shall be assessed a finance charge of 6% per year or
the maximum allowed by law if under 6%.
(F) The city shall be authorized to use any legal means to collect past due charges.
(G) The chapter shall be effective only within the corporate limits of the City of
Princeton.
280.03 Effective Date. This chapter shall be effective January 1, 2003.
Chapter 285 - Administrative Offense Procedures
285.01 Purpose. Administrative offense procedures established pursuant to this chapter are
intended to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost effective and expeditious
alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of certain ordinance provisions.
2-27
The procedures are intended to be voluntary on the part of those who have been charged
with administrative offenses. At any time prior to the payment of the administrative
penalty as is provided for hereafter, the individual may withdraw from participation in the
procedures, in which event the city may bring criminal charges in accordance with the law.
Likewise, the city, in its discretion, may choose not to initiate an administrative offense
and may bring criminal charges in the first instance. In the event a party participates in the
administrative offense procedures, but does not pay the monetary penalty which may be
imposed, the city will seek to collect costs of the administrative offense procedures as part
of a subsequent criminal sentence in the event the party is charged and is adjudicated guilty
of the criminal violation.
285.02 Administrative Offense Defined. An administrative offense is a violation of a provision
of this code and is subject to the administrative penalties set forth in the schedule of
offenses and penalties referred to in §285.08.
285.03 Notice. Any officer of the Princeton Police Department, or any other person employed by
the city, authorized by the City Council, and having authority to enforce this code, shall,
upon determining that there has been a violation, notify the violator, or in the case of a
vehicular violation, attach to the vehicle a notice of the violation. The notice shall set forth
the nature, date and time of the violation, the name of the official issuing the notice and the
amount of the scheduled penalty.
285.04 Payment. Once the notice is given, the alleged violator may, within seven days of the time
of issuance of the notice, pay the amount set forth on the schedule of penalties for the
violation or notify the city in writing that they contest the violation. The penalty may be
paid in person or by mail, and payment shall be deemed to be an admission of the violation.
285.05 Contested Case. Any person contesting an administrative offense shall have the
administrative penalty vacated and criminal charges shall be filed in accordance with the
law allowing them the opportunity to contest the violation in the court system.
285.06 Failure to Pay. In the event a party charged with an administrative offense fails to pay the
penalty and does not notify the city that they are contesting the violation, a misdemeanor or
petty misdemeanor charge may be brought against the alleged violator in accordance with
applicable statutes or, if applicable, the fine may be levied as an assessment against the
property owner. If the penalty is paid or if an individual is found to not have committed the
administrative offense by the courts, no such charge may be brought by the city for the
same violation.
285.07 Disposition of Penalties. All penalties collected pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to
the City’s Finance Director and may be deposited in the city’s general fund.
285.08 Offenses and Penalties. Offenses which may be charged as administrative offenses and
the penalties for such offenses may be established by resolution of the City Council from
time to time. Copies of such resolutions shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk.
285.09 Subsequent Offenses. In the event a party is charged with a subsequent administrative
offense within a 12-month period of paying an administrative penalty for the same or
substantially similar offense, the subsequent administrative penalty shall be increased by
2-28
25% above the previous penalty, except as otherwise provided by resolution.
CHAPTER 290 – Public Utilities Commission
290.01 Municipal Utilities and Establishment of the Public Utilities Commission.
Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 412.321, the City of Princeton owns and operates
various municipal utilities. Pursuant to Minnesota Statute Section 412.331 the City of
Princeton has established a Public Utilities Commission with the powers and duties as set
forth in Minnesota Statues Sections 412.331 to 413.391.
290.03 Membership and Organization.
(A) Membership. The commission shall consist of three members appointed by the City
Council at the first meeting in January of each year. No more than one member may be chosen
from the council membership. Each member shall serve for a term of three years and until a
successor is appointed and qualified. Residence shall not be a qualification for membership on
the commission unless the council so provides. A vacancy shall be filled by the council for the
unexpired term.
(B) Rules; officers, salary. The commission shall adopt rules for its own proceedings which
shall provide among other things for at least one regular meeting by the commission each
month. It shall annually choose a president from among its own members. It shall also appoint
a secretary for an indefinite term. The secretary need not be a member of the commission and
may be the city clerk. No member of the commission shall receive a salary except as fixed by
the council. The secretary shall receive a salary fixed by the commission.
290.04 Jurisdiction
Unless and until further amendment of this ordinance, the commission's jurisdiction shall be
limited to the city water system and city light and power system.
290.05 Powers and Duties.
(A) Contract; bid provisions apply. The commission shall have power to extend and to
modify or rebuild any public utility and to do anything it deems necessary for its proper and
efficient operation; and it may enter into necessary contracts for these purposes. The
provisions of section 412.311 relating to advertisement for bids shall apply to contracts of the
public utilities commission.
(B) Hire, direct, fix pay for personnel. The commission shall have power to employ all
necessary help for the management and operation of the public utility, prescribe duties of
officers and employees and fix their compensation.
(C) Buy fuel, supplies, wholesale energy. The commission shall have power to buy all
fuel and supplies, and it may purchase wholesale electric energy, steam heat, hot water energy,
gas or water, as the case may be, for municipal distribution.
(D) Fix rates; adopt service rules. The commission shall have power to fix rates and to
adopt reasonable rules and regulations for utility service supplied by the municipally owned
public utilities within its jurisdiction.
2-29
(E) Relations, finances with city. The commission shall have power to enter into agreements
with the council for payments by the city for utility service, compensation for the use by either
the commission or the city of buildings, equipment, and personnel under the control of the
other, payments to the city in lieu of taxes, transfers of surplus utility funds to the general fund,
and also agreements on other subjects of relationships between the commission and the
council.
290.06 Separate City Fund for each Utility
(A) For all utility money in and out. A separate fund or a separate account shall be established
in the city treasury for each utility. Into this fund or account shall be paid all the receipts from
the utility and from it shall be paid all disbursements attributable to the utility.
(B) Must audit like city. The commission shall, in the same manner as the council under
section 412.271, subdivision 1, and to the same extent, audit claims to be paid from the public
utilities fund. The secretary of the commission shall draw an order upon the treasurer for the
proper amount allowed by the commission.
(C) Checks paid like city. Upon counter signature by the president of the commission and
presentation orders shall be paid by the treasurer.
290.07 Reports.
The accounting officer of the commission shall make such monthly or annual statements of
operation as the commission may require. A copy of each such report shall be filed in the
office of the city clerk. An annual financial report shall be made and a copy filed with the
clerk at the close of the calendar year and shall be included as part of the annual financial
report or statement of the clerk in conformity with section 471.697 or 471.698. The cost of
publication of any other official statement required by law to be published shall be paid from
public utility funds.
290.08 Abolition of Commission or Utility Transfer.
(A) To council; procedure. The public utilities commission may be abolished or its
jurisdiction over any particular utility transferred to the council by following the procedure
prescribed in this section.
(B) Ballot question if abolition. The council may, and upon petition therefor signed by
voters equal in number to at least 15 percent of the electors voting at the last previous city
election shall submit to the voters at a regular or special election the question of abolition of
the public utilities commission. The question on the ballot shall be stated substantially as
follows: "Shall the public utilities commission be abolished?"
(C) Ballot question if transfer. Upon like presentation of a petition for election on the
question of transfer to the council of the jurisdiction of the commission over any one or more of
the utilities previously placed under its jurisdiction, the council shall, in the same manner as
under subdivision B, submit the question to the voters. The question on the ballot shall be stated
substantially as follows: "Shall jurisdiction over (Name of public utility) be transferred from
the public utilities commission to the council?"
2-30
(D) Lease, sale, or abandonment. Any such utility may be leased, sold, or its operation
discontinued wholly or in part, by ordinance or resolution of the council, approved by twothirds
of the electors voting on the ordinance or resolution at a general or special election. The
ordinance or resolution shall be concurred in by the public utilities commission. Such action
may be taken with respect to any specific part of the utility, which part shall be named in the
ordinance or resolution; but it shall not be necessary to submit the ordinance or resolution to
the voters in such case if the action proposed will not result in depriving any customer inside
the corporate limits of any type of municipal utility service available before the sale, lease or
discontinuance of operation.
(E) Time of effect. If a majority of the votes cast on a proposition submitted to the voters
under subdivision B or C is in the affirmative, the provisions of sections 412.331 to 412.381
shall cease to apply to the city, in the case of an election under subdivision B, or to the
particular utility mentioned in the proposition submitted to the voters, in the case of an
election under subdivision C. Such change shall take place 30 days after the election.
290.09 Removal From Office or Appointment. The City Council may remove, for proper cause,
any member or officer of the board and fill the vacancy; but, such removal must be by a concurrent
vote of the majority of the City Council, at a meeting of whose time, place, and object the charged
member or officer has been duly notified, with the reasons for such proposed removal and after the
opportunity to be heard in defense against the removal. Just cause includes, but is not limited to,
insubordination, engaging in conduct in violation of the City’s Social Media Policy or engaging in
conduct in violation of Section 7.2 (Discipline, Suspension, and/or Dismissal) of the City’s
Personnel Policy.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-1
TITLE 3. LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 300 Circus, Carnivals, Shows and Other Entertainment
Chapter 310 Junkyards
Chapter 320 Garbage Haulers
Chapter 330 Recycling Facilities
Chapter 340 Taxi-Cabs
Chapter 350 Tobacco Regulations Rev. 8-28-14; Ord. 710, 1-23-20; ord #788
Chapter 360 Rummage Sales
Chapter 370 Heritage Preservation Advisory Committee
Chapter 380 Securing and Registration of Vacant Buildings
Chapter 390 Pawn Shops
Chapter 395. Pet Store Licensing and Regulation
Chapter 300 - Circus, Carnivals, Shows and Other Entertainment
300.01 License Required. No person, firm or corporation shall give or maintain any show or public
entertainment, circus, carnival, game, or concert to which an admission is charged without
securing a license therefor; provided, no license shall be necessary for any entertainment of any
kind given by amateurs or in which the performers do not receive any pay or which is given for
the benefit of any school, church, benevolent institution, non-profit organization or charitable
purposes.
300.02 Application. Application for such license shall be made to the City Administrator and shall
state the nature of the entertainment, the time and place thereof.
300.03 Issuance. On authorization by the Council, and after fixing the license fee therefor, the
Administrator shall issue such license.
300.99 Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §100.99.
Chapter 310 - Junkyards
310.01 Purpose. It is hereby found that the operation of a motor vehicle, agricultural, construction
machinery or other junk yards adjacent to public rights-of-way are unsightly, thus impairing the
public investment in such rights-of-way. It is hereby found and declared that in the interest of
and to protect the public investment and to preserve natural beauty, it is necessary to regulate
the operation of junk yards on land adjacent to the public rights-of-way.
310.02 Definitions. Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions shall
apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter.
(A) “Person” shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
(B) “Junk” shall mean old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, synthetic or
organic, trash, rubber, debris, waste or junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles or
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-2 Amended 1-23-20
farm or construction machinery or parts thereof, iron, steel and other old or scrap ferrous
and nonferrous material.
(C) “Junkyard” means an establishment, place of business or place of storage or deposit
which is maintained, operated or used for storing, keeping, buying or selling junk or for
the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard and shall include garbage
dumps and sanitary fills not regulated by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, any of
which are wholly or partly within ½-mile of any rights-of-way, whether maintained in
connection with another business or not, where waste, body or discarded material stored
is equal in bulk to five or more motor vehicles and which are to be resold for used parts
or old iron, metal, glass or other discarded material.
(D) “Junk dealer” shall mean any person, partnership or corporation engaged in the operation
of a junkyard.
(E) “Auto graveyard” shall mean any establishment or place of business which is maintained,
used or operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined or
dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts.
310.03 License Required.
(A) No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the occupation of junk dealer or operate a
junkyard, as defined above, without first having secured a license in a manner hereinafter
set forth.
(B) A junk dealer who operates more than one junk yard within the city shall be required to
have a separate license in effect for each yard.
310.04 Application.
(A) Applicants desiring to secure a license shall make a written application to the City
Administrator, upon forms supplied by the city, accompanied with a fee as set by the City
Council.
(B) Applications for a junk yard license shall be filed with the City Administrator and shall
be reviewed and subject to approval by the majority vote of the City Council within 60
days of the application date.
310.05 General Operating Requirements. The following general operating requirements shall apply
to all junk dealers and junkyards licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter:
(A) The junkyard, together with things kept therein, shall at all times be maintained in a
sanitary condition.
(B) No space not covered by the license shall be used in the licensed business.
(C) No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on
the premises.
(D) Storage of junk shall not exceed eight feet in height from the ground and shall be
arranged to permit easy access to all junk for firefighting purposes.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-3
(E) As determined by the Fire Chief, no combustible materials of any kind not necessary or
beneficial to the licensee's business shall be kept on the premises or be allowed to
become a fire hazard.
(F) The licensee shall at all times retain on file after the passage of this chapter and shall
permit inspection, by the City Administrator or designee, or a police officer, of the
following:
(1) A copy of the Bill of Sale or Title Card, with motor vehicle serial number
contained thereon, for each motor vehicle purchased by the licensee;
(2) The name, address and telephone number of each person who has sold a motor
vehicle to the licensee and attached thereto or filed therewith shall be the license
number of the vehicle, in addition to the foregoing. Information shall be filed
containing the description, license number and serial number of the vehicle that
was sold to the licensee. All information contained in this section shall be
maintained on the premises for six months following disposition.
(G) No junkyard shall be allowed to become a nuisance; no junk yard shall be operated in
such a manner as to become injurious to the health, safety, natural resources or welfare of
the community or of any residents close by.
(H) No fires shall be permitted within the automobile junk yard.
310.06 Initial License Fees and Requirements. The initial fee to be paid for any junkyard license
shall be as established from time to time by ordinance of the Council, and in addition, the
following requirements shall be met:
(A) Within 60 days following the issuance of the junkyard license, the property owner shall
fence the premises pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. An extension of 30 days
renewable up to a six-month period, may be allowed for a just cause;
(B) Junk cars shall be kept only in enclosed buildings or in automobile graveyards, which are
adequately fenced by an eight-foot solid fence, the structure and placement of which shall
be approved by the City Council in accordance with the zoning ordinance. The fencing
shall be on all sides abutting private property or public roadways and shall be kept in
good repair at all times, as determined by the City Council or its authorized
representative.
310.07 Renewal of License and Requirements. The annual renewal fee for any license shall be as
established from time to time by ordinance of the Council.
310.08 Inspections.
(A) The City Administrator or designee shall inspect the junkyard of all junk dealers licensed
under this chapter at least once a year to determine whether such yards are being operated
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of the
law. One such inspection must have been within two months prior to renewal of any
junkyard license.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-4 Amended 1-23-20
(B) The licensee shall permit inspection of the business premises by the City Administrator
or designee.
310.09 Transferability. No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred or used by any person
other than the one to whom it was issued, except upon the approval of the City Council. As a
prerequisite to said approval, the transferee must meet all qualifications required by this chapter
or the original license. No junk dealer license shall be valid except at the approved location.
310.10 Granting, Denial, Renewal or Revocation of License. The City Council may revoke or
suspend the license of any junk dealer when it finds any of the following:
(A) That the licensee or any of his or her employees or agents have concealed the receipt of
stolen property or have knowingly received stolen property;
(B) That the licensee has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any other law
to the premises, equipment or operation of the licensed business;
(C) That the licensee has obtained his or her license through fraud or misstatement;
(D) That the licensed business or activity is being conducted in a manner found to be
detrimental to the health, safety, natural resources or general welfare of the public or is a
nuisance or is being operated or carried on in any unlawful manner.
310.11 Compliance. Any person acting as a junk dealer within the City of Princeton on the effective
date of this chapter shall have a period of six months after such effective date to comply with
the provisions of the chapter.
310.99 Penalties. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided by §100.99. Each day that the violation is permitted to exist hereunder shall constitute
a separate offense.
Chapter 320 - Garbage Haulers
320.0 Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section.
(A) “City” means the City of Princeton, Minnesota.
(B) “Collection” means the aggregation of waste from the place at which it is generated and
includes all activities up to the time when the waste is delivered to a waste facility.
(C) “Collector(s)” means any person(s) who owns, operates, or leases vehicles for the
purposes of collection and transportation of any type of mixed municipal solid waste
and/or recyclables.
(D) “Garbage” means any animal and vegetable waste, as well as discarded material resulting
from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving and consumption of food.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-5
(E) “Recyclable materials” means materials that are separated from mixed municipal solid
waste by the generator and includes all items of refuse designated by Mille Lacs County
and Sherburne County to be part of an authorized recycling program and which are
intended for transportation, processing and manufacturing or reuse. These materials
include newsprint, corrugated cardboard, office paper, magazines, glass-all colors, tin
containers, aluminum containers and polyethylene terephthalet (PET) and high-density
polyethylene (HDPE) plastic that is separated from solid waste for the purpose of
recycling. The materials are considered to be recyclable materials if appropriate markets
exist that will accept these recyclable materials.
320.02 License Required.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to haul garbage and recyclable materials without the
appropriate license issued by the city under this chapter unless the person is hauling for
his or her own residence or commercial establishment for disposal at another location
with the written approval of the property owner.
(B) Each license shall be applied for, issued and renewed and may be suspended or revoked,
as provided by this chapter, and each license shall comply with all applicable
requirements of this chapter.
(C) Haulers collecting garbage and recyclable materials from residential areas, commercial
establishments, multiple dwellings and/or mobile home parks must be licensed.
Penalty, see § 320.99
320.03 Application for License.
(A) Any person, firm or corporation desiring a license to collect garbage and recyclable
materials shall make application for the same to the city upon a form described by the
city. The applicant shall provide for the city the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) A list of equipment which the applicant proposes to use in such collection;
(3) The place or places to which the garbage and recyclable materials is to be hauled;
(4) The manner in which said garbage and recyclable materials is to be disposed of;
(5) Provide proof of Mille Lacs/Sherburne County permit.
(B) Before license is issued, the applicant shall file with the city evidence that the applicant
has in effect insurance in at least the amount of $600,000.00 per occurrence, $600,000.00
aggregate public liability and $600,000.00 combined single limit automobile liability.
(C) When the application is submitted, the applicant shall file with the city a schedule of
proposed rates to be charged during the licensed period. Every licensee shall provide 30
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-6 Amended 1-23-20
days' prior written notification to the city and the licensee's customers of any change in
rates to be implemented during the licensed period.
(D) At the time the application is submitted, the applicant shall pay to the city a license fee in
an amount per year (no prorating) as established from time to time by ordinance of the
Council.
(E) No license issued shall be for a longer period than one year and all licenses shall expire
on December 31 of each year.
(F) Licenses may be suspended or revoked by the Council, after the licensee has been given a
reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard, for the violation of any provisions of
this chapter or for the violation of any condition or restriction in the motion granting the
license or any motion passed by the Council or upon failure of the licensee to comply
with any condition, order or direction issued by the city.
(G) No license may be transferred or sold.
320.04 Requirements and Restrictions.
(A) All licensees shall comply with all of the following requirements and restrictions:
(1) All haulers operating on a route in a residential district shall operate vehicles on
city streets within the weight allowed by Minnesota State Statutes;
(2) Persons may haul garbage and recyclable materials from their own residence,
multiple dwelling or commercial establishment if hauled in containers which are
water-tight on all sides and at the bottom and have tight-fitting covers on top, and
if hauled in vehicles with leak-proof bodies which do not permit the loss of cargo;
(3) Recyclable materials shall be disposed of at a recycling facility, an organized
recyclable drive or through another licensed hauler;
(4) Each vehicle for which a hauler's license is issued shall exhibit a copy of such
license in a prominent position on the vehicle;
(5) Each of these licensed collectors should include either a covered tank-truck or
wagon so constructed that the contents will not leak or spill therefrom and in which
all garbage collected by them shall be conveyed to the place designated in their
application. The wagon or conveyance used shall be kept clean and as free from
offensive odors as possible and shall not be allowed to stand in any street, alley or
public place longer than is reasonably necessary to collect garbage.
(B) The following collection times shall be abided to:
(1) No residential pick up may be conducted before 6:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. on any
day, except in an emergency and City Hall must be notified as soon as possible
(same or next working day);
(2) No residential pick up may be conducted on Sunday;
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-7
(3) No pick up of any kind may be conducted on the holidays of New Year's Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day;
(4) All residential pick up must be conducted Monday through Friday as designated
pursuant to the Garbage Pick Up Zone Map which is made a part hereof, and as
may be amended from time to time.
(C) All licensees shall provide the City Council, to be placed and filed at City Hall, the
materials used to educate and promote recycling to customers.
(D) All licensees shall provide to City Council, to be placed on file, written policies on the
disposal of the following items: fluorescent bulbs, jagged sharp objects (needle-like),
appliances, mattresses and box springs, Christmas trees and other household items.
320.05 Reduction in Waste. Each licensed collector or hauler of garbage and recyclable materials
shall be required to provide for curbside recyclable material collection as pursuant to the
guidelines established by Minnesota State Statutes with reference to the recycling of total solid
waste generation from January 1, 1990.
320.99 Penalty.
(A) In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to fail to properly dispose of collected mixed municipal solid waste.
(B) Any licensed hauler violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be punished as provided by §100.99. Upon a violation, a hauler may have their
license suspended or revoked for cause by the Council.
Chapter 330 - Recycling Facilities
330.01 Definitions. Unless specifically altered, terms and abbreviations used in this chapter shall be
interpreted in a manner consistent with M.S. Chs. 115, 115A, 116, and 400, as they may be
amended from time to time. Terms and abbreviations used herein which are not specifically
defined by law shall be construed in accordance with the context and professional usage.
(A) “Licensee” means a person who has been issued a license by the city for recycling
purposes pursuant to this chapter.
(B) “Person” means any human being, any municipality or other governmental or political
subdivision or other public agency, any public or private corporation, any partnership,
firm, association or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee or other legal
representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity.
(C) “Recyclable materials” means materials that are separated from mixed municipal solid
waste by the generator for the purpose of recycling, including paper, plastic, glass,
metals, automobile oil and batteries.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-8 Amended 1-23-20
(D) “Recycling facility” means a facility where recyclable materials are purchased from
generators or collectors, processed for marketing or loaded into vehicles for transport to
market.
330.02 Recycling Facilities.
(A) No recycling facility shall be constructed, established, maintained or operated (even
temporarily from a truck or motor vehicle) unless the operator or owner thereof has first
been issued therefore a license from the City of Princeton and the County of Mille Lacs
and/or County of Sherburne. The recycler shall meet all requirements for obtaining a
license. The application shall include three sets of complete plans, specifications, design
data and ultimate land use plans. The applicant shall procure a proper zoning permit to
accompany the application if required by the city.
(B) The city shall refuse to issue a license for any recycling operation which does not comply
with this chapter.
(C) The city shall revoke a license for any recycling operation which does not comply with
this chapter and any applicable state and county laws, ordinances and rules.
(D) Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are either more restrictive
or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this
chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance or rule (including, but not limited to
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, Environmental Protection Agency or any other
state or federal agency's requirements), the provision which establishes the higher
standards for the promotion of public health, safety and general welfare shall prevail.
(E) A record of every license issued for a recycling facility shall be filed in the office of the
City Administrator.
330.03 Requirements for Operation. Application for a license shall contain the following:
(A) Location, size and ownership of land upon which the operation will be situated;
(B) General description of property used in the immediate vicinity of the operation;
(C) Complete construction plans and specifications and proposed operating procedures for
the operation;
(D) All recyclable materials must be accepted by the facility;
(E) A notarized affidavit stating that the applicable local governments have been given 30
days' written notification of the pending application for a license;
(F) A sign shall be posted on the premises indicating the name of the operation and the days
and hours during which it is open to the public;
(G) Sanitary facilities and shelter adequate for employees shall be provided on the premises;
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-9
(H) Records shall be maintained indicating the type and quantity of recyclable materials
processed by the operation;
(I) The premise entrances and exits shall be maintained in a clean, neat and orderly manner
at all times;
(J) Proof of insurance satisfactory to the city shall be provided;
(K) Each licensed operation shall on a quarterly basis, or at any time upon reasonable notice
during the license term and upon the issuance of a license renewal, provide to the city
verifiable volume and/or tonnage summaries of collected recyclable materials. This is
necessary in order to track collection performance and to comply with Mille Lacs and
Sherburne Counties and the Minnesota state reporting requirements.
330.04 Fee. The license period shall be January 1 through December 31 of each year. The license fee
per year shall be as follows:
Resident (fixed structure/facility): as established from time to time by Council ordinance.
Non-resident (mobile unit): as established from time to time by Council ordinance.
330.99 Penalty. Any person, persons, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by
§100.99. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 340 - Taxi-Cabs
340.01 Definitions.
(A) “Taxi-cab” means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying
passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of no more than seven passengers and not
operated on a fixed route. Also, it may include the carrying of small parcels and
packages.
(B) “Street” means a thoroughfare which affords a principal means of access to abutting
property and which has been accepted by the city as a public street.
(C) “Taxi-cab driver” means any person who drives a taxi-cab, whether such person be the
owner of such taxi-cab or be employed by a taxi-cab owner or operator.
(D) “Operator” means any person owning or having control of the use of one or more taxicabs
used for hire upon the streets or engaged in the business of operating a taxi-cab
within the city.
340.02 License Required.
(A) No person shall operate a taxi-cab within the city limits without first having obtained a
taxi-cab license thereof under the provisions of this chapter.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-10 Amended 1-23-20
(B) Each applicant for a taxi-cab license shall apply to the City Administrator for such license
upon a form to be provided by the city and must comply with the following provisions of
the City Council:
(1) Applicant shall be a citizen of the United States;
(2) Applicant shall be of the age of 18 years or over, and in the case of any copartnership,
firm or corporation must be authorized to operate taxi-cab and carry
on business in accordance with the laws of the State of Minnesota.
340.03 Taxi-Cab Fees. The applicant for a taxi-cab license shall, before being issued said license, pay
into the City Treasury the fee as established from time to time by ordinance for each taxi cab.
The fee shall be returned to the applicant if for any reason the license is denied.
340.04 Examination of Taxi-Cabs.
(A) The Chief of Police or designee shall annually inspect each vehicle.
(B) Taxi-cab vehicles shall be in a thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of
passengers.
(C) Taxi-cab vehicles shall be clean and in good appearance.
(D) The Council may order examinations and tests of licensed taxi-cabs at any time it may
deem advisable.
340.05 Taxi-Cab Drivers. No person, either the operator or employee of such operator, shall drive a
taxi-cab within the City of Princeton without first having the proper Minnesota state driver’s
license for transporting passengers for hire and without having such license upon his or her
person.
340.06 Taxi-Cab Stands.
(A) The City Council, by ordinance, may designate certain portions of the city streets to be
used and known as public taxi-cab stands and may change, modify or eliminate such as
public taxi-cab stands. All portions of the city streets so designated shall be plainly
marked and no vehicles other than licensed taxi-cabs shall park there. The City Council,
by ordinance, from time to time, may designate which taxi-cab licensee or licensees may
use any particular stand and may eliminate, modify or change any or all such
designations at any time.
(B) No taxi-cab shall park within 30 feet of any crosswalk unless such portion of the street
has been designated a taxi-cab stand.
340.07 Fares.
(A) The City Council, may, by ordinance, regulate minimum and maximum taxi-cab fares for
all taxi-cabs licensed under this chapter, and such regulated fares shall take effect ten
days after the City Administrator has mailed copies of the ordinance regarding the fares
to all taxi-cabs licensees. In the event that the Council does not set fares, each licensee
shall file, with the city, a schedule of the rates to be charged in the operation of his or her
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-11
licensed taxi-cab. Such schedule of rates may be amended by the licensee at any time by
filing with the city an amended schedule.
(B) No licensee, driver or employee shall charge any other rate for the carrying of passengers
in any licensed taxi-cab than that set forth in the schedule set by the Council or on file
with the Administrator, and any deviation from such schedule shall be considered a
violation of this chapter.
340.08 Insurance. Before a license shall be delivered to any operator, he or she shall deposit with the
City Administrator a policy or policies of any insurance company or companies duly licensed to
transact such business in this state, insuring the operator of any taxi-cab to be licensed against
loss and the liability imposed by law for damages on account bodily injuries or death or for
damages to property resulting from the ownership, maintenance or use of any taxi-cab to be
owned or operated under such license and agreeing to pay any judgment creditor to the extent of
the amount specified in such policy and final judgment rendered against the insured by reason
of such liability. The policy or policies shall be approved by the City Attorney as to form and
compliance with this chapter. The limit in any such insurance policy of such liability of the
insurer on account of ownership, maintenance and use of such taxi-cab shall not be less than
$100,000.00 for bodily injuries to or death of one person and $300,000.00 on account of any
one accident resulting in injuries to and/or death of more than one person and a total of
$50,000.00 liability for damage to property of others arising out of any one accident.
340.99 Penalty for Violations. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall upon conviction thereof be punished as provided in § 100.99.
Chapter 350 - Tobacco Regulations Rev. 8-28-14; Ord. 710, 1-23-20; ord #788
350.01 Purpose and Intent. Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 21 years
purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery
devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products and tobacco related devices and the sales,
possession and use are violations of both state and federal laws; and because studies, which the
city hereby accepts and adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking before they have
reached the age of 21 years and that those persons who reach the age of 21 years without having
started smoking are significantly less likely to begin smoking; and because smoking has been
shown to be the cause of several serious health problems which subsequently place a financial
burden on all levels of government; this chapter shall be intended to regulate the sale,
possession and use of tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia
delivery products and tobacco related devices for the purpose of enforcing and furthering
existing laws, to protect minors against the serious effects associated with the illegal use of
tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products and
tobacco related devices and to further the official public policy of the state in regard to
preventing young people from starting to smoke as stated in M.S. §144.391, as it may be
amended from time to time.
350.02 Definitions. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
(A) “Compliance checks” means the system the city uses to investigate and ensure that those
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-12 Amended 1-23-20
authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or
lobelia delivery products and tobacco related devices are following and complying with
the requirements of this chapter. “Compliance checks” shall involve the use of minors as
authorized by this chapter. “Compliance checks” shall also mean the use of minors who
attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or
lobelia delivery products, or tobacco related devices for educational, research and
training purposes as authorized by state and federal laws. “Compliance checks” may also
be conducted by other units of government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate
federal, state or local laws and regulations relating to tobacco, tobacco products and
tobacco related devices.
(B) “Electronic Delivery Device” means any product containing or delivering nicotine,
lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a
person to simulate smoking by delivery of nicotine or any other substance through
inhalation of vapor from the product, including any component part of an electronic
delivery device, whether or not it is sold or marketed separately.
(C) “Individually packaged” means the practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco product
wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco products shall
include but not be limited to single cigarette packs, single bags or cans of loose tobacco
in any form and single cans or other packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or
other packaging containing more than a single pack or other container as described in this
definition shall not be considered individually packaged.
(D) “Loosies” means the common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged
cigarette.
(E) “Minor” means any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 21 years.
(F) “Moveable place of business” means any form of business operated out of a truck, van,
automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address store
front or other permanent type of structure authorized for sales transactions.
(G) “Nicotine or Lobelia Delivery Products” means any product containing or delivering
nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption (or any part of such product) that is
not tobacco or an electronic delivery device.
(H) “Retail establishment” means any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products,
electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products, or tobacco related
devices are available for sale to the general public. The phrase shall include but not be
limited to grocery stores, convenience stores and restaurants.
(I) “Sale” means any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration.
(J) “Self-service merchandising” means open displays of tobacco, tobacco products,
electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products, or tobacco related
devices in any manner where any person shall have access to the tobacco, tobacco
products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products, or tobacco
related devices, without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee's
employee. The assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-13
tobacco, tobacco product, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery
products, or tobacco related device between the customer and the licensee or employee.
The phrase shall not include vending machines. Self-service sales are interpreted as
being any sale where there is not an actual physical exchange of the tobacco between the
clerk and the customer.
(K) “Tobacco” or “tobacco products” includes electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia
delivery products , commonly called an electronic cigarette or an E-Cigarette and any
substance or item containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars,
pipe tobacco, snuff, fine cut or other chewing tobacco, cheroots, stogies, perique,
granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed and other smoking tobacco, snuff flowers,
cavendish, shorts, plug and twist tobaccos, dipping tobaccos, refuse scraps, clippings,
cuttings and sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco leaf prepared in
a manner as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing or smoking.
(L) “Tobacco related devices” includes electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia
delivery products , commonly called an electronic cigarette or an E-Cigarette and any
tobacco product as well as a pipe, rolling papers or other device intentionally designed or
intended to be used in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing or smoking of
tobacco or tobacco products.
(M) “Vending machine” means any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of device
which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or
lobelia delivery product, or tobacco related devices upon the insertion of money, tokens
or other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the
tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device.
350.03 License.
(A) License required. No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products,
electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products, or tobacco related
device without first having obtained a license to do so from the city.
(B) Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, electronic
delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related devices shall be
made on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the
applicant, the applicant's residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the
name of the business for which the license is sought and any additional information the
city deems necessary. Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Administrator
shall forward the application to the City Council for action at its next regularly scheduled
City Council meeting. If the City Administrator shall determine that an application is
incomplete, he or she shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the
information necessary to make the application complete.
(C) Action. The City Council may either approve or deny the license, or it may delay action
for a reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any investigation of the
application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the City Council shall approve the
license, the City Administrator shall issue the license to the applicant. If the City Council
denies the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of
the applicant's right to appeal the City Council's decision.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-14 Amended 1-23-20
(D) Term. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each year.
(E) Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or
suspended as provided in §350.99.
(F) Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only on the premises for
which the license was issued and only for the person to whom the license was issued. No
transfer of any license to another location or person shall be valid without the prior
approval of the City Council.
(G) Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable place of business.
Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this chapter.
(H) Display. All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on
the licensed premise.
(I) Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be handled in the
same manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least
30 days but no more than 60 days before the expiration of the current license.
(J) Issuance as privilege and not a right. The issuance of a license issued under this
chapter shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and shall
not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal of the license.
Penalty, see § 350.99
350.04 Fees. No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license fee shall be paid
in full. The fee for a license under this chapter shall be established from time to time by
Council ordinance.
Penalty, see § 350.99
350.05 Basis for Denial of License.
(A) Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this chapter includes but
is not limited to the following:
(1) The applicant is under the age of 21 years;
(2) The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any violation of a
federal, state or local law, ordinance provision or other regulation relating to
tobacco or tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia
delivery products or tobacco related devices;
(3) The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, electronic
delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related devices
revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of application;
(4) The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application or
provides false or misleading information;
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-15
(5) The applicant is prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance or other
regulation from holding a license.
(B) However, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular
ground for denial does not mean that the city must deny the license.
(C) If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon the
discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under this chapter.
Penalty, see § 350.99
350.06 Prohibited Sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or offer to sell any
tobacco, tobacco product, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or
tobacco related device:
(A) To any person under the age of 21 years;
(B) By means of any type of vending machine, except as may otherwise be provided in
§350.07;
(C) By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to a make a verbal
or written request to an employee of the licensed premises in order to receive the tobacco,
tobacco product, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or
tobacco related device and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco,
tobacco product, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or
tobacco related device between the licensee, or the licensee’s employee, and the
customer;
(D) By means of loosies, as defined in §350.02;
(E) Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnos, cocaine, marijuana or
other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or controlled substances, except nicotine and
other substances found naturally in tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful
manufacturing process. It is not the intention of this provision to ban the sale of lawfully
manufactured cigarettes, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products
or other tobacco products;
(F) By any other means, to any other person on in any other manner or form prohibited by
federal, state or other local law, ordinance provision or other regulation.
Penalty, see § 350.99
350.07 Vending Machines. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to allow the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery
products or tobacco related devices by the means of a vending machine unless minors are at all
times prohibited from entering the licensed establishment.
Penalty, see § 350.99
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-16 Amended 1-23-20
350.08 Self-Service Sales. It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to allow the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or
tobacco related devices by any means whereby the customer may have access to those items
without having to request the item from the licensee or the licensee's employee and whereby
there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, electronic delivery devices,
nicotine or lobelia delivery products or the tobacco related device between the licensee or his or
her clerk and the customer. All tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine
or lobelia delivery products and tobacco related devices shall either be stored behind a counter
or other area not freely accessible to customers or in a case or other storage unit not left open
and accessible to the general public. Any retailer selling tobacco, tobacco products, electronic
delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related devices at the time this
chapter is adopted shall comply with this section immediately following the effective date of
this chapter.
Penalty, see § 350.99
350.09 Responsibility. All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions of their
employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices,
nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related devices on the licensed premises, and
the sale of an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder. Nothing in
this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also subjecting the clerk to whatever
penalties are appropriate under this chapter, state or federal law or other applicable law or
regulation.
Penalty, see § 350.99
350.10 Compliance Checks and Inspections. All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the
city police or other authorized city official during regular business hours. From time to time,
but at least once per year, the city shall conduct compliance checks by engaging, with the
written consent of their parents or guardians, minors over the age of 15 years but less than 21
years to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, electronic
delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related devices. Minors used
for the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised by city designated law enforcement
officers or other designated city personnel. Minors used for compliance checks shall not be
guilty of unlawful possession of tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine
or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related devices when those items are obtained as a part
of the compliance check. No minor used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false
identification misrepresenting the minor's age, and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance
check shall answer all questions about the minor's age asked by the licensee or his or her
employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for
educational, research or training purposes or required for the enforcement of a particular state or
federal law.
Penalty, see § 350.99
350.11 Other Illegal Acts. Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this
chapter:
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-17
(A) Illegal sales. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or otherwise
provide any tobacco, tobacco product, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia
delivery products or tobacco related device to any minor.
(B) Illegal possession. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to have in his or
her possession any tobacco, tobacco product, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or
lobelia delivery products or tobacco related device. This division (B) shall not apply to
minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.
(C) Illegal use. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to smoke, chew, snuff or
otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or
lobelia delivery products or tobacco related device.
(D) Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to purchase or
attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco, tobacco product, electronic delivery
devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related device, and it shall be a
violation of this chapter for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain those items on
behalf of a minor. It shall further be a violation for any person to coerce or attempt to
coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco
product, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco
related device. This division (D) shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a
compliance check.
(E) Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to attempt
to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false form of identification, whether the
identification is that of another person or one on which the age of the person has been
modified or tampered with to represent an age older than the actual age of the person.
(F) Child Resistant Packaging. It shall be a violation of this chapter to sell, purchase or
possess any liquid intended for human consumption and use is an electronic delivery
device which has not been sold or purchased in child resistant packaging as defined in
CFR, title 16, Section 1700.15(b)(1).
(G) Public Buildings. It shall be a violation of this chapter to use or operate any electronic
delivery device in any building owned or operated by the City of Princeton, or in any
Public School as defined in Minnesota Statute Section 120A.05.
Penalty, see § 350.99
350.12 Exceptions and Defenses. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco,
tobacco products, electronic delivery devices, nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco
related devices to a minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual or cultural
ceremony. It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this chapter for a person to have
reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law.
350.99 Violations and Penalty.
(A) Violations.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-18 Amended 1-23-20
(1) Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator shall be
issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation
and which shall inform the alleged violator of his or her right to be heard on
the accusation.
(2) Hearings. If a person accused of violating this chapter so requests, a hearing shall
be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be published and provided to the
accused violator.
(3) Hearing officer. The City Administrator shall serve as the hearing officer, or may
appoint a qualified person to act as a hearing officer.
(4) Decision. If the hearing officer determines that a violation of this chapter did
occur, that decision, along with the hearing officer's reasons for finding a violation
and the penalty to be imposed under division (B) of this section, shall be recorded
in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the accused violator. Likewise, if
the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not
imposing any penalty, those findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the
accused violator.
(5) Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall be filed in the
district court for the city in which the alleged violation occurred.
(6) Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from
seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this chapter.
(7) Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or
continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
(L) Administrative penalties.
(1) Licensees. Any licensee found to have violated this chapter, or whose employee
shall have violated this chapter, shall be charged an administrative penalty
pursuant to M.S. 461.12 as it may be amended from time to time and includes a
provision by which, upon a third offense, the license shall be suspended for not
less than seven days. This administrative fine or other penalty may also be
established from time to time by the city ordinance establishing fees and charges,
as it may be amended from time to time.
(2) Other individuals. Other individuals, other than minors, found to be in violation
of this chapter shall be charged an administrative penalty pursuant to M.S. 461.12
as it may be amended from time to time. This administrative fine or other penalty
may also be established from time to time by the city ordinance establishing fees
and charges, as it may be amended from time to time.
(3) Minors. Minors found in unlawful possession of or who unlawfully purchase or
attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, electronic delivery devices,
nicotine or lobelia delivery products or tobacco related devices shall be subject to
an administrative fine or may be subject to tobacco related education classes,
diversion programs, community services or another penalty that the city believes
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-19
will be appropriate and effective. The administrative fine or other penalty shall be
established by City Council ordinance upon the City Council's consultation with
interested parties of the courts, educators, parents and children to determine an
appropriate penalty for minors in the city. This administrative fine or other penalty
may also be established from time to time by the ordinance establishing fees and
charges, as it may be amended from time to time.
(4) Misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking
prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this chapter.
(5) Statutory penalties. If the administrative penalties authorized to be imposed by
M.S. §461.12, as it may be amended from time to time, differ from those
established in this section, then the greater of the two penalties shall prevail.
Chapter 360 – Rummage Sale Regulations
360.01 Definitions. For the purposes of this Code, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
(A) “Rummage Sale” shall mean and include all general sales, open to the public, conducted
from or on a residential premise in any zone, as defined by the zoning ordinance, for the
purpose of disposing of personal property including, but not limited to, all sales entitled
"garage," "lawn," “basement”, "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "auction," "backyard,"
"patio," "flea market," or "rummage" sale.
(B) “Personal Property” shall mean property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an
individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in the normal course of living
in or maintaining a residence.
(C) “Person” shall mean and include individuals, groups, organizations, partnerships,
voluntary organizations and corporations including any charitable, educational, cultural
or governmental institution or organization.
360.02 Property Permitted To Be Sold. No person, whether as owner, lessee, manager, occupant or
any agent thereof, shall sell, offer for sale, conduct or permit a sale of property other than
personal property at a garage sale or other residential personal property sale.
360.03 Permitted Number Of Yard Sales Per Year. It shall be unlawful for any residents and/or
family household to conduct more than two (2) yard sales during any one (1) calendar year. If
members of more than one residence and/or family household join in the operation of a garage
sale, it shall be considered as a garage sale for each and all such residences and/or family
households.
360.04 Hours of Operation. Such yard sales shall be limited in time and shall be open to the public
only between the hours of 8:00 AM to dusk of three (3) consecutive days. If, due to inclement
weather, the sale is postponed, the applicant shall notify the City.
360.05 Display of Sale Property. Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within the
residence, porch, in a garage, carport, and/or in any yard, but shall not be permitted within the
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-20 Amended 1-23-20
public right of way. Unsold items must be removed from the sale site and/or stored in an
enclosed structure within 12 hours after the last day of the sale.
360.06 Advertising; Signs. Signs advertising the garage sale shall be permitted according to the
following rules:
(A) Signs may be permitted to be displayed on the property of the residence where the yard
sale is being conducted.
(B) Any sign posted in conjunction with a sale shall be removed from view within two (2)
hours of the conclusion of the sale.
(M) Nothing under this provision shall serve as authorization for any rummage sale sign to be
posted on any off-premises property, utility pole, street sign, street light, stop light, fence
or structure without the written consent of the owner of said premises, property, sign,
pole, fence or structure.
(N) Signs may be located within a city street right-of-way (ROW) providing that:
1. Signage in the ROW must include the exact street address of the Rummage Sale as
well as the name of the property owner and the dates for the Rummage Sale.
2. Signage located within the ROW must be no closer than three feet (3’) to the driving
surface of the adjacent roadway and may not be positioned such that the signage
blocks the view of intersecting traffic.
3. All signage must comply with all other provisions of the city ordinances. Any owner
of Rummage Sale signage found in violation of any provision of city ordinance shall
be subject to an administrative fine or a regular citation.
360.07 Authority. The city building inspector, a police officer or any other city official designated by
the City Administrator, shall make inspections to enforce the same and shall have the right to
issue citations for violations of this Ordinance.
360.08 Persons Exempt. The provisions of this Code shall not apply to or affect the following:
(A) Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of Court of competent jurisdiction.
(B) Persons acting in accordance with their powers or duties as public officials.
(C) Persons acting in accordance with their responsibilities as court-appointed decedents'
personal representatives.
(D) Any bona fide charitable, educational, cultural or governmental institution, or
organization when the proceeds from the sale are used directly for the institution or
organization's charitable purposes.
360.09 Penalty. - Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor. Each day a violation exists shall be a separate violation. Said violation may be
subject to the Administrative Fine procedure pursuant to Ordinance #526.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-21
Chapter 370 – Heritage Preservation Advisory Committee
370.01 Policy and Purpose. The City Council of the City of Princeton, pursuant to Minnesota Statutes,
Section 471.193 hereby declares as a matter of public policy that the protection, preservation,
perpetuation and use of places, areas, buildings, structures and other objects having a special
historical, community or aesthetic interest or value is a public necessity and is required in the
interest of the people. The purpose of this Chapter is to:
(A) Safeguard the cultural resources of the City by preserving sites, structures, districts and
landmarks which reflect elements of the City’s cultural, social, economic, political or
architectural heritage.
(B) Protect and enhance the City’s historical attractions for residents and visitors.
(C) Foster civic pride in the beauty and notable achievements of the past.
(D) Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest of the City’s buildings,
structures and places.
(E) Promote the use and preservation of historic sites and landmarks for the education and
general welfare of the people of the City
370.03 Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
Alteration: Changing the existing exterior of a property. “Major alterations” include
construction work which is normally done with the aid of plans or specifications that
substantially changes the physical appearance or use of a property. “Minor alterations” include
work which is normally done without the aid of plans, specifications or skilled labor and which
does not radically change the external appearance of a property.
Cultural Resources: Any work of people or nature that is primarily of interest for its historical,
archeological, natural, scientific or aesthetic value including, but not limited to, old houses and
other structures such as barns, schools, kilns, archaeological sites, American Indian burial
grounds and earthworks, buildings identified as the work of an architect, developer or master
builder whose work has influenced the City, and structures noteworthy because of their design,
detail, materials or craftsmanship.
Heritage Preservation District: A discrete, geographically definable area containing buildings,
structures, archaeological sites, lands and areas linked historically through location, design,
workmanship, setting or association with people or events that have made an important
contribution to our heritage, as designated by the City Council.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-22 Amended 1-23-20
Heritage Preservation Site: Any area, place, structure, land or other object as designated by the
City Council.
Heritage Preservation Landmark: A landscape feature or aggregate of landscape features which
has or have a special historical or aesthetic character or interest as part of the development,
heritage, or cultural characteristics of the City, as designated by the City Council.
Significance: The sense of time and place in history that is conveyed by cultural resources, their
educational and scientific value and their capacity for enhancing the visual and aesthetic
character, diversity and interest of the City.
370.05 Heritage Preservation Advisory Committee.
(A) Committee Established; Members. The City Council hereby establishes a Heritage
Preservation Advisory Committee, which shall consist of five (5) voting members, adult
residents of the City, to be appointed by the City Council. This Committee shall be the
duly designated the Heritage Preservation Advisory Committee (“HPAC”), pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes section 471.193.
(B) Qualifications. Members of the HPAC shall be persons with demonstrated interest or
expertise in historic preservation. If available, at least one (1) member of the HPAC shall
be a heritage preservation related professional who meets the professional qualifications
and standards established by the United States Secretary of the Interior and the State
Historic Preservation Office. In addition to the five (5) voting members of the HPAC, the
City Council shall appoint ex officio non-voting members from one or more of the
following: The City Planning Commission; the Economic Development Authority; and
the Housing and Redevelopment Authority. The Mille Lacs County Historical Society
shall also be invited to appoint a representative to the HPAC who shall serve in an ex
officio non-voting capacity.
(C) Terms of Office. The City Council shall initially designate two (2) voting members to
serve a term of one (1) year, two (2) voting members to serve a term of two (2) years, and
one (1) voting member to serve a term of three (3) years. All subsequent appointments
shall be for terms of three (3) years. Voting members shall continue to hold offices until
their successors have been appointed and qualified. Ex officio members appointed by the
City Council shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council.
(D) Compensation. Voting members of the HPAC shall serve without compensation but shall
be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties in accordance with
the established City policy.
(E) Staff. The City Council shall provide the HPAC with a recording secretary.
370.07 Historic and Cultural Resource Studies. The HPAC shall conduct a continuing survey of
historic and cultural resources in the City which the HPAC has reason to believe are or will be
eligible for designation as Heritage Preservation Districts, Sites, or Landmarks. The HPAC shall
also prepare a Comprehensive Cultural Resource Management Plan for the City. Owners of
properties considered under this Section shall be notified of the HPAC review and apprised of
their right to opt out of the designation at the time of any City Council consideration of a
heritage preservation designation on such property.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-23
370.09 Designation of Heritage Preservation Districts, Sites, and Landmarks.
(A) Procedures Before the HPAC. Following consultation with the property owner, HPAC
may nominate to the City Council a heritage preservation designation for any district, site
or landmark identified by the HPAC in the survey prepared under Section 370.07 hereof.
Every such nomination shall be forwarded to the Minnesota Historical Society for review
and comment within sixty (60) days of the HPAC’s request for a heritage preservation
designation.
(B) Procedures Before the City Council. Upon the nomination by HPAC, the City Council
may, with the consent of the property owner, by resolution designate a nominated historic
district, site or landmark as a Heritage Preservation District, Site or Landmark. Prior to
such designation, the City Council shall hold a public hearing, notice of which shall have
been published in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days prior to the
date of the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall also be mailed at last fifteen (15) days
prior to the hearing to all owners of property which is proposed to be designated as a
Heritage Preservation District, Site, or Landmark and to all property owners within three
hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the area to be designated.
(C) Eligibility Criteria. In considering the designation of any area, place or structure within
the City as a Heritage Preservation District, Site or Landmark, whether by the HPAC or
the City Council, the following factors shall be considered with respect to its Significance
and eligibility for the designation:
(1) Its character, interest or value as part of the history or cultural heritage of the City,
the State of the United States;
(2) Its association with persons or events that have made a significant contribution to
the cultural heritage of the City;
(3) Its potential to yield information important in history or prehistory;
(4) Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of architectural type or style, or
elements of design, detail materials or craftsmanship; and
(5) Its unique location or singular physical appearance representing an established or
familiar visual feature of a neighborhood or community of the City.
370.11 Alterations to Designated Heritage Preservation Districts, Sites or Landmarks.
(A) Review and Recommendations Generally. The HPAC shall review and make
recommendations to the City Council concerning proposed Major Alterations to any
designated Heritage Preservation District, Site or Landmark.
(B) Factors to be Considered. The HPAC, upon receipt of the permit application and plans,
shall determine if the work to be performed is a Major Alteration or a Minor Alteration as
defined in the Ordinance. In the event of a minor alteration, the HPAC shall approve or
disapprove the permit and review is not required by the City Council, provided, however,
that any applicant may appeal the disapproval of a permit to the City Council. In the
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-24 Amended 1-23-20
event of a Major Alteration, the recommendation of the HPAC shall be forwarded to the
City Council for review. In determining whether the permit application and plans
describe a Major Alteration or a Minor Alteration, the HPAC shall consider the
following:
(1) Whether the work described in the application will significantly alter the
appearance of the Heritage Preservation District, Site or Landmark so as to remove
the features which distinguish it as a designated Heritage Preservation District, Site
or Landmark;
(2) Whether the use of the property will destroy, disturb or endanger a known or
suspected archaeological feature site;
(3) Whether the permit application and plans meet the guidelines set forth in the U.S.
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and Guidelines for Archaeology and Historic
Preservation;
(4) Whether the permit application and plans are in conflict with the overall goals of
this Ordinance for preservation of the designated Heritage Preservation Districts,
Sites and Landmarks of the City of Princeton.
(C) Building or Land Use Permit. Every application for a building or land use permit which
may result in the Major Alteration of a designated Heritage Preservation District, Site or
Landmark shall be reviewed by HPAC; thereafter, HPAC shall make a recommendation
and may recommend conditions regarding approval to the City Council concerning the
proposed permit. No permit will be issued by the City Building Official or the Zoning
Administrator unless a Certificate of Approval has been granted by the City Council. This
Certificate of Approval may contain conditions of approval that the Council deems
reasonable and appropriate.
(D) Plats, Variances, Interim Uses or Conditional Uses. Every application for a preliminary
or final plat, variance, interim use or conditional use permit which may result in a Major
Alteration of a designated Heritage Preservation District, Site or Landmark in the City
shall be reviewed by the HPAC and the recommendation of the HPAC shall be forwarded
to the Planning Commission and to the City Council to be considered by the Planning
Commission in making their recommendation to the City Council.
(E) Appeals. Except as stated in Section 370.11B, all decisions and recommendations of the
HPAC are advisory to the City Council. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
City Council with respect to the application of this Ordinance shall have a right to appeal
such decision to the District Court of Mille Lacs County. A copy of any such appeal shall
be served upon the City Administrator of the City of Princeton, and the original shall be
filed with the District Court Administrator along with an Affidavit of Service, within
thirty (30) days of written notice to the applicant of the final decision of the City Council.
Written notice to the applicant of the decision of the City Council, is effective on the date
that the notice is placed in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
applicant as described in the permit application and plans.
370.13 Designation of Historic Districts on Zoning Map. The City shall place all duly designated
Heritage Preservation Districts, Sites and Landmarks on the Official City Zoning Map,
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-25
provided, however, that the failure to do so shall not affect the official designation of the
heritage designation of any district, site or landmark.
370.15 Maintenance of Records and Documents.
(A) Register of Historic Sites and Landmarks. The City shall maintain a register of Heritage
Preservation Districts, Sites and Landmarks.
(B) Repository for Documents. The office of the City Administrator is designated as the
repository for all studies, surveys, reports, programs and designations of Heritage
Preservation Districts, Sites and Landmarks.
370.17 Violation. It shall be a misdemeanor to alter, disturb, deface, vandalize or materially change the
appearance of a designated Heritage Preservation District, Site and Landmark without a permit.
Chapter 380 – Securing and Registration of Vacant Buildings
380.01 Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
City: The City of Princeton, State of Minnesota.
Neighborhood Association: An organization recognized by the City as representing a
neighborhood within the City.
Owner of Record: The fee owner, contract for deed vendee, mortgagee in foreclosure, holder of
a sheriff’s certificate, and taxpayer as shown on the real property records of Mille Lacs or
Sherburne County, or the authorized agent of any of the preceding persons.
Secure: Includes, but is not limited to, installing locks, repairing windows and doors, boarding
windows and doors, posting "no-trespassing" signs, installing exterior lighting or motiondetecting
lights, fencing the property, and installing a monitored alarm or other security system
consistent with Minn. Stat. § 463.251.
Unoccupied Building: A building or portion of a building which is not being used by a person
entitled to legal occupancy.
Unsecured building: A building or a portion of a building that is open to entry by unauthorized
persons without the use of tools or ladders.
Vacant building: A building or a portion of a building that is unoccupied and meets one or more
of the following conditions:
(1) Records of the Mille Lacs or Sherburne County Recorder show the property is in
lien foreclosure;
(2) Windows or entrances to the property are boarded up or closed off, or multiple
doors or window are broken and unrepaired;
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-26 Amended 1-23-20
(3) Doors to the property are damaged, smashed through, caved in, broken off,
unhinged, or continuously unlocked;
(4) The property is without gas, electric, or water service;
(5) Rubbish, trash, putrescible materials or debris has accumulated on the property;
(6) Law enforcement agencies have received at least two reports of trespass,
vandalism or other illegal acts being committed on the property within 12 months;
(7) The yards on the property exhibit grass, lawn, weeds, and other vegetation which
are not maintained to the standards prevailing in the neighborhood.
380.02 Securing Vacant Buildings. Any building which becomes unsecured or vacant may be deemed
hazardous. If the hazardous condition could be abated by securing the building, the City Council
may order the building secured and shall cause notice of the order to be served by United States
Mail on the record owner at its last known address and upon any neighborhood association
consistent with Minn. Stat. § 463.251, Subd. 2. The notice must be in writing and must include,
at a minimum, a statement that:
(A) Informs the owner of record that it has 12 days to secure the building or provide the
council with a reasonable plan and schedule to comply with the order and that costs may
be assessed against the property if the person does not secure the building.
(B) Provides the owner of record with a copy of Minn. Stat. § 582.031 (right of entry by
holder of mortgage or sheriff’s certificate to protect the premises from waste and
trespass).
Service by mail is completed upon mailing.
380.03 Emergency Securing of Vacant Buildings. Pursuant to MN Statute § 463.251, Subd. 4, when
the City Council or the Council’s authorized representative determines that a vacant or
unsecured building poses an immediate threat to the health or safety of persons in the
community and the immediate securing of a building is required to protect health and safety, all
notice requirements herein are waived and the building may be secured by the City, provided
that:
(A) The conditions showing the existence of an immediate threat are documented in a written
report.
(B) A copy of the written report and the City action taken are mailed immediately to the
owner of record and any neighborhood association.
380.04 Collection of Costs. All costs incurred by the City for securing a vacant building under this
Ordinance may be charged against the real property as a special assessment pursuant to Minn.
Stat. §§ 463.251, 463.21 and 463.151.
380.05 Registration of Vacant Buildings. The owner of record of a vacant building shall register such
structure with the City’s Development Director no later than thirty (30) days after the building
becomes a vacant building, as defined in this Ordinance. The registration of vacant building
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-27
shall be submitted on forms provided by the City, and shall contain, at a minimum, the
following:
(A) The legal description and property address of the vacant building.
(B) The names and addresses of all owners of the vacant building.
(C) The names and addresses of all known lien holders and mortgagees of the vacant
building.
(D) The period of time which the building is expected to remain vacant.
(E) A plan and timetable for returning the building to appropriate occupancy and/or making
the structure compliant with all City Ordinances or for demolition of the building. The
plan must be approved by the City Development Director and shall require completion of
the plan within a reasonable period of time not to exceed three hundred sixty-five (365)
days. Such plan shall include all conditions that are to be corrected, the estimated value
of the project(s) required to complete the plan and a plan for continued care and upkeep
of the property consistent with this Ordinance.
(F) Other information deemed necessary by the City to process the registration.
380.06 Continuing Requirements of Registered Vacant Buildings. The owner of record shall
comply with all applicable state laws and City Ordinances and shall notify the City’s
Development Director of any changes in the information supplied as part of the vacant building
registration, within thirty (30) days of the change. Any change in the vacant building
registration must be approved by the City’s Development Director. The following additional
requirements shall apply:
(A) The owner of record shall keep the vacant building secured and shall keep the building
and grounds maintained until the rehabilitation or demolition of the building has been
completed. Residential vacant buildings shall not be used for storage.
(B) Failure of the owner of record to maintain the vacant building and grounds such that
abatement of violations by the City is required, shall be grounds for revocation of the
vacant building registration plan and the owner of record shall be subject to any
applicable penalties provided by law.
(C) In the event of a sale of the building or grounds by the owner of record to a purchaser, the
purchaser shall re-register the vacant building with the City’s Development Director
within thirty (30) days of the transfer of ownership or interest in the vacant building. The
new owner of record shall comply with the approved vacant building registration plan
and timetable unless any proposed changes in the plan are submitted to and approved by
the City’s Development Director.
380.07 Vacant Building Registration Fees. The owner of a vacant building shall pay an annual
registration fee as established by the City Council. This fee is imposed to defray the
administrative costs for registering and processing the vacant building registration form and the
costs of the City in monitoring the vacant building site.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-28 Amended 1-23-20
(A) The first annual registration fee shall be paid no later than thirty (30) days after the
building becomes vacant. Subsequent annual registration fees shall be due on the
anniversary date of initial vacancy.
(B) The registration fee shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of any building permits,
with the exception of a demolition permit.
380.08 Inspections. The record owner shall provide access to all portions of a vacant building for
inspection by City employees for the purpose of enforcing and assuring compliance with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
380.09 Right of Appeal. Any owner of record who is aggrieved by a decision or order of the
Development Director may appeal to the City Council. Such appeal must be in writing on
forms provided by the City, must specify the grounds for the appeal, and must be accompanied
by a filing fee in an amount determined by the City Council. The appeal must be submitted to
the City Clerk by personal service or United States mail within thirty (30) days from the date of
the decision or order from which the appeal is taken.
380.10 Severability. If any provision of this Ordinance is found to be invalid for any reason by a court
of competent jurisdiction, the validity of the remaining provisions shall not be affected.
380.99 Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance, or providing false information
to the City in connection with a vacant building registration shall, upon conviction therefore, be
punished as provided in the penalty section of this Ordinance.
Chapter 390 - Pawn Shops
390.01 Purpose. The city council finds that use of services provided by pawnbrokers provides an
opportunity for the commission of crimes and their concealment because pawn businesses have
the ability to receive and transfer property stolen by others easily and quickly. The city council
also finds that consumer protection regulation is warranted in transactions involving
pawnbrokers. The city council further finds that the pawn industry has outgrown the city's
current ability to effectively or efficiently identify criminal activity related to pawn shops. The
purpose of this chapter is to prevent pawn businesses from being used as facilities for the
commission of crimes, and to assure that such businesses comply with basic consumer
protection standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city.
To help the police department better regulate current and future pawn businesses, decrease and
stabilize costs associated with the regulation of the pawn industry, and increase identification of
criminal activities in the pawn industry through the timely collection and sharing of pawn
transaction information, this chapter also implements and establishes the required use of the
automated pawn system (APS).
390.02 Definitions. When used in this article, the following words shall mean:
Pawnbroker: Any natural person, partnership or corporation, either as principal, or agent or
employee thereof, who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other valuable
thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property, or other valuable thing on condition of
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-29
selling the same back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage
on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged. To the
extent that a pawnbroker’s business includes buying personal property previously used, rented or
leased, or selling it on consignment, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable.
Reportable transaction: Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in which merchandise is
received through a pawn, purchase, consignment or trade, or in which a pawn is renewed,
extended or redeemed, or for which a unique transaction number or identifier is generated by their
point-of-sale software, is reportable except:
(1) The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a merchant,
manufacturer or wholesaler having an established permanent place of business,
and the retail sale of said merchandise, provided the pawnbroker must maintain a
record of such purchase or consignment which describes each item, and must
mark each item in a manner which relates it to that transaction record.
(2) Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by pawn or
purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods have
expired.
Billable transaction: Every reportable transaction conducted by a Pawnbroker except renewals,
redemptions or extensions of existing pawns on items previously reported and continuously in the
licensee's possession is a billable transaction.
390.03 License Required. No person shall engage in the business of pawnbroker at any location
without a pawnbroker license for that location. No pawnbroker license may be transferred to a
different location or a different person. Issuance of a license under this chapter shall not relieve
the licensee from obtaining any other licenses required to conduct business at the same or any
other location.
390.04 Application Required.
(A) (Contents.) An application form provided by the city clerk must be
completed by every applicant for a new license or for renewal of an existing license.
Every new applicant must provide all the following information:
(1) If the applicant is a natural person:
a. The name, place and date of birth, street resident address, and
phone number of applicant.
b. Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or resident alien.
c. Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name other
than the applicant's name, and if so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and places used.
d. The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-30 Amended 1-23-20
designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant and a
certified copy of the certificate as required by Minnesota Statutes,
Section 333.01.
e. The street address at which the applicant has lived during the
preceding five (5) years.
f. The type, name and location of every business or occupation
in which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five (5)
years and the name(s) and address(es) of the applicant's employer(s) and
partner(s), if any, for the preceding five (5) years.
g. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime, or
violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, the
applicant must furnish information as to the time, place, and offense of
all such convictions.
h. If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the
manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all
information concerning each of them required in a. through g. of
subdivision (1) of this section.
(2) If the applicant is a partnership:
a. The name(s) and address(es) of all general and limited partners and all
information concerning each general partner required in subdivision (1)
of this section.
b. The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the interest of each partner
in the licensed business.
c. A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the
application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade
name pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 333.01, a certified copy of
such certificate must be attached to the application.
(2) If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
a. The name of the corporation or business form, and if incorporated, the
state of incorporation.
b. A true copy of the Certificate of Incorporation, Articles of Incorporation
or Association Agreement, and By-laws shall be attached to the
application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a Certificate of
Authority as required by Minnesota Statutes, Section 303.06, must be
attached.
c. The name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business
and all information concerning each manager, proprietor, or agent
required in a.. through g. of subdivision (1) of this section.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-31
(3) For all applicants:
a. Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker, precious metal dealer
or secondhand goods dealer license from any other governmental unit.
c. Whether the applicant has previously been denied, or had revoked or
suspended, a pawnbroker precious metal dealer, or secondhand dealer
license from any other governmental unit.
d. The location of the business premises.
d. Such other information as the city council or issuing authority may
require.
390.05 Application Execution. All applications for a license under this chapter must be signed and
sworn to under oath or affirmation by the applicant. If the application is that of a natural person,
it must be signed and sworn to by such person; if that of a corporation, by an officer thereof; if
that of a partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that of an unincorporated association,
by the manager or managing officer thereof. Any falsification on a license application shall
result in the denial of a license.
390.06 Persons ineligible for a License. No license under this chapter will be issued to an applicant
who is a natural person, a partnership if such applicant has any general partner or managing
partner, a corporation or other organization if such applicant has any manager, proprietor or
agent in charge of the business to be licensed, if the applicant:
(A) Is a minor at the time that the application is filed;
(B) Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed
by Minnesota Statutes, Section 364.03, Subd. 2, and has not shown competent evidence
of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a licensee under
this chapter as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes, Section 364.03, Subd. 3; or (3) Is not of
good moral character or repute.
390.07 License fees.
(A) The annual license fees for licenses issued under this chapter shall be as adopted by The
City Council and included in Appendix E of the City Ordinances.
(B) The billable transaction license fee shall reflect the cost of processing transactions and
other related regulatory expenses as determined by the city council, and shall be reviewed
and adjusted, if necessary every six (6) months. Licensees shall be notified in writing
thirty (30) days before any adjustment is implemented.
(C) Billable transaction fees shall be billed monthly and are due and payable within thirty
(30) days. Failure to do so is a violation of this chapter.
390.08 Bond Required. Before a license will be issued, every applicant must submit a five thousand
dollar ($5,000.00) bond on the forms provided by the licensing authority. All bonds must be
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-32 Amended 1-23-20
conditioned that the principal will observe all laws in relation to pawnbrokers, and will conduct
business in conformity thereto, and that the principal will account for and deliver to any person
legally entitled any goods which have come into the principal's hand through the principal's
business as a pawnbroker, or in lieu thereof, will pay the reasonable value in money to the
person. The bond shall contain a provision that no bond may be canceled except upon thirty
(30) days written notice to the city, which shall be served upon the licensing authority.
390.09 Records Required. At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals, extensions or
redemptions, every licensee must immediately record in English the following information by
using ink or other indelible medium on forms or in a computerized record approved by the
police department.
(A) A complete and accurate description of each item including, but not limited to, any
trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other
identifying mark on such an item.
(B) The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon, or pledged therefor.
(C) The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due, including monthly and annual
interest rates and all pawn fees and charges.
(D) Date, time and place the item of property was received by the licensee, and the unique
alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguishes it from all other transactions
in the licensee's records.
(E) Full name, current residence address, current residence telephone number, date of birth
and accurate description of the person from whom the item of property was received,
including: sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair.
(F) The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of
identification of the seller:
1. Current valid Minnesota driver's license.
2. Current valid Minnesota identification card.
3. Current valid photo identification card issued by another state or province of
Canada.
(G) The signature of the person identified in the transaction.
(H) Effective sixty (60) days from the date of notification by the police department of
acceptable video standards the licensee must also take a color photograph or color video
recording of:
1. Each customer involved in a billable transaction.
2. Every item pawned or sold that does not have an unique serial or
identification number permanently engraved or affixed.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-33
If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two (2) inches in length by two (2) inches in
width and must be maintained in such a manner that the photograph can be readily
matched and correlated with all other records of the transaction to which they relate. Such
photographs must be available to the chief of police or the chief's designee, upon request.
The major portion of the photograph must include an identifiable front facial close-up of
the person who pawned or sold the item. Items photographed must be accurately
depicted.
The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being photographed by displaying a
sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place in the premises. If a video photograph is
taken, the video camera must zoom in on the person pawning or selling the item so as to
include an identifiable close-up of that person's face. Items photographed by video must
be accurately depicted. Video photographs must be electronically referenced by time and
date so they can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the
transaction to which they relate.
The licensee must inform the person orally that he or she is being videotaped and by
displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee
must keep the exposed videotape for three (3) months.
(I) Digitized photographs. Effective sixty (60) days from the date of notification by the
police department licensees must fulfill the color photograph requirements in above
section (H) by submitting them as digital images, in a format specified by the issuing
authority, electronically cross-referenced to the reportable transaction they are associated
with. Notwithstanding the digital images may be captured from required video
recordings, this provision does not alter or amend the requirements in subdivision (H).
(J) Renewals, extensions and redemptions. For renewals, extensions and redemptions, the
licensee shall provide the original transaction identifier, the date of the current transaction
and the type of transaction.
(K) Inspection of records. The records must at all reasonable times be open to inspection by
the police department or department of licenses and consumer services. Data entries shall
be retained for at least three (3) years from the date of transaction. Entries of required
digital images shall be retained a minimum of ninety (90) days.
390.10: Daily Reports To Police.
(A) Effective no later than sixty (60) days after the police department provides licensees with
computerized record standards, licensees must submit every reportable transaction to the
police department daily in the following manner:
1. Licensees must provide to the police department all information required in the
Records Required section (A) through (F) and other required information by
transferring it from their computer to the Automated Pawn system via modem.
All required records must be transmitted completely and accurately after the
close of business each day in accordance with standards and procedures
established by the issuing authority. The licensee must display a sign of sufficient
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-34 Amended 1-23-20
size, in a conspicuous place in the premises, which informs all patrons that all
transactions are reported to the police department daily.
(B) Billable transactions fees. Licensees will be charged for each billable transaction reported to
the police department.
1. If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the required reports by modem, the
licensee must provide the police department printed copies of all reportable
transactions along with the video tape(s) for that date by 12:00 the next business
day.
2. If the problem is determined to be in the licensee's system and is not corrected by
the close of the first business day following the failure, the licensee must provide
the required reports as detailed in section (DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE) (b)
(1), and must be charged a fifty dollar ($50.00) reporting failure penalty, daily,
until the error is corrected, or:
3. If the problem is determined to be outside the licensee's system, the licensee must
provide the required reports in (DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE) (B) (1) and
resubmit all such transactions via modem when the error is corrected.
4. If a licensee is unable to capture, digitize or transmit the photographs required in
(RECORDS REQUIRED) (I), the licensee must immediately take all required
photographs with a still camera, cross-reference the photographs to the correct
transaction, and make the pictures available to the Police Department upon
request.
5. Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems that prevented the
licensee from uploading their reportable transactions, upon correction of the
problem, the licensee shall upload every reportable transaction from every
business day the problem had existed.
6. (DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE) (B) (1) through (3) notwithstanding, the police
department may, upon presentation of extenuating circumstances, delay the
implementation of the daily reporting penalty.
390.11 Receipt Required. Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified in every
reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for three (3) years. The receipt
must include at least the following information:
(A) The name, address and telephone number of the licensed business.
(B) The date and time the item was received by the licensee.
(C) Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of the transaction.
(D) An accurate description of each item received including, but not limited to, any
trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name or other
identifying mark on such an item.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-35
(E) The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee that conducted the
transaction.
(F) The amount advanced or paid.
(G) The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and charges.
(H) The last regular day of business by which the item must be redeemed by the pledger
without risk that the item will be sold, and the amount necessary to redeem the pawned
item on that date.
(I) The full name, current residence address, current residence telephone number and date of
birth of the pledger or seller.
(I) The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of
identification of the seller:
1. Current valid Minnesota driver's license.
2. Current valid Minnesota identification card.
3. Current valid photo driver's license or identification card issued by another state
or province of Canada.
(K) Description of the pledger or seller including sex, approximate height, weight, race, color
of eyes and color of hair.
(L) The signature of the pledger or seller.
(M) All printed statements as required by state statute 325J.04 subdivision 2, or any other
applicable statutes.
390.12 Redemption Period. Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an item for security must have
a minimum of ninety (90) days from the date of that transaction to redeem the item before it may
be forfeited and sold during the ninety (90) day holding period, items may not be removed from
the licensed location except as provided in (BUSINESS AT ONLY ONE PLACE).
Licensees are prohibited from redeeming any item to anyone other than the person to whom the
receipt was issued or, to any person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem
the property identified in the receipt, or to a person identified in writing by the pledger at the time
of the initial transaction and signed by the pledger, or with approval of the police license
inspector. Written authorization for release of property to persons other than original pledger
must be maintained along with original transaction record in accordance with (RECORDS
REQUIRED) (J).
390.13 Holding Period. Any item purchased or accepted in trade by a licensee must not be sold or
otherwise transferred for thirty (30) days from the date of the transaction. An individual may
redeem an item seventy-two (72) hours after the item was received on deposit, excluding Sundays
and legal holidays.
390.14 Police Order to Hold Property.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-36 Amended 1-23-20
(A) Investigative hold. Whenever a law enforcement official from any agency notifies a
licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the premises. The
investigative hold shall be confirmed in writing by the originating agency with seventytwo
(72) hours and will remain in effect for fifteen (15) days from the date of initial
notification or until the investigative order is canceled, or until an order to hold/confiscate
is issued, pursuant to [section] (POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY) (B)
whichever comes first.
(B) Order to hold. Whenever the chief of police or the chief's designee, notifies a licensee not
to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the licensed premises until
authorized to be released by the chief or the chief's designee. The order to hold shall
expire ninety (90) days from the date it is placed unless the chief of police or the chief's
designee determines the hold is still necessary and notifies the licensee in writing.
(C) Order to confiscate. If an item is identified as stolen or evidence in a criminal case the
chief or chief's designee may:
1. Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to written order from the
chief or the chief's designee, or
2. Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided in (POLICE ORDER TO
HOLD PROPERTY) (B) and leave it in the shop.
When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall provide identification upon
request of the licensee, and shall provide the licensee the name and phone number of the
confiscating agency and investigator and the case number related to the confiscation.
When an order to hold/confiscate is no longer necessary, the chief of police or chief's
designee shall so notify the licensee.
390.15 Inspection of Items. At all times during the terms of the license, the licensee must allow law
enforcement officials to enter the premises where the licensed business is located, including all
off-site storage facilities as authorized in (BUSINESS AT ONLY ONE PLACE), during normal
business hours, except in an emergency for the purpose of inspecting such premises and
inspecting the items, ware and merchandise and records therein to verify compliance with this
chapter and other applicable laws.
390.16 Label Required. Licensee must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned, purchased or
received in inventory from any reportable transaction permanently recorded on this label must be
the number or name that identifies the transaction in the shop's records, the transaction date, the
name of the item and the description or the model and serial number of the item as reported to the
police department whichever is applicable and the date the item is out of pawn or can be sold, if
applicable. Labels shall not be re-used.
390.17 Prohibited Acts.
(A) No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may pawn or sell or attempt to pawn or
sell goods with any licensee, nor may any licensee receive any goods from a person under
the age of eighteen (18) years.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-37
(B) No licensee may receive any goods from a person of unsound mind or an intoxicated
person.
(C) No licensee may receive any goods, unless the seller presents identification in
the form of a valid driver's license, a valid State of Minnesota identification card, or
current valid photo driver's license or identification card issued by the state of residency
of the person from whom the item was received.
(D) No licensee may receive any item of property that possesses an altered or obliterated
serial number or operation identification number or any item of property that has had its
serial number removed.
(E) No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property not
their own; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit the property
of another, whether with permission or without; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell,
consign, leave, or deposit any article of property in which another person has a security
interest; with any licensee.
(F) No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit any article of property
with any licensee shall give a false or fictitious name, nor give a false date of birth; nor
give a false or out of date address of residence or telephone number; nor present a false or
altered identification, or the identification of another; to any licensee.
390.18 Denial, Suspension or Revocation. Any license under this chapter may be denied, suspended or
revoked for one or more of the following reasons:
(A) The proposed use does not comply with any applicable zoning code.
(B) The proposed use does not comply with any health, building, building maintenance or
other provisions of this Code of Ordinances or state law.
(C) The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with one or more provisions of this
chapter.
(D) The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon whom it is
impractical or impossible to conduct a background or financial investigation due to the
unavailability of information.
(E) Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing or renewing a license.
(F) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the application and investigation
for, or in the course of, the applicant's business.
(G) Violation within the preceding five (5) years, of any law relating to theft, damage or
trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance, or operation of a business.
(H) The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not qualify for a license
under the terms of this chapter.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-38 Amended 1-23-20
390.19 Business at Only One Place. A license under this chapter authorizes the licensee to carry on its
business only at the permanent place of business designated in the license. However, upon written
request, the police inspector may approve an offsite locked and secured storage facility. The
licensee shall permit inspection of the facility in accordance with (INSPECTION OF ITEMS).
All provisions of this chapter regarding record keeping and reporting apply to the facility and its
contents. Property shall be stored in compliance with all provisions of the city code. The licensee
must either own the building in which the business is conducted, and any approved off-site
storage facility, or have a lease on the business premise that extends for more than six (6) months.
390.20 Separability. Should any section, subsection, clause or other provision of this chapter be declared
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid such decision shall not affect the validity of the
ordinance as a whole or any part other than the part so declared invalid.
390.21 Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance, or providing false information
to the City in connection with an application for a Pawnbroker’s license shall, upon conviction
therefore, be punished as provided in the penalty section of this Ordinance.
Chapter 395. PET STORE LICENSING AND REGULATION
Added – 6-17-14, ord #708
395.01 Purpose. The City Council finds that pet stores can present health, safety, and sanitation
problems if not properly and locally regulated. The City Council therefore enacts the following
licensing scheme governing pet stores.
395.02 Pet Store License Required No person shall operate a pet store that sells animals without first
obtaining a license in compliance with this Section of the City Code.
395.03 License Application The application for a license under this Section shall be made on a form
supplied by the City Clerk containing the following information:
A. The full name, current address, home and business phone of the applicant.
B. Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership or other form of organization.
C. Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and payable for the premise to be licensed
have been paid, and if not paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid.
D. The location where the pet store will be operated.
E. Such other information as the City Clerk deems necessary.
F. Description of the operation including, but not limited to, the type and number of animals, animal shelter
and restraints, and copies of applicable rabies vaccination information.
G. Evidence of liability insurance amount of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury.
395.04 License Fee The fee for a pet store license shall be set forth by a separate ordinance. The
license shall be effective as long as the licensee is in compliance with the provisions within this Section.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-39
395.05 License Application Execution, Verification and Consideration
A. Execution. All applications for a license under this Section shall be signed and sworn to. If the
application is that of a natural person, it shall be signed and sworn to by such person; if that of a
corporation, by an officer thereof; if that of a partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that of an
unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof.
B. Verification. All applications shall be subject to verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the
application. The City is Clerk is authorized to conduct any and all investigations to verify the information
on the application, including ordering a computerized criminal history inquiry and/or a driver's license
history inquiry on the applicant.
C. Consideration. Within a reasonable period after the completion of the license verification process, the
City Council shall accept or deny the license application in accordance with this Section. If the application
is denied, the City Council shall notify the applicant of the determination in writing.
395.06 Persons and Locations Ineligible for a License
A. Persons Ineligible. No license under this Section shall be issued to an applicant if such applicant:
1. Is not eighteen (18) years of age or older on the date the license application is submitted to the City
Council;
2. Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed, including but not limited to
cruelty to animals, as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes, Section 364.03, subdivision 2, and has not
shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the
licensed occupation as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes, Section 364.03, subdivision 3;
3. Is not a citizen of the United States, a resident alien, or does not have the legal authority to be employed in
the United States;
4. Is not of good moral character or repute;
5. Has knowingly falsified or misrepresented information on the license application;
6. Owes taxes and assessments to the State, County, School District or City that are due and delinquent; or
7. Is not the real party in interest of the business being licensed.
B. Locations Ineligible. The following locations shall be ineligible for a license under this Section:
1. Taxes Due on Property. No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any property on
which taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the State, County, School District, or City are
past due, delinquent, or unpaid. In the event a suit has been commenced under Minnesota Statutes, Sections
278.01-278.13, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the City Council may on application waive
strict compliance with this provision; no waiver may be granted, however, for taxes or any portion thereof
which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one (1) year after becoming due.
2. Improper Zoning. No license shall be granted if the property is not properly zoned.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-40 Amended 1-23-20
3. Space Not Suitable. No license shall be granted if the property or building is not suitable for a pet store
due to size, configuration, location, design or other site characteristics that is likely to create a nuisance to
adjoining property users or significantly impair the ability of the licensee to comply with the provisions of
this Section.
4. Proximity to Residential Uses. No license shall be granted if any portion of the building is also used for
residential purposes.
395.07 Health and Welfare Regulations
A. Diseased Animals. The pet store licensee must not possess or offer for sale, any animal afflicted with an
infectious disease.
B. Floor Requirements. The floors of a pet store shall be non-absorptive, monolithic construction and must
be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and in good repair. For large animals where it would be detrimental to
the animal's health to stand for prolonged periods on hard nonabsorbent floors, alternate approved
flooring, such as rugs that may be removed and laundered, may be allowed.
C. Walls and Ceilings. Walls and ceilings of a pet store shall be kept clean, sanitary, and in good repair.
D. Confinement. All cages, pens, benches, boxes, tanks, or receptacles in which animals are confined shall be
easily cleanable, durable and constructed of non-corrosive material and maintained in good repair. Such
cages and pens shall also be properly sufficient and humane in size for the confinement of such animals.
E. Ventilation. All rooms in a pet store shall be mechanically ventilated and meet all standards of the Uniform
Mechanical Code. A negative pressure must be maintained to prevent odors and organisms from entering the
adjacent businesses or departments. Provisions shall be made for pre-heated replacement air.
F. Delivery Requirements. All delivery trucks transporting animals to and from the pet store shall be kept clean
and sanitary.
G. Feeding of Animals. All utensils used in the preparation of food and the feeding of animals shall be kept
clean, sanitary and in good repair; and the use of the utensils for such purpose which are badly worn,
rusted, or corroded, or in such condition that they cannot be clean and sanitary is prohibited.
H. Humane Treatment of Animals. Any animal in the pet store shall be handled and treated in a humane
manner by the owner, operator and employees of the pet store. All state laws governing cruelty to animals
and humane treatment of animals shall be adhered to and all operations must enhance or maintain the
health and welfare of all animals in the establishment.
I. Animal Care and Handling. The pet store operator or an agent of the operator must be
present at least once daily, regardless of whether the store is open, for general care, maintenance,
and to ensure adequate exercise of the animals in the custody of the pet store. Pet store operators
must ensure that:
1. Each animal is handled in a manner which will not cause discomfort, physical harm, or undue
stress to that animal.
2. Each animal is observed at regular intervals, at least once a day, in order to recognize and
evaluate general symptoms of sickness, injury, or abnormal behavior.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
Amended 1-23-20 3-41
J. Location of Animals. Where the licensee keeps animals for sale or display, all animals shall be kept
entirely within an enclosed building and no animals shall be kept or maintained outdoors. Exterior walking
or exercise areas shall be maintained free of wastes and other litter, and all wastes should be removed
and disposed of in an approved manner immediately.
K. Infectious Diseases. All animals subject to distemper and infectious hepatitis acquired by the pet store
owner or operator must have been inoculated prior to delivery at the pet store by a veterinarian licensed to
practice in the state of Minnesota. Nonhuman primates must have a yearly tuberculin test. The licensee shall
maintain a written vaccination record for every animal kept within the pet store.
L. Size Requirements. The pet store must include a room of sufficient size to contain an approved sink with
hot and cold running water under pressure, for the purpose of storing janitorial supplies, and equipment used
to maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary manner.
M. Disposal of Wastes. All animal wastes must be disposed of in a timely and sanitary manner. In no event
shall there be an accumulation of waste beyond twenty-four (24) hours. In public areas during exhibition, all
wastes must be disposed of immediately or, at minimum, such waste to be stored in an approved container
with tight fitting lids and disposed of in an approved sanitary manner at the end of the day.
395.08 Sanctions for License Violations
A. Suspension or Revocation. The City Council may suspend or revoke a license issued pursuant to this
Section for a violation of:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in a license application or a renewal application.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on the licensed occupation or
business.
3. Any violation of this Section or state law.
4. A licensee’s criminal conviction that is directly related to the occupation or business licensed, including
but not limited to cruelty to animals, as defined by Minnesota Statutes, Section 364.03, subdivision 2,
provided that the licensee cannot show competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present
fitness to perform duties of the licensed occupation or business as defined by Minnesota Statutes,
Section 364.03, subdivision 3.
5. Conducting the licensed business or occupation in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
community.
A. Notice and Hearing. A revocation or suspension by the City Council shall be preceded by written
notice to the licensee and a hearing. The notice shall give at least ten (10) days' notice of the time and place
of the hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The notice shall be mailed by
regular mail to the licensee at the most recent address listed on the license application.
395.09 License Regulations
A. Posting of License. The license issued pursuant to this Section shall be conspicuously displayed at the
pet store.
City of Princeton Title 3 Licensing and Regulations
3-42 Amended 1-23-20
B. Insurance. No license shall be issued or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect a
liability insurance policy in the amount of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury.
C. Licensed Premises. A license issued pursuant to this Section is effective only for the compact and
contiguous space specified in the approved license application.
D. Regulation, inspection and enforcement by the City. In order to provide for the public health
and safety, the City shall have authority to regulate and enforce the provisions stated herein
concerning the use, operation, and maintenance Pet Store facilities and, further, shall have
authority to enter upon the premises of a Pet Store facility and inspect the facility as often as
necessary to confirm compliance with the provisions of this article. In the event of a failure to
comply with the provisions of this article, after due notice thereof, the city shall have the power to
abate or cause a suspension of the use of the Pet Store facility permit until such time as the same
is, in the opinion of the city, no longer a hazard to public health or safety.
E. Transfer of License Prohibited. A license issued pursuant to this Section is for the person and the
persons named on the approved license application. No transfer of a license shall be permitted from place
to place or from person to person without complying with the requirements of an original license application.
395.10 Penalty. A violation of this Section shall be a misdemeanor under Minnesota law.
City of Princeton Title 4 Alcoholic Beverages
4-1
TITLE 4. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Chapter 400 Liquor Dispensary and Sports and Convention Facilities
Chapter 405 Off-Site Delivery of Liquor
Chapter 410 Liquor Licensing Regulations
Chapter 411 Consumption of Liquor – Social Hosting
Chapter 412 Sale of Liquor by Caterers
Chapter 400 - Liquor Dispensary and Sports and Convention Facilities
400.01 Definition of Terms. As used in this chapter, the terms shall mean as follows unless the
context clearly requires or indicated a different meaning.
(A) “Intoxicating liquor” and “liquor” mean ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spiritous,
vinous and malt beverages containing more than 3.2% of alcohol by weight.
(B) “Beer” means any malt beverage with an alcoholic content of more than .5% by volume
and not more than 3.2% by weight.
(C) “On-sale” means sale by the drink for consumption in the Dispensary.
(D) “Off-sale” means retail sale in the original package for consumption away from the
Dispensary.
(E) “Sell” means all barters and all manners or means of furnishing intoxicating liquor or
beer, including such furnishing in violation or evasion of law or this chapter.
(F) “Minor” means any person under 21 years of age.
(G) "Restaurant" - a stand alone retail establishment under the control of a single proprietor
or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises (as opposed to
frozen or pre-packaged food) and served at tables to the general public and having
seating capacity for a minimum of 30 customers.
(H) “Sports and convention facility” means the Princeton Civic Center, the Princeton Depot
Center and the Princeton Youth Hockey Arena.
(I) “The sale or dispensing of set ups” means the sale, serving or dispensing of liquids for
the purpose of mixing the intoxicating liquor but not the sale of intoxicating liquor.
400.02 Dispensing Established. There is hereby established a municipal liquor dispensary for the
on-sale and off-sale of intoxicating liquor. The municipal on-sale dispensary is further authorized
to sell and dispense intoxicating liquor at any convention, banquet, conference,
meeting or social affair conducted on the premises of a sports and convention facility, as defined
in §400.01(G) hereof. The operation of the Dispensary shall continue to be discontinued
or be re-opened at the discretion of the City Council. No liquor may be sold at retail
elsewhere in the city, except at such locations, establishments and clubs as may be lawfully
licensed to do so, pursuant to this code.
City of Princeton Title 4 Alcoholic Beverages
4-2
400.03 Location and Operation.
(A) Location. The Dispensary shall be located at such suitable places in the city as the
Council determines, but no premises upon which taxes, assessments or other public
charges are delinquent shall be leased for Dispensary purposes.
(B) Manager. The Dispensary shall be in the immediate charge of a liquor store manager
selected by the Council and paid such compensation as is fixed by the Council. He or
she shall furnish a surety bond to the municipality, conditioned upon the faithful discharge
of his or her duties, in such sum as the Council specifies. The bond premium
shall be paid by the city. The Manager shall operate the Dispensary under the Council's
direction and shall perform such duties in connection with the Dispensary as may
be imposed upon him or her by the Council. He or she shall be responsible to the
Council for the conduct of the Dispensary in full compliance with this chapter and
with the laws relating to the sale of liquor and beer.
400.04 Dispensary Fund Created.
(A) Fund established. A Municipal Liquor Dispensary Fund is hereby created in which
all revenues received from the operation of the Dispensary shall be deposited and from
which all ordinary operating expenses shall be paid. Any amounts it may be necessary
to borrow from the General Fund of the city for initial costs of rent, fixtures and stock
or for operating expenses shall be reimbursed to that Fund out of the first available
moneys coming into the Dispensary Fund thereafter. Surpluses accumulating in the
Dispensary Fund may be transferred to the General Fund or to any other appropriate
fund of the city by ordinance of the Council and expended for any municipal purpose.
(B) Receipts and disbursements. The handling of Municipal Liquor Dispensary receipts
and disbursements shall comply with the procedure prescribed by law for the receipts
and disbursements of city funds generally.
400.05 Hours of Operation. No on-sale intoxicating liquor shall be made in the Municipal Liquor
Dispensary or at a sports and convention facility after 1:00 a.m. on Sunday nor until 8:00
a.m. on Monday. No sale shall be made between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on
any other day. No on-sale shall be made after 8:00 p.m. on December 24. No off-sale shall
be made before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. of any day. No off-sale shall be made on Sundays
or on New Year's Day, January 1; Thanksgiving Day; or Christmas Day, December 25;
and no off-sale shall be made after 8:00 p.m. on December 24. The Dispensary shall not
open for business of any kind during the hours when sale of intoxicating liquors are prohibited.
400.06 Conditions of Operation and Restrictions on Consumption.
(A) No business other than the sale of liquor shall be carried on in the Dispensary, except
the retail sale of cigars, cigarettes, all forms of tobacco, food and soft drinks and both
on-sale and off-sale.
City of Princeton Title 4 Alcoholic Beverages
4-3
(B) The Dispensary may offer recorded or live entertainment and make available coin operated
amusement devices.
(C) No person shall keep, possess or operate in any part of the Dispensary any slot machine,
dice or other gambling device or permit the same to be kept or used. No person
shall otherwise gamble on such premises, and no gambling of any character shall
be permitted thereon except as authorized herein.
(D) No minor except an employee or accompanied by an adult shall be permitted to remain
on the Dispensary premises. No liquor or beer shall be sold or served to a minor,
directly or indirectly. No minor shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose
of obtaining liquor or beer.
(E) No liquor or beer shall be sold or served to an intoxicated person.
(F) No person shall be permitted to loiter about the Dispensary habitually.
400.07 Conditions of Operations and Restrictions on Consumption at Sports and Convention
Facilities.
(A) In addition to the conditions and restrictions on consumption provided in § 400.06
hereof, the sale and dispensing of intoxicating liquors at a sports and convention facility
is further subject to the restrictions described herein.
(B) No liquor, beer or set-ups shall be sold except at a convention, banquet, conference,
meeting or social affair conducted on the premises of the sports and convention facility.
(C) The Dispensary may be engaged to dispense intoxicating liquor at such an event described
in division (B) of this section by such person or organization permitted by the
Council to use the facility, and intoxicating liquor, beer or set-ups may only be dispensed
to persons attending the event.
(D) No liquor, beer or set-ups shall be dispensed to any person attending or participating
in any amateur athletic event held on the premises.
(E) The dispensing of intoxicating liquor shall be subject to all laws and ordinances governing
the dispensing of intoxicating liquor not inconsistent herewith and upon such
terms and conditions as the Council may from time to time prescribe, and such terms
and conditions may limit the dispensing of intoxicating liquor to designated areas of
the facility.
(F) The Council may fix and assess a fee to be paid to the city by a person or organization
engaging the Dispensary to dispense liquor, beer or set-ups at an event permitted by
the Council and described in division (B) of this section.
City of Princeton Title 4 Alcoholic Beverages
4-4
400.08 Set-Ups. The Municipal Liquor Dispensary is authorized to sell set-ups at the Dispensary
or at a sports and convention facility between the hours of 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight
on Sundays upon such terms and conditions as the Council and the Department of Public
Safety of the State of Minnesota may prescribe.
400.09 Enforcement. It shall be the duty of all police officers of the city to enforce the provisions
of this chapter, to search premises and seize evidence of law violation and preserve the same
as evidence against any person alleged to be violating this chapter and to prepare the necessary
processes and papers therefor.
400.99 Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon convictions thereof, shall be punished as provided in § 100.99.
CHAPTER 405 - OFF-SITE DELIVERY OF LIQUOR
405.01 Authority. This ordinance is enacted pursuant to Minn. Stat. Chapters 145A and 340A.
405.02 Definitions. For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms have the following meanings:
(A) “Alcoholic beverage” means any beverage containing more than one-half of one per
cent alcohol by volume.
(B) “Person” means any off-sale retail liquor store licensee, and any individual, partnership,
corporation, or any association of one or more individuals employed or assisting
such licensee.
(C) “Premises” means any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or
motel room, place, dwelling unit, a hall, meeting room, park, place of assembly, business,
whether retail, manufacturing, industrial, public or private, whether occupied or
unoccupied, on a temporary or permanent basis.
405.03 Prohibited Acts.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to deliver alcoholic beverages by or on behalf of any offsale
retail liquor store not physically located within the corporate boundaries of the
City of Princeton to any premise within the corporate boundaries of the City of
Princeton.
(B) A person is criminally responsible for violating this Ordinance if such person intentionally
aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires with or otherwise procures another
to commit the prohibited act.
405.04 Enforcement. This ordinance shall be enforced by any duly licensed law enforcement officer.
City of Princeton Title 4 Alcoholic Beverages
4-5
405.05 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or other portion of
this ordinance is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in whole, or in part,
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed severable, and such unconstitutionality
or invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
law, which remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect.
405.06 Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §100.99.
Chapter 410 - Liquor Licensing Regulations
410.01 Provisions of State Law Adopted. The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time, relating to the definition of terms, licensing, consumption, sales, financial
responsibility of licensees, hours of sale and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale,
distribution and consumption of intoxicating liquor, wine and 3.2% malt liquor are adopted
and made a part of this chapter as if set out in full.
410.02 License Required.
(A) General requirements. No person, except a wholesaler or manufacturer to the extent
authorized under state license, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell or keep for
sale in the city any intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor without a license to do so
as provided in this chapter. Licenses shall be of seven kinds: “on-sale,” temporary
“on-sale,” “on-sale” wine, 3.2% malt liquor “on-sale,” 3.2% malt liquor “off-sale,”
3.2% malt liquor temporary and special club licenses.
(B) On-sale licenses. “On-sale” licenses shall be issued only to hotels, clubs and restaurants
and shall permit “on-sale” of liquor only. The holder of a retail on-sale intoxicating
liquor license may dispense intoxicating liquor at any convention, banquet, conference,
meeting or social affair conducted on the premises of the Princeton Civic
Center, the Princeton Depot Center and the Princeton Youth Hockey Arena, as provided
in M.S. §340A.404, Subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time, and any
such dispensing of intoxicating liquor shall be done in accordance with all applicable
state statutes.
(C) On-sale wine licenses. Subject to the approval of the Department of Public Safety,
“on-sale” wine licenses shall be issued only to restaurants meeting the qualifications of
M.S. §340A.404, Subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time, and shall permit
only the sale of wine not exceeding 14% alcohol by volume, for consumption on the
licensed premises only, in conjunction with the sale of food. The holder of an on-sale
wine license who is also licensed to sell 3.2% malt liquor, pursuant to M.S.
§340A.411, as it may be amended from time to time, and §410.02(D) and whose
gross receipts are at least 60% attributable to the sale of food may sell intoxicating
malt liquor at on-sale without additional license.
City of Princeton Title 4 Alcoholic Beverages
4-6
(D) 3.2% malt liquor “on-sale.” “On-sale” licenses for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor
shall be issued only to drug stores, restaurants, hotels, clubs and bowling centers for
the sale of 3.2% malt liquor with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.
(E) Temporary on-sale licenses. Subject to the approval of the Department of Public
Safety, temporary on-sale licenses shall be issued only to clubs or charitable, religious
or other non-profit organizations in existence for at least three years. A temporary license
authorizes the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event
within the city sponsored by the licensee and subject to restrictions imposed by the
State Liquor Act and such further conditions as the Council may from time to time
prescribe. A temporary on-sale license can only be issued for not more than three
days per event and no more than three events per year by any one group.
(F) 3.2% malt liquor off-sale. Off-sale licenses for the sale for 3.2% malt liquor may be
issued for the sale of 3.2% malt liquor in its original package and only for consumption
off the premises.
(G) 3.2% malt liquor temporary on-sale license. Temporary on-sale licenses for the
sale of 3.2% malt liquor shall be issued only to a club or charitable, religious or other
non-profit organization, organized for social purposes, business purposes, for intellectual
improvement or for promotion of sports where the serving of 3.2% malt liquor is
incidental to and not the main purpose of the club. The license may authorize the onsale
of 3.2% malt liquor for not more than three consecutive days. A temporary license
under this division shall be subject to restrictions imposed by the State Liquor
Act and such further conditions as the Council may from time to time prescribe.
(H) Special club licenses. Special club licenses shall be issued to incorporated clubs or
congressionally chartered veterans organizations which have been in existence for at
least three years, where liquor sales will only be to members and bona fide guests of a
member.
410.03 Applications.
(A) General. Applications for licenses described in § 410.02 shall contain the information
and be in the form described in division (B) of this section.
(B) Form.
(1) Applications for on-sale, on-sale wine, 3.2% malt liquor on-sale, 3.2% malt liquor
off-sale and special club licenses shall state the name of the applicant, the
applicant's age, representations as to the applicant's character with such references
as the Council may require, applicant's citizenship, with type of license
applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will operate
and its location, whether the applicant is the owner and operator of the
business, how long the applicant has been in that business at that place and such
City of Princeton Title 4 Alcoholic Beverages
4-7
other information as the Council may require from time to time. Every application
shall also include a copy of each summons received by the applicant under
M.S. §340A.802 (dram shop law), as it may be amended from time to time,
during the preceding year. In addition to containing such information, the application
shall be in the form prescribed by the Bureau of Criminal Apprehension
and shall be verified and filed with the City Administrator. No person shall
make a false statement in an application. Applications for the licenses described
above shall be filed with the City Administrator on or before December 10 of
the year prior to the calendar year for which the license is sought.
(2) Every application for a temporary on-sale license to sell intoxicating liquor
and/or 3.2% malt liquor shall be on a form or forms supplied by the city and
may require such information as the Council deems advisable, but in all cases
shall contain information relative to the area of sale, hours of sale and dates of
sale. The application for such temporary license shall be filed with the City
Administrator for at least 30 days prior to the first date for which the license is
sought.
410.04 Financial Responsibility.
(A) Insurance on-sale and off-sale. The license described in §410.02 shall not be issued,
maintained or renewed unless the applicant/licensee demonstrates proof of financial
responsibility as defined in M.S. §340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time,
with regard to liability under M.S. §340A.801 (dram shop laws), as it may be amended
from time to time. Such proof shall be filed with the Department of Public Safety
and the City Administrator. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of financial
responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. §340A.409, as it may be
amended from time to time. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this section shall not apply
to licensees who by affidavit establish that:
(1) They are on-sale 3.2% malt liquor licensees with sales of less than $10,000.00
of 3.2% malt liquor for the preceding year;
(2) They are off-sale 3.2% malt liquor licensees with sale of less than $20,000.00 of
3.2% malt liquor for the preceding year; or
(3) They are holders of on-sale wine licenses with sales of less than $10,000.00 for
wine for the preceding year.
(B) Temporary licenses. An applicant for a temporary license under §410.02 shall provide
such liability insurance for the sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor as
the city through its agent shall require. Proof of insurance coverage shall be supplied
by applicant, providing a copy of the policy or certificate of insurance from the insurer.
City of Princeton Title 4 Alcoholic Beverages
4-8
410.05 Approval of Security. The bond required must be approved by the City Council and, in the
case of applications for on-sale wine licenses, by the State Department of Public Safety.
410.06 License Fees.
(A) Schedule of fees. The license fees for the licenses described in §410.02 shall be as established
from time to time by ordinance of the Council.
(B) Payment. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a receipt from the
City Treasurer for payment in full of the license fee and the fixed investigation fee required
under §410.07, if any. All fees shall be paid into the General Fund. If an application
for a license is rejected, the Treasurer shall refund the amount paid as the license
fee.
(C) Term - pro rata fee. All licenses, except temporary licenses, shall be issued for a period
of one year, except that if the application is made during the license year, a license
may be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee, with any unexpired
fraction of a month being counted as one month. All licenses, except temporary
licenses, shall expire on the last day of December.
(D) Refunds. No refund of any fee shall be made except as authorized by state statute.
410.07 Granting of Licenses.
(A) Investigation fee. On an initial application for any of the licenses described in
§410.02, and on application for transfer of existing license, the applicant shall pay
with the application the following investigation fees:
(1) On-sale: minimum $50.00, plus any costs over for investigation within the
state. All costs for investigation outside the state;
(2) On-sale wine: minimum $50.00, plus any costs over for investigation within the
state. All costs for investigation outside the state;
(3) On-sale 3.2% malt liquor: minimum $50.00, plus any costs over for investigation
within the state. All costs for investigation outside the state;
(4) Temporary on-sale liquor: minimum $50.00, plus any costs over for investigation
within the state. All costs for investigation outside the state. Fee waived if
applicant already possesses an on-sale liquor license for that current year;
(5) Off-sale 3.2% malt liquor: all costs on an annual basis;
(6) Temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor: all costs on an annual basis; and
(7) Special club licenses: all costs on an annual basis.
City of Princeton Title 4 Alcoholic Beverages
4-9
(B) Background and financial investigation. The City shall conduct a preliminary
background and financial investigation of each application. The application shall be in
the form prescribed in §410.03 and shall contain such additional information as the
Council may require. If the Council deems it in the public interest to have an investigation
made on an individual named on a particular application for renewal of a license,
it shall so determine. In any case, if the Council determines that a comprehensive
background and financial investigation of the applicant is necessary, it may conduct
the investigation itself, or contract with the Bureau of Criminal Investigation for
the investigation. No license shall be issued, transferred or renewed if the results
show to the satisfaction of the Council that the issuance would not be in the public interest.
If an investigation outside the state is required, the applicant shall be charged
the cost, not to exceed $10,000.00, which shall be paid by the applicant after deducting
any initial investigation fee already paid. The fee shall be payable by the applicant,
whether or not the license is granted. All information resulting from a MN Computerized
Criminal History Check will be maintained at the Princeton Police Department.
(C) Hearing and issuance. The City Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application
and not investigated in the preliminary background and financial investigation
conducted pursuant to division (B) of this section. Opportunity shall be given to
any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. After the investigation
and hearing, the Council shall, in its discretion, grant or refuse the application.
No on-sale wine license or temporary on-sale license shall be effective until it, together
with the security furnished by the applicant, has been approved by the Department
of Public Safety.
(D) Person and premises licensed: transfer. Each license shall be issued only to the applicant
and for the premises described in the application. No license may be transferred
to another person or place without City Council approval. Any transfer of
stock of a corporate licensee is deemed a transfer of the license, and a transfer of
stock without Council approval is grounds for revocation of the license.
410.08 Persons Ineligible for License. No license shall be granted to any person made ineligible
for such license by state law. No more than one intoxicating liquor license shall be directly
or indirectly issued within the city to any one person.
410.09 Places Ineligible for License.
(A) General prohibition. No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible
for such a license under state law.
(B) Delinquent taxes and charges. No license shall be granted for operation on any
premises on which taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city are delinquent
and unpaid.
410.10 Conditions of License.
City of Princeton Title 4 Alcoholic Beverages
4-10
(A) In general. Every license is subject to the conditions in the following divisions of this
section and all other provisions of this chapter and of any other applicable chapter,
state law or regulation.
(B) Insurance. Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and of
this chapter is a continuing condition of any license granted pursuant to this chapter.
(C) Licensee's responsibility. Every licensee is responsible for the conduct in the licensed
establishment, and any sale of alcoholic beverages by any employee authorized
to sell such beverage in the establishment is the act of the licensee.
(D) Clean up - temporary licensees. The holder of a temporary license described in
§410.02 shall be required to police the sale and cleanup of the sale area of all debris
left in the sale area after each day of operation. The Council may require a deposit
not exceeding $1,000.00 to ensure proper cleanup of the premises which deposit will
forfeit to the city at the discretion of the Council or its agents, if the area is not
properly policed and cleaned up immediately after the license expires.
(E) Inspections. Every licensee shall allow any police office, health officer or properly
designated officer or employee of the city to enter, inspect and search the premises of
the licensee during business hours without a warrant.
(F) Display during prohibited hours. No “on-sale” establishment shall display liquor to
the public during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
(G) Practices which increase consumption. The holder of a temporary license, pursuant
to §410.02 shall be prohibited from participating in activities which may tend to increase
the consumption of alcoholic beverages. The prohibited practices include but
shall not be limited to: serving free alcoholic beverages; sale of unlimited alcoholic
beverages during a period of time for a fixed price; sale of pitchers of alcoholic beverages,
except to groups of two or more persons; increasing the volume of intoxicating
or 3.2% malt liquor without proportionately increasing the price regularly charged for
such beverage; games or contests which enhance drinking; awarding of alcoholic beverages
as prizes, offering free food or entertainment or other prizes.
(H) Minors on premises.
(1) No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms constituting
the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are sold at retail
on sale, except that persons under the age of 18 may be employed as musicians
or to perform the duties of a bus person or dishwashing services in places defined
as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multi-purpose building serving food
in rooms in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2% malt liquor are sold at retail on
sale.
(2) No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment except
City of Princeton Title 4 Alcoholic Beverages
4-11
to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a restaurant, or attend social
functions that are held in a portion of the premises where liquor is not sold.
(3) No person under the age of 18 shall enter or be permitted to enter any establishment
holding any on-sale or club license without being accompanied by their
parent, grandparent, or legal guardian.
(I) Compliance checks. Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, city
employee, or any other person designated by the Council to conduct compliance
checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of the licensee during
business hours and after business hours during the time when customer remain on the
premises without a warrant.
From time to time, but at least once per year, the City shall conduct compliance
checks by engaging underage individuals in an attempt to purchase intoxicating liquor,
wine, or 3.2% malt liquor. Individuals who are 18, 19, or 20 years old and used for
the purpose of compliance checks shall be supervised by City designated law enforcement
officers or other designated City personnel. The individuals used for compliance
checks shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of intoxicating liquor, wine,
or 3.2% malt liquor when these items are obtained as part of a compliance check. No
individual used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting
their age, and all individuals lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall
answer all questions about their age asked by the licensee or his or her employee and
shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked. Nothing in
this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state of federal laws for
educational, research, or training purposes or required for the enforcement of a particular
state of federal law.
410.11 Restrictions on Purchase and Consumption. Amended 10-25-12 Ord #693
(A) Liquor and 3.2% malt liquor in unlicensed places. No person shall mix or prepare
liquor or 3.2% malt liquor for consumption at any public place or place of business
unless it has a license to sell liquor or 3.2% malt liquor “on-sale” or a permit from the
Department of Public Safety under M.S. §340A.414, as it may be amended from time
to time, and no person shall consume liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in any such place.
(B) Consumption in public places. No person shall consume liquor or 3.2% malt liquor
on any public highway, alley, sidewalk, parking area, vacant lot, public park (except
the softball area and Solheim Field area of Mark Park and the camping area of Riverside
Park) or other public place except as hereinafter permitted. Possession of open
containers, glasses or other receptacles containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt
liquor shall be prima facie evidence of consumption. The consumption herein prohibited
does not apply to consumption in places of business duly licensed to sell either intoxicating
liquor or 3.2% malt liquor or on any public property described in this division
when an organization has been temporarily licensed to sell intoxicating liquor or
3.2% malt liquor at a defined location under this chapter and pursuant to applicable
City of Princeton Title 4 Alcoholic Beverages
4-12
state law.
(C) Hours and days of sale. No sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor shall be
made during the hours or days when such sale is prohibited by M.S. §340A.504, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(D) Establishment to be closed. Entryways into licensed establishments shall be locked
and secured no later than the closing time required in M.S. §340A.504, as it may be
amended from time to time. No person or customer shall be permitted to enter said
premises after the required hour of closing unless it is a law enforcement officer or
public safety officer conducting an inspection of said premises.
(E) Customers to be off -premises. All licensees shall require that all customers shall be
off of licensed premises not more than 30 minutes following the required closing time
established by M.S. §340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, and all entryways
shall be locked and secured. Only licensees and their employees shall be authorized
to remain in the licensed premises after 30 minutes following the required
closing of the licensed premises. Not more than 30 minutes following the required
closing, all shades, drapes, curtains or other objects that may interfere with the view
of the inside premises are to be removed or opened in such a way that a complete survey
of the inside of the licensed premises may be accomplished by any law enforcement
officer wishing to inspect said premises.
410.12 Suspension and Revocation.
(A) The Council may either suspend for up to 60 days or revoke any license granted pursuant
to this chapter or impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each violation
upon a finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, regulation
or ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages. Except in cases of failure of financial
responsibility , no suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has
been afforded an opportunity for hearing pursuant to M.S. §§ 14.57 through 14.70 of
the Administrative Procedure Act, as it may be amended from time to time.
(B) Lapse of required dram shop insurance or bond or withdrawal of the required deposit
of cash or securities shall effect an immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant
to this chapter without further action of the City Council. Notice of cancellation,
lapse of a current liquor liability policy or bond or withdrawal of deposited cash or securities
shall also constitute notice to the licensee of the suspension of the license.
The holder of the license who has received notice of lapse of required insurance or
bond or withdrawal of the required deposit or of suspension or the revocation of the
license may request a hearing thereon, and if such request is made in writing to the
City Administrator, a hearing shall be granted within ten days or such longer period as
may be requested. Any suspension under this division shall continue until the City
Council determines that the financial responsibility requirements of this chapter have
again been met.
City of Princeton Title 4 Alcoholic Beverages
4-13
410.13 Bottle Clubs.
(A) Permit required. No person, business establishment or club which does not hold a
license described in §410.02 may directly or indirectly allow the consumption and display
of intoxicating liquor or knowingly serve any liquid for the purpose of mixing
with intoxicating liquor without first having obtained a permit from the Department of
Public Safety as provided in M.S. §340A.414, as it may be amended from time to
time, and the approval of the City Council.
(B) Permit fee. Every establishment or club desiring to allow consumption or display of
intoxicating liquor, as provided in division (A) of this section, shall on or before December
10 of the year prior to the calendar year for which the permit is sought, pay to
the City Treasurer an annual fee in the amount of $300.00 and shall be issued a written
receipt therefore. The written receipt shall be posted in some conspicuous place
upon the premises alongside the permit issued by the Department of Public Safety.
410.14 Sunday licenses. By authorization of a special election held on September 12, 1995, the
governing body of the City of Princeton may by this chapter authorize a holder of an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license to apply for a special license allowing the sale of intoxicating liquor
on Sunday for consumption on premises in accordance with M.S. §340A.504, Subd. 3,
as it may be amended from time to time.
Chapter 411 - Consumption of Liquor – Social Hosting
411.01 Authority. This ordinance is enacted pursuant to Minn. Stat. §145A.05 Subdivision 1.
411.02 Definitions. For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms have the following
meanings:
(A) “Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey,
rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled or fermented spirits including dilutions and
mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
(B) “Alcoholic beverage” means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or
solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one
percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either
alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.
(C) “Event or gathering” means any group of three or more persons who have assembled
or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
(D) “Host or Allow” means to aid, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or
permit a gathering or event.
City of Princeton Title 4 Alcoholic Beverages
4-14
(E) “Parent” means any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
(1) As natural, adoptive parent, or step-parent;
(2) As a legal guardian; or
(3) As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
(F) “Person” means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or any
association of one or more individuals.
(G) “Residence” or “premises” means any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting
room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on
a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for
an event, gathering, party or other social function, and whether owned, leased,
rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
(H) “Underage person” is any individual under twenty-one (21) years of age.
411.03 Prohibited Acts.
(A) It is unlawful for any person(s) to;
(1) host or allow an event or gathering;
(2) at any residence, premises, or on any other private or public property;
(3) where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present;
(4) when the person knows or reasonably should know that an underage person
will or does:
(i) consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or
(ii) possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the intent to
consume it; and
(5) the person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or consumption
by the underage person(s).
(B) A person is criminally responsible for violating Chapter 411.03, (A) above if the
person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires with or otherwise
procures another to commit the prohibited act.
City of Princeton Title 4 Alcoholic Beverages
4-15
(C) A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be physically present at
the event or gathering to be liable for prosecution under this Ordinance, provided
their conduct falls within Section 411.03 (A) or (B).
411.04 Exceptions.
(A) This ordinance does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and
his or her parents while present in the parent’s household.
(B) This ordinance does not apply to legally protected religious observances.
(C) This ordinance does not apply to duly licensed on-sale or off-sale liquor licensees,
3.2 percent malt liquor licensees, municipal liquor stores, or bottle club permit
holders who are regulated by Minn. Stat. §340A.503 Subd.1 (a) (1).
(D) This ordinance does not apply to situations where underage persons are lawfully in
possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and within the
scope of his or her employment.
411.05 Enforcement. This ordinance shall be enforced by any duly licensed law enforcement
officer.
411.06 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or other portion
of this ordinance is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in whole, or in
part, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed severable, and
such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
of this law, which remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect.
411.07 Penalty.
(A) Violation of Subdivision 411.03 is a misdemeanor, punishable by up to 90 days in
jail and a fine in the amount of $1,000.00, and
(B) A social host shall be liable for the costs of providing enforcement services in response
to an event in which minors have obtained, possessed, or consumed alcoholic
beverages. Such costs include, but are not limited to, attorney’s fees in the
event of litigation.
CHAPTER 412 – SALE OF LIQUOR BY CATERERS
412.01 Illegal Sale. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Caterer’s Permit to sell alcoholic
beverages off the holder’s licensed premises in the City of Princeton, except as an incidental
part of the service of prepared meals at an event sponsored by a person with
whom the holder has contracted for such prepared meal service.
City of Princeton Title 4 Alcoholic Beverages
4-16
412.02 Illegal Interest. It shall be unlawful for the person who has contracted with the holder
for prepared meal service to have any legal, equitable or pecuniary interest in the holder,
or the holder’s compensation from the catered event.
412.03 Information Required. Except for holders who also hold an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license issued by the City of Princeton, it is unlawful for any person holding a Caterer’s
Permit to sell or otherwise provide alcohol to any individual or group located within the
corporate boundaries of the City of Princeton unless said person has first provided the
Police Chief for the City of Princeton with the following:
1. A copy of their valid caterer’s permit as issued by the State of Minnesota, and
2. A copy of their valid on-sale liquor license as issued by the city where their
primary on-sale liquor premises is located, and
3. A copy of their dram shop insurance policy clearly indicating that dram shop
coverage is currently in force, and
4. A completed caterer’s permit application form, and
5. Payment of an application fee as set by resolution by the City Council of
Princeton.
412.04 Aiding and Abetting. It is unlawful for any person to intentionally aid, advise, hire,
counsel, or conspire with or otherwise procure another to commit the prohibited act.
412.05 Enforcement. This ordinance shall be enforced by any duly licensed law enforcement
officer.
412.06 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or other portion
of this ordinance is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in whole, or in
part, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed severable, and
such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
of this law, which remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect.
412.07 Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §100.99.
City of Princeton Title 5 Animals
5-1
TITLE 5. ANIMALS
Chapter 500 Animals
Chapter 510 Horses, Colts and Ponies
Chapter 500 – Animals amended 11-2-16, ord 741
500.01 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) “Animal” means any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all fowl and
poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal kingdom.
“Animals” shall be classified as follows:
(1) “Domestic animals” means those animals commonly accepted as domesticated
household pets. Unless otherwise defined, “domestic animals” shall include
dogs, cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits,
fish, non-poisonous, non-venomous and non-constricting reptiles or
amphibians and other similar animals;
(2) “Farm animals” are those animals commonly associated with a farm or
performing work in an agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined, “farm
animals” shall include members of the equestrian family (horses, mules),
bovine family (cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl (ducks,
geese), swine (including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees and other
animals associated with a farm, ranch or stable;
(3) “Nondomestic animals” means those animals commonly considered to be
naturally wild and not naturally trained or domesticated or which are
commonly considered to be inherently dangerous to the health, safety and
welfare of people. Unless otherwise defined, “nondomestic animals” shall
include:
(a) Any member of the large cat family (family Felidae), including lions,
tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly
accepted domesticated house cats;
(b) Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family Canidae),
including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingos and jackals, but excluding
commonly accepted domesticated dogs;
(c) Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog, unless
the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet;
(d) Any member or relative of the rodent family, including any skunk
(whether or not descended), raccoon, squirrel or ferret, but excluding
those members otherwise defined or commonly accepted as domesticated
City of Princeton Title 5 Animals
5-2
pets;
(e) Any poisonous, venomous, constricting or inherently dangerous member
of the reptile or amphibian families, including rattlesnakes, boa
constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators;
(f) Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above but which can be
reasonably defined by the terms of this section, including but not limited
to bears, deer, monkeys and game fish.
(B) “At large” means off the premises of the owner and not under the custody and control
of the owner or other person, either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise restrained or
confined.
(C) “Cat” means both the male and female of the Felidae species commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets.
(D) “Dog” means both the male and female of the canine species, commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets and other domesticated animals of a dog kind.
(E) “Owner” means any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
keeping or harboring an animal.
(F) “Release permit” means a permit issued by the Animal Control Officer or other
person in charge of the pound for the release of any animal that has been taken to the
pound. A release permit may be obtained upon payment of a fee to the City
Administrator in accordance with the regular license requirement if the animal is
unlicensed, payment of a release fee and any maintenance costs incurred in capturing
and impounding the animal. The release fee shall be as established from time to time
by ordinance of the Council.
500.02 Dogs and Cats.
(A) Running at large prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat of any person
who owns, harbors or keeps a dog or cat to run at large. A person who owns, harbors
or keeps a dog or cat which runs at large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Dogs or
cats on a leash and accompanied by a responsible person or accompanied by and
under the control and direction of a responsible person so as to be effectively
restrained by command as by leash shall be permitted in streets or on public land
unless the city has posted an area with signs reading “Dogs or Cats Prohibited.”
(B) License required.
(1) All dogs or cats over the age of eight months kept, harbored or maintained by
their owners in the city shall be licensed and registered with the city. Dog or
cat licenses shall be issued by the City Administrator upon payment of the
license fee as established from time to time by ordinance of the Council. The
City of Princeton Title 5 Animals
5-3
owner shall state, at the time application is made for the license and upon
forms provided, his or her name and address and the name, breed, color and
sex of each dog or cat owned or kept by him or her. No license shall be
granted for a dog or cat that has not been vaccinated against distemper and
rabies, as evidenced by a certificate by a veterinarian qualified to practice in the
state in which the dog or cat is vaccinated. Each license shall expire on
December 31 of even-numbered years
(2) It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog or cat subject to this section to pay
to the City Staff the license fee established from time to time by ordinance of
the Council.
(3) Upon payment of the license fee as established from time to time by ordinance
of the Council, the Staff shall issue to the owner a license certificate and
metallic tag for each dog or cat licensed. The tag shall have stamped on it the
year for which it is issued and the number corresponding with the number on
the certificate. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog or cat with a
collar to which the license tag must be affixed and shall see that the collar and
tag are constantly worn. In case a dog or cat tag is lost or destroyed, a
replacement shall be issued by the City Administrator. A charge shall be made
for each replacement tag in an amount established from time to time by
ordinance of the Council. Dog or cat tags shall not be transferable from one
dog or cat to another, and no refunds shall be made on any dog or cat license
fee or tag because of death of a dog or cat or the owner’s leaving the city
before the expiration of the license period.
(4) The licensing provisions of this division (B) shall not apply to dogs or cats
whose owners are nonresidents living within the city for less than six months,
nor to dogs or cats brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any
dog or cat show, nor shall this provision apply to “seeing eye” dogs properly
trained to assist blind persons for the purpose of aiding them in going from
place to place.
(5) The funds received by the City Administrator from all dog or cat licenses and
metallic tags fees, as established from time to time by ordinance of the
Council, shall first be used to defray any costs incidental to the enforcement of
this chapter, including, but not restricted to, the costs of licenses, metallic tags
and impounding and maintenance of the dogs or cats.
(C) Cats. Cats shall be included as controlled by this section insofar as running at large,
pickup, impounding, boarding, licensing and proof of anti-rabies vaccine is
concerned. All other provisions of this section shall also apply to cats unless
otherwise provided.
City of Princeton Title 5 Animals
5-4
(D) Vaccination.
(1) All dogs and cats kept harbored, maintained or transported within the city shall
be vaccinated at least once every three years by a licensed veterinarian for:
(a) Rabies - with a live modified vaccine; and
(b) Distemper.
(2) A certificate of vaccination must be kept on which is stated the date of
vaccination, owner’s name and address, the animal’s name (if applicable), sex,
description and weight, the type of vaccine and the veterinarian’s signature.
Upon demand made by the City Administrator, the Animal Control Officer or a
police officer, the owner shall present for examination the required
certificate(s) of vaccination for the animal(s). In cases where certificates are
not presented, the owner or keeper of the animal(s) shall have seven days in
which to present the certificate(s) to the City Administrator or officer. Failure
to do so shall be deemed a violation of this section.
Penalty, see §500.99
500.03 Nondomestic Animals. It shall be illegal for any person to own, possess, harbor or offer
for sale any nondomestic animal within the city. Any owner of a nondomestic animal at the
time of adoption of this code shall have 30 days in which to remove the animal from the
city, after which time the city may impound the animal as provided for in this chapter. An
exception shall be made to this prohibition for animals specifically trained for and actually
providing assistance to the handicapped or disabled and for those animals brought into the
city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research laboratory or a
licensed show or exhibition.
Penalty, see §500.99
500.04 Farm Animals. Farm animals shall only be kept in an agricultural district of the city. An
exception shall be made to this section for those animals brought into the city as part of an
operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research laboratory or a licensed show or
exhibition.
500.05 Impounding.
(A) Running at large. Any unlicensed animal running at large is hereby declared a
public nuisance. Any Animal Control Officer or police officer may impound any dog
or other animal found unlicensed or any animal found running at large and shall give
notice of the impounding to the owner of the dog or other animal, if known. In case
the owner is unknown, the officer shall post notice at the city office that if the dog or
other animal is not claimed within the time specified in division (C) of this section, it
will be sold or otherwise disposed of. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it
shall be unlawful to kill, destroy or otherwise cause injury to any animal, including
dogs and cats running at large.
City of Princeton Title 5 Animals
5-5
(B) Biting animals. Any animal that has not been inoculated by a live modified rabies
vaccine and which has bitten any person, wherein the skin has been punctured or the
services of a doctor are required, shall be confined in the city pound for a period of
not less than ten days, at the expense of the owner. The animal may be released at
the end of the time if healthy and free from symptoms of rabies and by the payment
of all costs by the owner. However, if the owner of the animal shall elect
immediately upon receipt of notice of need for the confinement by the officer to
voluntarily and immediately confine the animal for the required period of time in a
veterinary hospital of the owner’s choosing, not outside of the county in which this
city is located, and provide immediate proof of confinement in the manner as may be
required, the owner may do so. If, however, the animal has been inoculated with a
live modified rabies vaccine and the owner has proof of the vaccination by a
certificate from a licensed veterinarian, the owner may confine the dog or other
animal to the owner’s property.
(C) Reclaiming. All animals conveyed to the pound shall be kept, with humane
treatment and sufficient food and water for their comfort, at least five regular
business days, unless the animal is a dangerous animal as defined under § 500.11, in
which case it shall be kept for seven regular business days or the times specified in
§ 500.11, and except if the animal is a cruelly-treated animal, in which case it shall be
kept for ten regular business days, unless sooner reclaimed by their owners or keepers
as provided by this section. In case the owner or keeper shall desire to reclaim the
animal from the pound, the following shall be required, unless otherwise provided for
in this code or established from time to time by ordinance of the City Council:
(1) Payment of the release fee and receipt of a release permit as established from
time to time by ordinance of the Council;
(2) Payment of maintenance costs, as provided by the pound, per day or any part
of the day while the animal is in the pound; and
(3) If a dog or cat is unlicensed, payment of a regular license fee as established
from time to time by ordinance of the Council and valid certificate of
vaccination for rabies and distemper shots is required.
(D) Unclaimed animals. At the expiration of the times established in division (C) of this
section, if the animal has not been reclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this
section, the officer appointed to enforce this section may let any person claim the
animal by complying with all provisions in this section or the officer may sell the
animal to the University of Minnesota or cause the animal to be destroyed in a proper
and humane manner and shall properly dispose of the remains thereof. Any money
collected under this section shall be payable to the City Administrator.
Penalty, see §500.99
City of Princeton Title 5 Animals
5-6
500.06 Kennels.
(A) Definition of kennel. The keeping of more than three dogs, cats, and/or other
domestic animals on the same premises, whether owned by the same person or not
and for whatever purpose kept, shall constitute a “kennel;” except that a fresh litter of
pups or kittens may be kept for a period of eight months before that keeping shall be
deemed to be a “kennel.” Any property, except veterinary clinics and doggie
daycares, where more than three dogs or three cats over the age of eight months are
owned, boarded, bred, trained, or offered for sale.
(B) Kennel as a nuisance. Because the keeping of more than three dogs or cats on the
same premises is subject to great abuse, causing discomfort to persons in the area by
way of smell, noise, hazard and general aesthetic depreciation, the keeping of more
than three dogs or cats on the premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and no
person shall keep or maintain a kennel within the city.
Penalty, see §500.99
500.07 Nuisances.
(A) Habitual barking. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog which
habitually barks or cries. Habitual barking shall be defined as barking for repeated
intervals of at least five minutes with less than one minute of interruption. The
barking must also be audible off of the owner’s or caretaker’s premises.
(B) Damage to property. It shall be unlawful for any person’s dog or other animal to
damage any lawn, garden or other property, whether or not the owner has knowledge
of the damage.
(C) Cleaning up litter. The owner of any animal or person having the custody or control
of any animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces of the animal and
disposing of the feces in a sanitary manner, whether on their own property, on the
property of others or on public property.
(D) Other. Any animals kept contrary to this section are subject to impoundment as
provided in §500.05.
Penalty, see §500.99
500.08 Seizure of Animals. Any police officer or Animal Control Officer may enter upon private
property and seize any animal, provided that the following exist:
(A) There is an identified complainant other than the police officer or Animal Control
Officer making a contemporaneous complaint about the animal;
(B) The officer reasonably believes that the animal meets either the barking dog criteria
City of Princeton Title 5 Animals
5-7
set out in § 500.07(A), the criteria for cruelty set out in § 500.13 or the criteria for an
at large animal set out in §500.05(A);
(C) The officer can demonstrate that there has been at least one previous complaint of a
barking dog, inhumane treatment of the animal or that the animal was at large at this
address on a prior date;
(D) The officer has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of the dog and the
property to be entered and those attempts have either failed or have been ignored;
(E) The seizure will not involve the forced entry into a private residence. Use of a pass
key obtained from a property manager, landlord, innkeeper or other authorized person
to have that key shall not be considered unauthorized entry; and
(F) Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place if personal contact with the
owner of the dog is not possible.
500.0 Animals Presenting a Danger to Health and Safety of City. If, in the reasonable belief
of any person or the Animal Control Officer or police officer, an animal presents an
immediate danger to the health and safety of any person, the animal is threatening imminent
harm to any person or the animal is in the process of attacking any person, the person or
officer may destroy the animal in a proper and humane manner. Otherwise, the person or
officer may apprehend the animal and deliver it to the pound for confinement under
§500.05. If the animal is destroyed, the owner or keeper of the animal destroyed shall be
liable to the city for the cost of maintaining and disposing of the animal, plus the costs of
any veterinarian examination. If the animal is found not to be a danger to the health and
safety of the city, it may be released to the owner or keeper in accordance with §500.05(C).
500.10 Diseased Animals.
(A) Running at large. No person shall keep or allow to be kept on his or her premises or
on premises occupied by them, nor permit to run at large in the city, any animal
which is diseased so as to be a danger to the health and safety of the city, even though
the animal be properly licensed under this section.
(B) Confinement. Any animal reasonably suspected of being diseased and presenting a
threat to the health and safety of the public may be apprehended and confined in the
pound by any person, the Animal Control Officer or a police officer. The officer
shall have a qualified veterinarian examine the animal. If the animal is found to be
diseased in a manner so as to be a danger to the health and safety of the city, the
officer shall cause the animal to be painlessly killed and shall properly dispose of the
remains. The owner or keeper of the animal killed under this section shall be liable
to the city for the cost of maintaining and disposing of the animal, plus the costs of
any veterinarian examinations.
(C) Release. If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be diseased, the animal
shall be released to the owner or keeper free of charge.
City of Princeton Title 5 Animals
5-8
Penalty, see §500.99
500.11 Dangerous Animals.
(A) Attack by an animal. It shall be unlawful for any person’s animal to inflict or
attempt to inflict bodily injury to any person or other animal, whether or not the
owner is present. This section shall not apply to an attack by a dog under the control
of a law enforcement officer or to an attack upon an uninvited intruder who has
entered the owner’s home with criminal intent.
(B) Destruction of dangerous animal. The Animal Control Officer shall have the
authority to order the destruction of dangerous animals in accordance with the terms
established by this chapter.
(C) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(1) “Dangerous animal” means an animal which has:
(a) Caused bodily injury or disfigurement to any person on public or private
property;
(b) Engaged in any attack on any person under circumstances which would
indicate danger to personal safety;
(c) Exhibited unusually aggressive behavior, such as an attack on another
animal;
(d) Bitten one or more persons on two or more occasions; or
(e) Been found to be potentially dangerous and/or the owner has personal
knowledge of the same or the animal aggressively bites, attacks or
endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
(2) “Potentially dangerous animal” means any animal that:
(a) when unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal on
public or private property; or
(b) when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person, including a person on
a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property,
other than the animal’s owner’s property, in an apparent attitude of
attack; or
(c) has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked,
causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic
City of Princeton Title 5 Animals
5-9
animals.
(3) “Proper enclosure” means securely confined indoors or in a securely locked
pen or structure suitable to prevent the animal from escaping and to provide
protection for the animal from the elements. A proper enclosure does not
include a porch, patio or any part of a house, garage or other structure that
would allow the animal to exit of its own volition or any house or structure in
which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the only
barriers which prevent the animal from exiting. The enclosure shall not allow
the egress of the animal in any manner without human assistance. A pen or
kennel shall meet the following minimum specifications:
(a) Have a minimum overall floor size of 32 square feet;
(b) Side walls shall have a minimum height of five feet and be constructed
of 11-gauge or heavier wire. Openings in the wire shall not exceed 2
inches, support posts shall be 1¼-inch or larger steel pipe buried in the
ground 18 inches or more. When a concrete floor is not provided, the
side walls shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches in the ground;
(c) A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be provided. The cover shall
be constructed of the same gauge wire or heavier as the side walls and
shall also have no openings in the wire greater than two inches;
(d) An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be constructed of the same
material as the side walls and shall also have no openings in the wire
greater than two inches. The gate shall be equipped with a device
capable of being locked and shall be locked at all times when the animal
is in the pen or kennel.
(4) “Unprovoked” means the condition in which the animal is not purposely
excited, stimulated, agitated or disturbed.
(D) Designation as potentially dangerous animal. The Animal Control Officer shall
designate any animal as a potentially dangerous animal upon receiving evidence that
the potentially dangerous animal has, when unprovoked, then bitten, attacked or
threatened the safety of a person or a domestic animal as stated in division (C)(2).
When an animal is declared potentially dangerous, the Animal Control Officer shall
cause one owner of the potentially dangerous animal to be notified in writing that the
animal is potentially dangerous.
The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal must have a microchip
implanted in the animal for identification, and the name of the microchip
manufacturer and identification number of the microchip must be provided to the
animal control authority. If the microchip is not implanted by the owner, it may be
implanted by the animal control authority. In either case, all costs related to purchase
City of Princeton Title 5 Animals
5-10
and implantation of the microchip must be borne by the animal’s owner.
(E) Evidence justifying designation. The Animal Control Officer shall have the
authority to designate any animal as a dangerous animal upon receiving evidence of
the following:
(1) That the animal has, when unprovoked, bitten, attacked or threatened the safety
of a person or domestic animal as stated in division (C)(1);
(2) That the animal has been declared potentially dangerous and the animal has
then bitten, attacked or threatened the safety of a person or domestic animal as
stated in division (C)(1).
(F) Authority to order destruction. The Animal Control Officer, upon finding that an
animal is dangerous hereunder, is authorized to order, as part of the disposition of the
case, that the animal be destroyed based on a written order containing one or more of
the following findings of fact:
(1) The animal is dangerous as demonstrated by a vicious attack, an unprovoked
attack, an attack without warning or multiple attacks; or
(2) The owner of the animal has demonstrated an inability or unwillingness to
control the animal in order to prevent injury to persons or other animals.
(G) Procedure. The Animal Control Officer, after having determined that an animal is
dangerous, may proceed in the following manner. The Animal Control Officer shall
cause one owner of the animal to be notified in writing or in person that the animal is
dangerous and may order the animal seized or make orders as deemed proper. This
owner shall be notified as to dates, times, places and parties bitten and shall be given
14 days to appeal this order by requesting a hearing before the City Council for a
review of this determination.
(1) If no appeal is filed, the orders issued will stand or the Animal Control Officer
may order the animal destroyed.
(2) If an owner requests a hearing for determination as to the dangerous nature of
the animal, the hearing shall be held before the City Council, which shall set a
date for hearing not more than three weeks after demand for the hearing. The
records of the Animal Control or City Administrator’s office shall be
admissible for consideration by the Animal Control Officer without further
foundation. After considering all evidence pertaining to the temperament of
the animal, the City Council shall make an order as it deems proper. The City
Council may order that the Animal Control Officer take the animal into
custody for destruction, if the animal is not currently in custody. If the animal
is ordered into custody for destruction, the owner shall immediately make the
animal available to the Animal Control Officer.
City of Princeton Title 5 Animals
5-11
(3) No person shall harbor an animal after it has been found by to be dangerous
and ordered into custody for destruction.
(H) Stopping an attack. If any police officer or Animal Control Officer is witness to an
attack by an animal upon a person or another animal, the officer may take whatever
means the officer deems appropriate to bring the attack to an end and prevent further
injury to the victim.
(I) Notification of new address. The owner of an animal which has been identified as
dangerous or potentially dangerous shall notify the Animal Control Officer in writing
if the animal is to be relocated from its current address or given or sold to another
person. The notification shall be given in writing at least 14 days prior to the
relocation or transfer of ownership. The notification shall include the current
owner’s name and address, the relocation address and the name of the new owner, if
any.
Penalty, see §500.99
500.12 Dangerous Animal Requirements.
(A) Requirements. If the City Council does not order the destruction of an animal that
has been declared dangerous, the City Council may, as an alternative, order any or all
of the following:
(1) That the owner provide and maintain a proper enclosure for the dangerous
animal as specified in §500.11(C)(3);
(2) Post the front and the rear of the premises with clearly visible warning signs,
including a warning symbol to inform children that there is a dangerous animal
on the property as specified in M.S. §347.51, as may be amended from time to
time;
(3) Provide and show proof annually of public liability insurance in the minimum
amount of $300,000.00;
(4) If the animal is a dog and is outside the proper enclosure, the dog must be
muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash (not to exceed six feet in
length) and under the physical restraint of a person 16 years of age or older.
The muzzle must be of a design as to prevent the dog from biting any person or
animal, but will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or
respiration;
(5) If the animal is a dog, it must have an easily identifiable, standardized tag
identifying the dog as dangerous affixed to its collar at all times as specified in
M.S. §347.51, as amended from time to time;
(6) All animals deemed dangerous by the Animal Control Officer shall be
City of Princeton Title 5 Animals
5-12
registered with the county in which this city is located within 14 days after the
date the animal was so deemed and provide satisfactory proof thereof to the
Animal Control Officer;
(B) Seizure. The Animal Control Officer shall immediately seize any dangerous animal
if the owner does not meet each of the above requirements within 14 days after the
date notice is sent to the owner that the animal is dangerous. Seizure may be
appealed to District Court by serving a summons and petition upon the city and filing
it with the District Court.
(C) Reclaiming animals. A dangerous animal seized under § 500.12(B) may be
reclaimed by the owner of the animal upon payment of impounding and boarding fees
and presenting proof to animal control that each of the requirements under
§ 500.12(A) is fulfilled. An animal not reclaimed under this section within 14 days
may be disposed of as provided under §500.11(F), and the owner is liable to the city
for costs incurred in confining and impounding the animal.
(D) Subsequent offenses. If an owner of an animal has subsequently violated the
provisions under §500.11 with the same animal, the animal must be seized by animal
control. The owner may request a hearing as defined in § 500.11(G). If the owner is
found to have violated the provisions for which the animal was seized, the Animal
Control Officer shall order the animal destroyed in a proper and humane manner, and
the owner shall pay the costs of confining the animal. If the person is found not to
have violated the provisions for which the animal was seized, the owner may reclaim
the animal under the provisions of division (C) of this section. If the animal is not
yet reclaimed by the owner within 14 days after the date the owner is notified that the
animal may be reclaimed, the animal may be disposed of as provided under
§500.11(F), and the owner is liable to the animal control for the costs incurred in
confining, impounding and disposing of the animal.
500.13 Basic Care. All animals shall receive from their owners or keepers kind treatment, housing
in the winter and sufficient food and water for their comfort. Any person not treating their
pet in a humane manner will be subject to the penalties provided in this chapter.
500.14 Breeding Moratorium. Every female dog or female cat in heat shall be confined in a
building or other enclosure in a manner that it cannot come in contact with another dog or
cat, except for planned breeding. Upon capture and failure to reclaim the animal, every dog
or cat shall be neutered or spayed prior to being transferred to a new owner.
500.15 Enforcing Officer. The Council is hereby authorized to appoint an animal control
officer(s) to enforce the provisions of this section. In the officer’s duty of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter, he or she may from time to time, with the consent of the City
Council, designate assistants.
500.16 Pound. The Council shall designate an official pound to which animals found in violation
of this chapter shall be taken for safe treatment and, if necessary, for destruction.
City of Princeton Title 5 Animals
5-13
500.17 Interference With Officers. No person shall in any manner molest, hinder or interfere
with any person authorized by the City Council to capture dogs, cats or other animals and
convey them to the pound while engaged in that operation; nor shall any unauthorized
person break open the pound, attempt to do so or take or attempt to take from any agent any
animal taken up by him or her in compliance with this chapter or in any other manner to
interfere with or hinder the officer in the discharge of his or her duties under this chapter.
Penalty, see §500.99
500.99 Penalty.
(A) Separate offenses. Each day a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable under this section.
(B) Misdemeanor. Unless otherwise provided, violation of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor punishable as provided in §100.99.
(C) Petty misdemeanor. Violations of §500.02, 500.07, 500.13 and 500.14 are petty
misdemeanors punishable as provided in §100.99.
Chapter 510 - Horses, Colts and Ponies
510.01 Keeping and Riding Prohibited. No horses, colt or pony shall be kept, quartered,
ridden or led within the municipal limits of the City of Princeton, Minnesota, except as
permitted by Section 2.A.1 of the Zoning Code or as provided below.
Penalty, see §510.99
510.02 Exceptions.
(A) Person riding or leading horses in any event sanctioned by the Princeton City Council
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter on the day of such event, subject
to such restrictions imposed by the Council.
(B) Horses being used to pull a passenger buggy or sleigh for a specific community or
civic event will be permitted.
(C) Horses, colts and ponies participating in any Mille Lacs County Fair Board
sanctioned event on fairground property will be permitted.
510.03 Requirements of Riders and Owners. It will be the responsibility of the owner, rider or
person in control of the horse to take all reasonable actions necessary to assure that proper
control of the horse, colt or pony is maintained at all times, that there are no accumulations
of manure on any street, sidewalk, alley or any other open area and that no undue traffic
delay or hazard is created.
City of Princeton Title 5 Animals
5-14
510.99 Penalty. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter is guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided by §100.99.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-1
TITLE 6. NUISANCES AND OFFENSES
Chapter 600 Health and Safety; Nuisances
Chapter 605 Signs and Display of Commercial Merchandise in Public Rights-of-Way
Chapter 610 Sidewalks
Chapter 615 Weeds
Chapter 620 Garbage
Chapter 625 Discharge of Firearms
Chapter 630 Curfew
Chapter 635 Crimes on School Property
Chapter 640 Open Burning
Chapter 645 Other Nuisances
Chapter 650 Fireworks
Chapter 655 Nuisances Caused by Sound
Chapter 660 Hours of Operation for City Parks and Recreation Facilities
Chapter 665 Alcoholic Beverages in Riverside Park and Campground
Chapter 670 Peddlers, Hawkers, Solicitors, Transient Merchants, and Food Vendors
Chapter 675 Alcoholic Beverages in Mark Park Softball Field Areas
Chapter 685 Adult Establishments
Chapter 600 - Health and Safety; Nuisances
600.01 Assessable Current Services. – amended 12-27-18, ord #778
(A) Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. “Current service”
means one or more of the following: snow, ice or rubbish removal from sidewalks;
weed elimination from street grass plots adjacent to sidewalks or from private property;
removal or elimination of public health or safety hazards from private property,
excluding any hazardous building included in M.S. §§ 463.15 through 463.26, as they
may amended from time to time; installation or repair of water service lines; street
sprinkling, street flushing, light street oiling or other dust treatment of streets; repair
of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of trees and removal of unsound and insect-
infected trees from the public streets or private property; and the operation of a
street lighting system.
(B) Snow, ice, dirt and rubbish.
(1) Duty of owners and occupants. The owner and the occupant of any property
adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the walk safe for pedestrians.
Residential Owners or Occupants shall remove all snow, ice, dirt or
rubbish from the sidewalk within 12 hours of 8am of the 1st day after the snow
event ends. Commercial building owner or occupant in the Central Business
District shall remove all snow, ice, dirt or rubbish from the sidewalk within 8
hours of 8am of the 1st day after the snow event ends. Failure to comply with
this section shall constitute a violation.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-2
(2) Removal by city. The City Administrator or designee may cause removal
from all public sidewalks all snow, ice, dirt and rubbish as soon as possible beginning
12 hours from 8am of the 1st day after the snow event ends for residential
and 8 hours from 8am of the 1st day after the snow event ends for Commercial
properties in the Central Business District. The City Administrator or other
designated person shall keep a record showing the cost of removal adjacent
to each separate lot and parcel. The Council may establish the charge for this
service.
(C) Public health and safety hazards. When the city removes or eliminates public
health or safety hazards from private property under the following provisions of this
chapter, the administrative officer responsible for doing the work shall keep a record
of the cost of the removal or elimination against each parcel of property affected and
deliver that information to the City Administrator.
(D) Installation and repair of water service lines. Whenever the city installs or repairs
water service lines serving private property, the City Administrator shall keep a record
of the total cost of the installation or repair against the property.
(E) Repair of sidewalks and alleys.
(1) Duty of owner. The owner of any property within the city abutting a public
sidewalk or alley shall keep the sidewalk or alley in repair and safe for pedestrians.
Repairs shall be made in accordance with the standard specifications
approved by the City Engineer. No public sidewalk shall be permanently removed
without the written consent of the city.
(2) Inspections; notice. The City Council or its designee shall make inspections
as are necessary to determine that public sidewalks and alleys within the city
are kept in repair and safe for pedestrians or vehicles. If it is found that any
sidewalk or alley abutting on private property is unsafe and in need of repairs,
the City Council shall cause a notice to be served, by registered or certified
mail or by personal service, upon the record owner of the property, ordering the
owner to have the sidewalk or alley repaired and made safe within 30 days and
stating that if the owner fails to do so the city will do so and that the expense
thereof must be paid by the owner and, if unpaid, it will be made a special assessment
against the property concerned.
(3) Repair by city. If the sidewalk or alley is not repaired within 30 days after receipt
of the notice, the City Administrator shall report the facts to the City
Council and the City Council shall by resolution order the work done by contract
in accordance with law. The City Administrator shall keep a record of the
total cost of the repair attributable to each lot or parcel of property.
(F) Personal liability. The owner of property on which or adjacent to which a current
service has been performed shall be personally liable for the cost of the service. As
soon as the service has been completed and the cost determined, the City AdministraCity
of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-3
tor, or other designated official, shall prepare a bill and mail it to the owner and
thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City
Administrator.
(G) Damage to public property. Any person driving any vehicle, equipment, object or
contrivance upon any street, road, highway or structure shall be liable for all damages
which the surface or structure thereof may sustain as a result of any illegal operation
or driving or moving of the vehicle, equipment or object or contrivance or as a result
of operating, driving or moving any vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance weighing
in excess of the maximum weight permitted by statute or this code. When the
driver is not the owner of the vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance, but is operating,
driving or moving it with the express or implied permission of the owner, then
the owner and the driver shall be jointly and severally liable for any such damage.
Any person who willfully acts or fails to exercise due care and by that act damages
any public property shall be liable for the amount thereof, which amount shall be collectable
by action or as a lien under M.S. § 514.67, as it may be amended from time
to time.
(H) Assessment. On or before September 1 of each year, the City Administrator shall list
the total unpaid charges for each type of current service and charges under this chapter
against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this section.
The City Council may then spread the charges against property benefitted as a special
assessment under the authority of M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from
time to time, and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and
collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not
exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each case.
Penalty, see §100.99
600.02 Tree Diseases.
(A) Trees constituting nuisance declared. The following are public nuisances whenever
they may be found within the city:
(1) Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the
Dutch Elm disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau or which harbors
any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus (Eichh.) or Hylungopinus
Rufipes (Marsh);
(2) Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches, stumps, firewood or
other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or
sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide;
(3) Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the
Oak Wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum;
(4) Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion of the designated officer
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-4
constitutes a hazard, including but not limited to logs, branches, stumps, roots,
firewood or other oak material which has not been stripped of its bark and
burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide;
(5) Any other shade tree with an epidemic disease.
(B) Abatement of nuisance. It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance
as defined in division (A) of this section to remain on any premises the person owns
or controls within the city. The City Council may by resolution order the nuisance
abated. Before action is taken on that resolution, the City Council shall publish notice
of its intention to meet to consider taking action to abate the nuisance. This notice
shall be mailed to the affected property owner and published once no less than
one week prior to the meeting. The notice shall state the time and place of the meeting,
the street affected, action proposed, the estimated cost of the abatement and the
proposed basis of assessment, if any, of costs. At such hearing or adjournment thereof,
the City Council shall hear any property owner with reference to the scope and desirability
of the proposed project. The City Council shall thereafter adopt a resolution
confirming the original resolution with modifications as it considers desirable and
provide for the doing of the work by day labor or by contract.
(C) Record of costs. The City Administrator shall keep a record of the costs of abatement
done under this section for all work done for which assessments are to be made,
stating and certifying the description of the land, lots, parcels involved and the
amount chargeable to each.
(D) Unpaid charges. On or before September 1 of each year, the City Administrator
shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel
to which they are attributable under this section. The City Council may then
spread the charges or any portion thereof against the property involved as a special
assessment as authorized by M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to
time, and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection
the following year along with the current taxes.
Penalty, see §100.99
600.03 Public Nuisance Defined. Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally
does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is a
misdemeanor:
(A) Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or endangers
the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any member or members of the public;
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-5
(B) Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage, any public highway or
right-of-way or waters used by the public; or
(C) Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or this ordinance to be a public
nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically provided.
600.04 Public Nuisances Affecting Health. The following are hereby declared to be nuisances
affecting health:
(A) Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable matter, except
bona fide, properly maintained compost;
(B) All diseased animals running at large;
(C) Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after death;
(D) Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;
(E) Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight or which are so
maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and disagreeable odors;
(F) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or body of water by
sewage, industrial waste or other substance;
(G) All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or private property;
(H) Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot or cinders in unreasonable quantities;
(I) Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating under local license.
600.05 Public Nuisances Affecting Morals and Decency. The following are hereby declared to
be nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
(A) All unlicensed gambling devices;
(B) Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in such occupations;
(C) All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse,
gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;
(D) All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in violation of
law or where, in violation of law, people are permitted to resort for the purpose of
drinking intoxicating liquor, or where intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or other disCity
of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-6
position in violation of law, and all liquor and other property used for maintaining
such a place; and
(E) Any vehicle used for the transportation of intoxicating liquor, or for promiscuous
sexual intercourse or any other immoral or illegal purpose.
600.06 Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety. The following are declared to be nuisances
affecting public peace and safety: amended 12-27-18, ord #778
(A) All snow and ice not removed from residential district public sidewalks within 12
hours of 8am of the 1st day after the snow event ends, and commercial district public
sidewalks within 8 hours of 8am of the 1st day after the snow event ends.
(B) All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent people from having
a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
(C) All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a sidewalk or street
as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
(D) All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations;
(E) Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of streets, alleys,
sidewalks or public grounds except under such conditions as are permitted by this
code or other applicable law;
(F) Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a dangerous manner;
(G) Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public
street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic
and the free use of the street or sidewalk;
(H) All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets and sidewalks, or
so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed and maintained as provide
by ordinance;
(I) The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or structure upon
any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
(J) Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and within three feet of a
public sidewalk or way;
(K) All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated or operated
on private property as to attract the public;
(L) Raw sewage cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public properties;
(M) Accumulations in the open of one or more discarded or disused piece of machinery,
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-7
household appliance, automobiles body, junk vehicles (as defined under paragraph
“E” of Section 240.03 of these ordinances) or other material, in a manner conducive
to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation
among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health or safety hazards
from such accumulation;
(N) Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in such other condition
as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming on the premises
where it is located;
(O) Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or public street drain, gutter
or ditch with trash of other materials;
(P) The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public property of any glass,
tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which may injure any person or animal or
damage any pneumatic tire when passing over such substance;
(Q) The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on adjacent private
property; and
(R) All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the person or property
of anyone.
600.07 Duties of City Officers. The Public Works Superintendent, Police Department, Community
Development Officer or other designated official shall enforce the provisions of §§
600.03 et seq. relating to nuisances affecting public safety. The Police Department shall
enforce provisions relating to other nuisances and shall assist the other designated officer(s)
in the enforcement of provisions relating to nuisances affecting public safety. Such officers
shall have the power to inspect private premises and take all reasonable precautions to prevent
the commission and maintenance of public nuisances.
600.08 Abatement.
(A) Notice. Written notice of violation; notice of the time, date, place and subject of any
hearing before the City Council; notice of City Council order; and notice of motion
for summary enforcement hearing shall be given as set forth in this subdivision.
(1) Notice of Violation. Written notice of violation shall be served by the officer
charged with enforcement on the owner of record or occupant of the premises
either in person or by certified or registered mail. If the premises is not occupied,
the owner of record is unknown, or the owner of record or occupant refuses
to accept notice of violation, notice of violations hall be served by posting
it on the premises.
(2) Notice of Council Hearing. Written notice of any City Council hearing to determine
or abate nuisance shall be served on the owner of record and occupant
of the premises either in person or by certified or registered mail. If the premises
is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the owner of record or
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-8
occupant refuses to accept notice of Council hearing, notice of Council hearing
shall be served by posting it on the premises.
(3) Notice of City Council Order. Except for those cases determined by the city
to require summary enforcement, written notice of any City Council order shall
be made as provided in M.S. § 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard Building
Act).
(4) Notice of Motion for Summary Enforcement. Written notice of any motion
for summary enforcement shall be made as provided for in M.S. § 463.17
(Hazardous and Substandard Building Act).
(B) Procedure. Whenever the officer charged with enforcement determines that a public
nuisance is being maintained or exists on premises in the city, the officer shall notify
in writing the owner of record or occupant of the premises of such fact and order that
the nuisance be terminated or abated. The notice of violation shall specify the steps
to be taken to abate the nuisance and the time within which the nuisance is to be
abated. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time specified, the
enforcing officer shall report that fact forthwith to the Council. Thereafter, the
Council may, after notice to the owner or occupant and an opportunity to be heard,
determine that the condition identified in the notice of violation is a nuisance and further
order that if the nuisance is not abated within the time prescribed by the county
the city may seek injunctive relieve by serving a copy of the City Council order and
notice of motion for summary enforcement.
(C) Emergency Procedure; Summary Enforcement. In cases of emergency, where delay
in abatement required to complete the notice and procedure requirements set forth
in divisions (A) and (B) above will permit a continuing nuisance to unreasonably endanger
public health safety or welfare, the City Council may order summary enforcement
and abate the nuisance. To proceed with summary enforcement, the officer
charged with enforcement shall determine that a public nuisance exists or is being
maintained on premises in the city and that delay in abatement of the nuisance
will unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare. The enforcement officer
shall notify in writing the occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the nuisance
and of the city’s intention to seek summary enforcement and the time and place
of the Council meeting to consider the question of summary enforcement. The City
Council shall determine whether or not the condition identified in the notice to the
owner or occupant is a nuisance, whether public health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably
endangered by delay in abatement required to complete the procedure set
forth in division (A) above, and may order that such nuisance be immediately terminated
or abated. If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the City
Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
(D) Immediate Abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without notice
or other process, from immediately abating any condition which poses an imminent
and serious hazard to human life or safety.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-9
600.09 Recovery of Cost.
(A) Personal Liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been abated by
the city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement, including
administrative costs. As soon as the work has been completed and the cost determined,
the City Clerk or other official designated by the Council shall prepare a bill
for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately
due and payable at the officer of the City Clerk.
(B) Assessment. If the nuisance is a public health or safety hazard on private property,
the accumulation of snow and ice on public sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private
property or outside the traveled portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected
trees, the Clerk shall, on or before September 1 next following abatement of the nuisance,
list the total unpaid charges along with all other such charges as well as other
charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. §429.101 against each such
property under that statute and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County
Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments,
not exceeding ten, as the Council may determine in each case.
600.10 Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided by §100.99.
Chapter 605 - Signs and Display of Commercial Merchandise in Public Rights-of-Way
605.01 Obstruction of Right-of-Way. No person, firm or corporation shall construct, erect or
maintain any sign or other obstruction upon any street, including sidewalk, boulevard or
curb, within the City of Princeton, Minnesota, the support of which depends upon any pole,
standard, brace or guy wire placed or anchored in any portion of street, including sidewalk,
boulevard and curb unless otherwise allowed elsewhere in these city ordinances.
605.02 Display of Merchandise. No person shall display merchandise or equipment for any
commercial venture within the limits of the public right-of-way.
605.99 Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided by §100.99.
Chapter 610 – Sidewalks - amended 12-27-18, ord #778
610.01 Cleaning of Sidewalks. The owners or occupants of all buildings and real estate within the
city shall remove all snow and ice from the public sidewalks adjacent thereto as follows.
Residential Owners or Occupants shall remove all snow, ice, dirt or rubbish from the sidewalk
within 12 hours of 8am of the 1st day after the snow event ends. Commercial building
owner or occupant in the Central Business District shall remove all snow, ice, dirt or rubbish
from the sidewalk within 8 hours of 8am of the 1st day after the snow event ends. Each
owner or occupant of real estate within the Central Business District shall clear or cause to
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-10
be cleared all snow or ice from such sidewalks within 8 hours after the snow or ice has
ceased to fall thereon. “Central Business District” as used herein includes that part of the
city bounded by 4th Avenue on the east, 6th Avenue on the west, Hwy. 95 on the north and
4th Street South on the south.
Penalty, see §610.99
610.02 Removal to Street. Snow and ice which is cleared from public sidewalks in the Central
Business District may be placed on the city streets for collection by the city; however, no
person shall place on city streets snow or ice which has fallen on private walkways, driveways
or private parking lots.
Penalty, see §610.99 – amended 12-27-18, ord #778
610.03 Removal by City; Assessment of Costs. Failure to Clean sidewalks. Whenever the owner
or occupant of any premises in the city fails to clean their sidewalk within the above required
time, the City Administrator designee shall clear the sidewalk and bill the property
owner for all costs. Said cost may include, but are not limited to, equipment mobilization,
labor, equipment use, fuel, and overhead expenses.
Assessment of cost. If the bill is not paid to the City, the amount of the cost shall be certified
to the County Auditor and the auditor shall cause the cost to be assessed, levied and
collected in one payment with the payable taxes.
610.99 Penalty. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall
be punished in accordance with §100.99.
Chapter 615 - Weeds
615.01 Short Title. This chapter shall be cited as the “Weed Ordinance.”
615.02 Jurisdiction. This chapter shall be in addition to any state statute or county ordinance
presently in effect, subsequently added, amended or repealed.
615.03 Definitions; Exclusions.
(A) For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(1) “Destruction order” means the notice served by the City Council or designated
city official, in cases of appeal, on the property owner of the ordinance
violation.
(2) “Property owner” means the person occupying the property, the holder of legal
title or a person having control over the property of another, such as a right-ofway,
easement, license or lease.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-11
(3) “Weeds, grasses and rank vegetation” includes but is not limited to the following:
(a) Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include but not be limited to:
alum (allium), Buckthorn, Bur Cucumber, Canada Thistle, Corncockle,
Cressleaf Groundsel, Curly Dock, Dodder, Field Bindweed, French
Weed, Hairy Whitetop, Hedge Bindweed, Hoary Cress, Horsenettle,
Johnsongrass, Leafy Spurge, Mile-A-Minute Weed, Musk Thistle, Oxeye
Daisy, Perennial Sowthistle, Poison Hemlock, Purple Loosestrife,
Quackgrass, Russian Knapweed, Russian Thistle, Serrated Tussock,
Shatter Cane, Sorghum, Wild Carrot, Wild Garlic, Wild Mustard, Wild
Onion and Wild Parsnip;
(b) Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or more and not pruned,
sprayed, cultivated or otherwise maintained for two consecutive years;
(c) Bushes of the species of tall, common or European barberry, further
known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties.
(4) Any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental
plants, growing to a height exceeding six inches;
(5) Rank vegetation includes the uncontrolled, uncultivated growth of annuals and
perennial plants;
(6) The term “weeds” does not include shrubs, trees, cultivated plants or crops.
(B) In no event shall cultivated plants or crops include plants which have been defined by
state statute or administrative rule as being noxious or detrimental plants.
615.04 Owners Responsible for Trimming, Removal and the Like. All property owners shall
be responsible for the removal, cutting or disposal and elimination of weeds, grasses and
rank vegetation or other uncontrolled plant growth on their property, which at the time of
notice is in excess of six inches in height.
Penalty, see §100.99
615.05 Notice of Violations.
(A) Upon becoming aware of the probable existence of weeds in violation of this chapter,
a person designated by the City Administrator shall make an inspection and prepare a
written report. Said designee, upon concluding that there is a probable belief that this
chapter has been violated, shall forward written notification in the form of a “Destruction
Order” to the property owner or the person occupying the property as that
information is contained within the records of the City. The notice shall be served in
writing by certified mail. The notice shall provide that within seven regular business
days after the receipt of the notice that the designated violation shall be removed by
the property owner or person occupying the property.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-12
(B) (1) All notices are to be in writing and all filings are to be with the City Administrator.
(2) Certified mailing to the City Administrator or others is deemed filed on the
date of posting to the United States Postal Service.
615.06 Appeals.
(A) The property owner may appeal to the City Council by filing written notice of objections
with the City Administrator within 48 hours of the notice, excluding weekends
and holidays, if the property owner contests the finding of the City Administrator. It
is the property owner’s responsibility to demonstrate that the matter in question is
shrubs, trees, cultivated plants or crops or is not otherwise in violation of this chapter
and should not be subject to destruction under this chapter.
(B) An appeal by the property owner shall be brought before the City Council and shall
be decided by a majority vote of the Council members in attendance and being at a
regularly scheduled or special meeting of the City Council.
615.07 Abatement by City. In the event that the property owner shall fail to comply with the
“Destruction Order” within seven regular business days and has not filed a notice within 48
hours to the City Administrator of an intent to appeal, the City Council may employ the
services of city employees or outside contractors and remove the weeds to conform to this
chapter by all lawful means.
615.08 Liability.
(A) The property owner is liable for all costs of removal, cutting or destruction of weeds
as defined by this chapter.
(B) The property owner is responsible for all collection costs associated with weed destruction,
including but not limited to court costs, attorney’s fees and interest on any
unpaid amounts incurred by the city. If the city uses municipal employees, it shall set
and assign an appropriate per hour rate for employees, equipment, supplies and
chemicals which may be used.
(C) All sums payable by the property owner are to be paid to the City Administrator and
to be deposited in a general fund as compensation for expenses and costs incurred by
the city.
(D) All sums payable by the property owner may be collected as a special assessment as
provided by M.S. §429.101, as it may be amended from time to time.
Chapter 620 - Garbage
620.01 Containers. All garbage, rubbish and refuse accumulated on any premises shall be placed
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-13
and maintained in plastic bags, containers or packaged or bundled in a manner so as to enable
convenient pickup. Garbage, rubbish and refuse bags and/or containers provided by the
owner, tenant, lessee or occupants of the premises shall be maintained in good, clean, neat
and sanitary condition at all times. All garbage, rubbish and refuse bags and/or containers
shall be used solely and only by that owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the premises or
commercial establishment as a receptacle.
620.02 Illegal Dumping or Depositing. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or dump
any residential, commercial or large amount of garbage, rubbish, refuse or any other type of
waste on any public or private property and/or in any commercial establishment dumpster,
container or receptacle unless specifically authorized by the commercial establishment.
620.99 Penalty. Any person found in violation of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be punished as provided by §100.99.
Chapter 625 - Discharge of Firearms
625.01 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) “Bodily harm” means physical pain or injury, illness or any impairment of physical
condition.
(B) “Bows and arrows” or “bow and arrow” means any device or combination of devices
designed to propel any arrow from a cord connecting the two ends of a bow by pulling
on the cord, thus bending the bow and then releasing the cord; except it shall not
mean devices of this type commonly interpreted to be toys.
(C) “Dangerous weapon” means any firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, or any device
designed as a weapon and capable of producing bodily harm, or any other device or
instrument which, in the manner it is used or intended to be used, is calculated or
likely to produce bodily harm.
(D) “Firearm” means any device from which is propelled any missile, projectile, bullet or
other mass through a barrel by means of explosives, gas, air and/or spring devices,
except that any device that discharges blank cartridges for a show or theater, for signal
or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports, or for use as a bird or animal repelling
device shall not be considered a “firearm” for purposes of this subchapter.
625.02 Prohibited Activity.
(A) It shall be unlawful to do the following:
(1) Recklessly handle or use a firearm, bow and arrow, dangerous weapon or explosive
so as to endanger the safety of another;
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-14
(2) Intentionally point a firearm of any kind, whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward
another;
(3) Possess any device or weapon known as a slingshot, slingshot, sand club, metal
knuckles, switchblade knife, dagger, stiletto, dirk, blackjack, chain club, pipe
club, Molotov cocktail, grenade, throwing star or similar device;
(4) Possess any other dangerous article or substance for the purpose of being used
unlawfully as a weapon against another; and
(5) Sell or have in possession any device designed to silence or muffle the discharge
of a firearm.
(B) Division (A) above shall not apply to the articles mentioned when they are carried or
possessed as curiosities for their historical significance or value.
625.03 Discharge and Uses Prohibited. Amended 2-10-11 ord #662
(A) Except in accordance with this subchapter, it shall be unlawful to discharge or use
any firearm or bow and arrow within the corporate boundaries of the city.
(B) Bows and arrows may be used on private property, or on school and city property in
connection with an organized school or recreation class provided that the arrows used
shall be equipped with blunt tips (also known as “field points” or “target arrows”).
(C) Certain firearms, limited to shotguns, muzzle loaders, bow and arrow and cross bow
may be discharged in the following locations within the City (hereinafter called
“Permitted Discharge Areas”);
(1) On any approved firearms range or other location approved by the City Council
for a special hunting program operating under a permit issued by the City
Council.
(2) Within any county or regional park while participating under a permit or license
in a special hunting program established by the county board.
(3) In any unplatted area approved by the City Council in accordance with the procedure
described in sub-paragraph 4 of this section and identified by green
cross-hatching on the map which is attached hereto and made a part hereof as if
fully set out herein. (see Appendix F for map.)
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-15
(4) The City Council shall designate Permitted Discharge Areas by resolution after
considering: (a) the proximity of the proposed area to adjacent areas zoned or
used for residential or commercial purposes; (b) the proximity of the proposed
area to schools, churches, parks and other places where people congregate; (c)
the effect of both the noise of a discharge and the danger which a discharged
projectile may pose to persons living, traveling, or legally present in or in proximity
to the proposed area.
(5) Any Property Owner may petition to have his or her property included in, or
excluded from the Permitted Discharge Area based upon the criteria described
in sub-paragraph 4 of this section.
(D) Except for discharge, this section intends neither to further restrict nor to permit what
is restricted in M.S. §624.711 through 624.7181.
(E) Under the conditions for discharge allowed in this section, it shall be unlawful for
any person to be under the influence of alcohol, narcotics or any other drug when discharging
a firearm or bow and arrow.
(F) Nothing in this section shall be construed to include any discharge of any firearm or
bow and arrow when done in the lawful defense of person, family, property or within
the basement of a private residence.
(G) Nothing in this section shall be construed to include any discharge of any device used
exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges, explosive rivets or similar industrial ammunition
when used for construction purposes.
625.04 Transportation Requirements.
(A) It shall be unlawful to transport any firearm in a motor vehicle, airplane, snowmobile
or boat unless the same is unloaded in both barrels and magazine and completely
contained in a gun case expressly made for that purpose which is fully enclosed by
being zipped, snapped, buckled, tied or otherwise fastened, with no portion of the
firearm exposed, or unless unloaded and contained in the trunk of a car with the trunk
door closed, except that pistols and revolvers may be transported when done in accordance
with M.S. §§ 624.711 through 624.717.
(B) It shall be unlawful to transport the following in a motor vehicle, airplane, snowmobile
or boat:
(1) A bow and arrow unless unstrung, completely contained in a case or unless
contained in the trunk of a car with the trunk door closed; or
(2) A muzzle loading firearm unless fully unloaded and completely contained in a
gun case expressly made for that purpose which is fully enclosed by being
zipped, snapped, buckled, tied or otherwise fastened with no portion of the
firearm exposed, or unless unloaded and contained in the trunk of a car with
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-16
the trunk door closed. A muzzle loading firearm with a flintlock ignition is
fully unloaded it if has no priming powder in any pan and a muzzle loading
firearm with percussion ignition is fully unloaded if it has no percussion cap on
any nipple.
625.05 Possession by Minors.
(A) Except in accordance with this section, it shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of 16 years, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, to have in his or her
possession or under his or her control, any firearm for any purpose. For the purposes
of this section, the word “guardian” is defined as legal guardian or any other person
over the age of 18 years who has been selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise
the person under the age of 16 years while he or she has in his or her possession
or under his or her control any firearm.
(B) This section shall not apply to any person between the ages of 14 years and 16 years
who has the certificate provided for in M.S. §97.81, or to any person participating in
the course provided by the section to carry a properly encased and unloaded firearm
to and from class and to handle the same during the instruction. Also, the person
shall be allowed participation in organized target shooting programs conducted under
qualified adult supervision.
(C) It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian to permit a child under 14 years of age to
handle or use outside of the parent’s or guardian’s presence, any firearm, any ammunition
or any explosive.
(D) It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish a minor under 18 years of age with any
firearm, any ammunition, or any explosive without the written consent of the minor’s
parent or guardian.
625.06 Exception. This subchapter does not apply to law enforcement officers and members of
the armed services of either the United States or the state for use in the course of their duties.
625.99 Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a gross
misdemeanor or a felony. Amended 6-9-11 ord #665
Chapter 630 - Curfew
630.01 Purpose. This chapter is enacted to ensure the safety of our youths in public places in the
late evening hours and early morning hours and to further provide accountability of the
youths and their parent(s) for the youth activities in our community. M.S. § 412.221, Subd.
32, provides that the Council shall have power to provide for the government and good order
of the city, the suppression of vice and immorality, the prevention of crime, the protection
of public and private property, the benefit of residence, trade and commerce, and the
promotion of health, safety, order, convenience and the general welfare by such ordinances
not inconsistent with the constitution and laws of the United States or of this state as it shall
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-17
deem expedient.
630.02 Title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the “Princeton City
Curfew Ordinance.”
630.03 Validity. Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole
or any part thereof other than the part so declared invalid.
630.04 Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of this chapter shall be city wide, including incorporated areas.
630.05 Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the protection of the public safety and general
welfare.
630.06 Definitions and Rules of Language. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) “Minor” means any individual who is under the age of 17 and has not been declared
by a court of competent jurisdiction as being emancipated.
(B) “Parent” means any individual who is 18 or older and is the birth or adoptive parent
of the minor, or who has the legal custody of the minor as established by order of a
court of competent jurisdiction. This definition excludes individuals who are providing
foster care as it is defined in M.S. § 260.015, subd. 7.
(C) Unless specifically defined herein, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted
so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so
as to give this chapter its most reasonable application. Words used in the present
tense shall include the future; words in the singular shall include the plural; and the
words “shall” and “must” are mandatory and not discretionary.
630.07 Minors Curfew.
(A) Curfew Hours and Locations. It shall be unlawful for any minor who is unaccompanied
by a parent or accompanied by an adult who does not have permission of the
parent to be with the minor, to be present upon any public street, avenue, alley, park,
playground or place open to the public, or place of amusement and entertainment, vacant
lot or other unsupervised place in the city during the following hours:
(1) If the minor is under the age of 16, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of any day
and 5:00 a.m. of the following day.
(2) If the minor is 16, between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-18
(B) Exceptions:
(1) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel.
(2) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment
activity, without any detour or stop.
(3) Involved in an emergency.
(4) Attendance at an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised
by adults and sponsored by the City of Princeton, a civic organization, a
local nonprofit or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor,
and travel to and returning home from the qualifying activity, without detour or
stop.
630.99 Penalties.
(A) A person under the age of 17 may be charged with a misdemeanor under this chapter.
(B) Any parent whose minor violates this provision shall be notified of all offenses at the
address given by the minor or the last known address. Service by first class mail to
the last known address or the address given by the minor shall be deemed notice to
such parent. The parent shall be notified that if the minor incurs three or more curfew
violations, then the parent shall be held subject to the penalties set forth herein.
(C) A parent of a person under the age of 17 (minor) may be charged with a misdemeanor
under this chapter.
Chapter 635 - Crimes on School Property
635.01 Unlawful Actions.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in a public or private school building or
upon the grounds and office after being requested to leave the premises by the school
principal or other person lawfully responsible for the control of the premises.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person, whether on or off school premises, willfully to
annoy, disturb, interfere with or obstruct any classroom instruction teaching program
or other school organization or assembly being conducted upon the premises of any
public or private school.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person, whether on school property or on property contiguous
to school property, to interfere with school bus loading and unloading or to obstruct
school buses in their safe operation.
Penalty, see §635.99
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-19
635.99 Penalty. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §100.99.
Chapter 640 - Open Burning
640.01 Open Burning; Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) “Fire Chief, Fire Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshals” means the Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which provides fire protection
services to the city.
(B) “Open burning” means the burning of any matter if the resultant combustion products
are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or chimney,
except a recreational fire, as defined herein. Mobile cooking devices such as
manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood smokers and propane or natural gas devices
are not defined as “open burning.”
(C) “Recreational fire” means a fire set with approved starter fuel no more than three feet
in height, contained within the border of a “recreational fire site” using dry, clean
wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the property line; conducted
with an adult tending the fire at all times; for recreational, ceremonial, food
preparation for social purposes; extinguished completely before quitting the occasion;
and respecting weather conditions, neighbors, burning bans and air quality so that
nuisance, health or safety hazards will not be created. No more than one recreational
fire is allowed on any property at one time.
(D) “Recreational fire site” means an area of no more than a three-foot diameter circle
(measured from the inside of the fire ring or border), completely surrounded by noncombustible
and non-smoke or odor producing material, either of natural rock, cement,
brick, tile or blocks or ferrous metal only, and which area is depressed below
ground, on the ground or on a raised bed. Included are permanent outdoor wood
burning fireplaces. Burning barrels are not a “recreation fire site” as defined herein.
“Recreational fire sites” shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any structure.
(E) “Starter fuels” means dry, untreated or unpainted kindling, branches, cardboard or
charcoal fire starter. Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as starter fuels and
as aids to ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean gas burning devices causing
minimal pollution must be used to start an open burn.
(F) “Wood” means dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, “presto logs,”
charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber. The term does not include
wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked or treated with
paint, glue or preservatives. Clean pallets may be used for recreational fires when cut
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-20
into three-foot lengths.
640.02 Prohibited Materials.
(A) No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of oils, petro fuels, rubber,
plastics, chemically-treated materials or other materials which produce excessive or
noxious smoke such as tires, railroad ties, treated, painted or glued wood composite
shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition board, sheetrock, wiring, paint or paint
fillers.
(B) No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of hazardous waste or salvage
operations, open burning of solid waste generated from an industrial or manufacturing
process or from a service or commercial establishment or building material generated
from demolition of commercial or institutional structures.
(C) No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of discarded material resulting
from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving or consumption of food.
(D) No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of any leaves or grass clippings.
Penalty, see §100.99
640.03 Permit Required for Open Burning. No person shall start or allow any open burning on
any property in the city without first having obtained an open burn permit, except that a
permit is not required for any fire which is a recreational fire, as defined in §640.01.
Penalty, see §100.99
640.04 Purposes Allowed for Open Burning.
(A) Open burn permits may be issued only for the following purposes:
(1) Elimination of fire or health hazard that cannot be abated by other practical
means;
(2) Ground thawing for utility repair and construction;
(3) Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest, prairie or wildlife habitat
and in the development and maintenance of land and rights-of-way where
chipping, composting, land spreading or other alternative methods are not practical;
(4) Disposal of diseased trees generated on site, diseased or infected nursery stock
or diseased bee hives;
(5) Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and wood shakes generated
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-21
from construction, where recycling, reuse, removal or other alternative disposal
methods are not practical.
(B) Fire training permits can only be issued by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
Penalty, see §100.99
640.05 Permit Application for Open Burning; Permit Fees.
(A) Applications for open burning permits shall be made on forms provided by the city
and submitted at least ten days prior to the desired burn date. The Fire Chief or designee
shall review the permit and may issue the permit in conformance with the provisions
of this chapter. The Fire Chief or designee may set dates, times, and special conditions
as a condition of the permit. The permit holder shall also obtain any required permit
from the Department of Natural Resources.
(B) An open burning permit shall require the payment of a fee. Permit fees shall be in the
amount established from time to time by ordinance of the Council.
Penalty, see §100.99
640.06 Permit Process for Open Burning. Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit
application and permit fee, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshals shall
schedule a preliminary site inspection to locate the proposed burn site, note special conditions
and set dates and time of permitted burn and review fire safety considerations.
640.07 Permit Holder Responsibility.
(A) Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be responsible for confirming
that no burning ban or air quality alert is in effect. Every open burn event shall be
constantly attended by the permit holder or his or her competent representative. The
open burning site shall have available, appropriate communication and fire suppression
equipment as set out in the fire safety plan.
(B) The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit holder or his
or her representative leaves the site. No fire may be allowed to smolder with no person
present. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to have a valid permit, as required
by §§ 640.06 through 640.09, available for inspection on the site by the Police
Department, Fire Department, MPCA representative or DNR forest officer.
(C) The permit holder is responsible for compliance and implementation of all general
conditions, special conditions and the burn event safety plan as established in the
permit issued. The permit holder shall be responsible for all costs incurred as a result
of the burn, including but not limited to fire suppression and administrative fees.
Penalty, see §100.99
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-22
640.08 Revocation of Open Burning Permit. The open burning permit is subject to revocation at
the discretion of a police officer, the DNR forest officer, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal or Assistant
Fire Marshals. Reasons for revocation include but are not limited to a fire hazard
existing or developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of the permit being
violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance conditions developing during
the course of the burn or a fire smoldering with no flame present.
Penalty, see §100.99
640.09 Denial of Open Burning Permit. If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning
permit are not met during review of the application, it is determined that a practical alternative
method for disposal of the material exists, a pollution or nuisance condition would
result or if a burn event safety plan cannot be drafted to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief,
Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshals, these officers may deny the application for the
open burn permit.
640.10 Burning Ban or Air Quality Alert. No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted
when the city or DNR has officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire
conditions or when the MPCA has declared an Air Quality Alert.
Penalty, see §100.99
640.11 Rules And Laws Adopted by Reference. The provisions of M.S. §§ 88.16 to 88.22 and
the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code, Minn. Rules Ch. 1510, as these statutes and rules may
be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter as if fully set forth at this point.
640.12 Burning.
(A) Outdoor Fires/Recreational Fires.
(1) Outdoor Fires. No person shall build, ignite or maintain any outdoor fire of
any kind or character, or for any purpose whatsoever, in or upon any hazardous
fire area, except by the authority of a written permit from the Princeton Fire
Chief. Such a permit shall incorporate such terms and conditions which will
reasonably safeguard public safety and property. Regardless of permit, however,
no person shall build, ignite or maintain any outdoor fire in or upon any
hazardous fire area under the following conditions:
(a) When any high wind is blowing (exceeding 15 mph); or
(b) When there is no person aged 18 or older, who is capable of tending such
fire, present at all times to watch; or
(c) Such times as public announcement is made that there shall be no open
burning.
(2) Recreational Fires.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-23
(a) No permit will be required for outdoor fires within habited premises or
designated campsites where such fires are built in a permanent barbecue,
portable barbecue, outdoor fireplace, grill or a fire pit not to exceed three
feet in diameter and 30 inches in height. A fire pit shall have a perimeter
of which shall consist of rock, brick or other noncombustible material
and shall be a minimum of 15 feet from any structure, brush, tall grass or
other similar combustible material.
(b) Recreational fires must be at least ten feet from any property line that
abuts another private property or public property which contains public
facilities, a minimum of 30 feet from any tall grass, grain, brush or other
similar combustible material.
(c) Recreational fires must be attended by a person at all times.
(d) Water, sand or other material or device to extinguish the recreational fire
must be readily available at all times.
(e) Recreational fires must be extinguished to the point of being cold before
being left unattended.
(3) Grilling, Barbequing and the Like. No person shall use any permanent barbecue,
portable, barbecue, outdoor fireplace, grill or fire pit for the disposal of
leaves, garbage, cleanings, rubbish, trash, litter, organic waste, animal residue,
tires, treated, painted, varnished or other coated lumber, green or fresh cut
wood, or other solid or combustible waste material.
(B) Incinerators and Fireplaces.
(1) No person shall build, install, or maintain any incinerator, outdoor fireplace,
permanent barbecue or grill in any hazardous fire area without first securing
written approval of the Princeton Fire Chief.
(2) Every incinerator, outdoor fireplace, permanent barbecue or grill shall be maintained
in good repair and in a safe condition at all times. All openings in any
such appliance shall be provided with an approved spark arrester, screen or
door. If required for their property functioning, barbecues and grills may be
approved with certain openings left unprotected.
(3) External Solid fuel-fired heating devices
(a) Definition of terms
a. “External solid fuel-fired heating device” means a device designed
for solid fuel combustion so that usable heat is derived for the interior
of a building, and includes solid fuel-fired stoves, solid fuelfired
cooking stoves, combination fuel furnaces or boilers which
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-24
burn solid fuel, and outdoor wood burning stoves or units. Solid
fuel-fire heating devices do not include outdoor grills, fire rings,
fireplaces or interior natural gas-fired fireplace logs or woodburning
fireplaces, wood stoves or similar devices located in the interior
of a dwelling.
b. “Stacks” or “chimney” means any vertical structure incorporated
into a building, or upon an outdoor solid fuel-fired heating device,
and enclosing a flue or flues that carry off smoke or exhaust from a
solid fuel-fired heating device; especially that part of such a structure
extending above a roof.
c. “Person” means an individual, partnership, corporation, company
or other association.
(b) Requirements - Outdoor wood-burning furnaces or solid fuel-fired heating
devices designed and intended, and/or used, for the purpose of heating
the principal structure or another accessory structure on the premises
may be allowed to be installed within the City of Princeton only after
this issuance of an Interim Use Permit pursuant to the process outlined in
the City of Princeton’s Zoning Ordinance.
(c) Non-conforming use
a. The lawful use of any existing wood-burning unit or solid fuelfired
heating device existing at the time of the effective date of this
ordinance may be continued, although such use may not conform to
the provision of this ordinance.
b. No pre-existing, non –conforming wood-burning unit or solid fuelfired
heating device shall hereafter be extended, enlarged, or expanded.
c. At such time as the useful life of a non-conforming wood-burning
unit or solid fuel-fired heating device has elapsed or would need to
be repaired to function properly, the unit cannot be replaced and
must be abandoned, not used, and removed from the property immediately.
(d) Officers and Enforcement - City Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator,
Fire Chief, Police Chief and/or their designees, or designated officials
shall enforce the provisions of this sub-paragraph.
(C) Bonfires and Rubbish Fires.
(1) For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-25
(a) A “bonfire” means a fire larger than three feet in diameter and 30 inches
in height.
(b) “Rubbish” means useless or rejected construction debris including waste
material from the construction or demotion of buildings.
(2) A permit is required to kindle or authorize the kindling or maintenance of bonfires
or rubbish fires.
(3) No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize any
such fire to be kindled or maintained on any private land unless:
(a) The location is not less than 50 feet from any structure and adequate
provision is made to prevent fire from spreading to within 50 feet of any
structure; or
(b) The fire is contained in an approved waste burner located safely not less
than 15 feet from any structure.
(4) Bonfires and rubbish fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person
until the fire is extinguished. This person shall have a garden hose connected
to a water supply or other fire-extinguishing equipment readily available for
use.
(5) The Fire Chief may prohibit any or all bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires when
atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous.
(D) Additional Requirements.
(1) Hours of Burning. Waste matter shall not be disposed of by burning except
as follows:
(a) All burning shall take place during hours approved by the Princeton Fire
Chief.
(b) Recreational fires shall not be allowed to burn for more than four consecutive
hours in one day unless a garden hose and water supply or other
fire-extinguishing equipment is on hand and a competent person is in
constant attendance until all fire has been extinguished.
(c) Burning shall be confined to incinerators. EXCEPTION: All burning
shall be done in an approved incinerator, except that outdoor burning of
combustible waste matter other than paper may be done in the open if:
1. A permit to engage in such burning is obtained from the Princeton
Fire Chief.
2. Such burning is done at a distance of more than 50 feet from any
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-26
building, structure or other combustible waste matter.
3. A garden hose and water supply or other fire-extinguishing
equipment is on hand and a competent person is in constant attendance
until all fire has been extinguished. Applicants for such
permit must be in legal control of the lot or parcel of land on
which the burning is to be done.
(2) Offensive Smoke and Odors. Waste matter shall not be burned, under permit
or otherwise, which shall, in burning, cause or create a dense smoke, odor,
noxious fumes, gas and soot or cinders in unreasonable quantities.
(3) R-1 Occupancy Deck, Balcony or Patio Fire or Barbecues.
(a) No person shall kindle, maintain, or cause any fire or open flame on any
R-1 Occupancy deck or balcony above ground level or a combustible
ground floor patio immediately adjacent to or within 15 feet of any unit
except for the use of an attended propane barbecue grill.
(b) No person shall store any charcoal lighter fluid, liquid fuel, kerosene or
other similar heating or lighting chemicals on deck or similar combustible
surface.
(4) Attendant for Fire. Except in an approved incinerator, every bonfire, campfire
or burning of combustible waste matter shall be constantly attended by a
competent person and shall be completely extinguished before being left alone.
(5) Fire Hazard Prohibited. A person shall not construct, erect, install, maintain
or use any incinerator or barbecue pit or so burn any combustible material as to
constitute or occasion a fire hazard by the use or burning thereof or as to endanger
the life or property of any person hereby.
(6) Items Not Allowed to Burn. Items which are not allowed to be burned include:
paper (except when used as a starter), tarpaper, roofing, shingles, tires,
garbage, paint, varnish, stains, chemicals, cleaning supplies or petroleum based
products.
(7) Starting Fires; Conditions. If conditions, including weather, are not right,
fires should not be started.
(E) Responsibility for Enforcement.
(1) The Princeton Fire Chief shall be primarily responsible for the administration
and enforcement of this code. Under his or her direction, the Fire Department
shall enforce all ordinance of the jurisdiction pertaining to:
(a) The prevention of fires;
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-27
(b) The suppression or extinguishing of dangerous or hazardous fire;
(c) The storage, use and handling of explosive, flammable, combustible,
toxic, corrosive and other hazardous gaseous, solid and liquid materials;
(d) The installation and maintenance of automatic, manual and other private
fire alarm systems and fire-extinguishing equipment;
(e) The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes;
(f) The maintenance of fire protection and the elimination of fire hazards on
land and in buildings, structures and other property, including those under
construction;
(g) The means and adequacy of each exit in the event of fire, from factories,
schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters,
amphitheaters and all other places in which people work, live or
congregate from time to time for any purpose; and
(h) The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fire.
(2) The Princeton Fire Chief and designated members of the Princeton Fire Department
shall have the powers of a police officer in performing their duties
under this code. Further, members of the Princeton Police Department are also
authorized to issue citations or levy administrative fines under this code.
(3) The Princeton Fire Chief shall have the authority to stipulate conditions as he
deems necessary in all permits. If, in his or her judgment, public safety would
be better served, he or she may refuse to issue any such permit.
(F) Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor. Each day a violation exists shall be a separate violation. In all cases,
the violator may be held accountable for the costs of prosecution and the cost incurred
from suppression of the fire.
Chapter 645 - Other Nuisances
645.01 Assembly. No person or group of persons shall assemble or cause others to assemble on
any sidewalk, street, alley or parking lot generally open to the public so as to obstruct the
free passage of pedestrians or vehicular traffic thereon or to interfere with the use thereof.
645.02 Loitering. It shall be unlawful for any person, individually or as a member of any group of
persons, to loiter, stand, sit, lay or remain upon or within any street, sidewalk, crosswalk,
alley or parking lot generally open to the public or other public way or otherwise occupy
any portion thereof with the intent or purpose to block, obstruct or interfere with the free
passage of any pedestrians thereon or the orderly free-flow of vehicle traffic on the street or
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-28
public way.
Penalty, see §100.99
645.03 Freedom of Speech and Assembly Retained. Sections 645.01 through 645.02 shall not
be interpreted to restrict the lawful exercise of freedom of speech and assembly.
645.04 Penalty. Violation of §645.01 through 645.03 constitutes a petty misdemeanor, punishable
as provided by § 100.99.
645.05 Motor Vehicle Noise.
(A) For the purposes of this section, the following phrases are defined as follows:
(1) “Engine retarding brake” means a dynamic brake, Jake break, Jacobs brake, Cbrake,
Paccar brake, transmission brake or other similar engine retarding brake
system which alters the normal compression of the engine and subsequently releases
that compression.
(2) “Abnormal or excessive noise” shall mean:
(a) Distinct and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures
or endangers the comfort and repose of any person or precludes
their enjoyment of property or affects their property’s value;
(b) Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. § 169.69, as it may be amended
from time to time, which requires every motor vehicle to be equipped
with a muffler in good working order; or
(c) Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. § 169.693 and Minn. Rules
parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1060, as this statute and these rules may
be amended from time to time, which establish motor vehicle noise
standards.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge the exhaust or permit the discharge of
the exhaust from any motor vehicle except through a muffler that effectively prevents
abnormal or excessive noise and complies with all applicable state laws and regulations.
(C) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck to intentionally use an engine retarding
brake on any public highway, street, parking lot or alley within the city which
causes abnormal or excessive noise from the engine because of an illegally modified
or defective exhaust system, except in an emergency.
(D) M.S. §169.69 and 169.693 (motor vehicle noise limits) and Minn. Rules parts
7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as these statutes and rules may be amended from time
to time, are hereby adopted by reference.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-29
(E) Signs stating “Vehicle Noise Laws Enforced” may be installed at locations deemed
appropriate by the City Council to advise motorists of the prohibitions contained in
this section, except that no sign stating “Vehicle Noise Laws Enforced” shall be installed
on a state highway without a permit from the Minnesota Department of
Transportation. The provisions of this section are in full force and effect even if no
signs are installed.
Penalty, see §100.99
Chapter 650 - Fireworks
650.01 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) “Fireworks” will have the same definition as contained in M.S. §624.20; that being:
(1) The term “fireworks” means any substance or combination of substances or article
prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and includes blank cartridges,
toy cannons and toy canes in which explosives are used, the type of balloons
which require fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes,
skyrockets, Roman candles, daygo bombs, sparklers other than those specified
in division (A)(3) below, or other fireworks of like construction, and any fireworks
containing any explosive or inflammable compound, or any tablets or
other device containing any explosive substance and commonly used as fireworks.
(2) The term “fireworks” shall not include toy pistols, toy guns, in which paper
caps containing 25/100 grains or less of explosive compound are used and toy
pistol caps which contain less than 20/100 grains of explosive mixture.
(3) The term also does not include wire or wood sparklers of not more than 100
grams of mixture per item, other sparkling items which are non-explosive and
non-aerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical mixture per tube or a total
of 200 grams or less for multiple tubes, snakes and glow worms, smoke devices
or trick noisemakers which include paper streamers, party poppers, string
poppers, snappers and drop pops, each consisting of not more than twenty-five
hundredths grains of explosive mixture. The use of items listed in this paragraph
is not permitted on public property. This paragraph does not authorize
the purchase of items listed in it by persons younger than 18 years of age. The
age of a purchaser of items listed in this paragraph must be verified by photographic
identification.
(4) The term “explosive fireworks” means any fireworks that contain pyrotechnic
or flash powder, gunpowder, black powder or any other explosive compound
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-30
constructed to produce detonation or deflagration.
650.02 Permit Required. No person shall sell or possess for sale fireworks without first having an
annual permit from the city.
(A) The designated Fire Official shall give final approval or denial of an application for
the manufacture, storage for commercial purposes or sale of fireworks within 30 days
of such application being made to the city.
(B) Permits shall be issued for the calendar year applied for and shall be issued on May
1st.
(C) Prior to processing the application, a criminal records check shall be conducted. Neither
the applicant(s) nor the responsible parties for the permit shall have been convicted
of a felony or a fire or fireworks-related misdemeanor within the last three
years. All information resulting from said Minnesota Computerized Criminal History
Check will be maintained at the Princeton Police Department.
(D) Prior to processing the application, the designated Fire Official shall determine that
the proposed location is code compliant.
(E) The applicant shall include a letter from the person legally responsible for the property
on which the fireworks related activity would occur. The letter shall grant permission
to the applicant for the use of the property.
650.03 Sales and Storage of Fireworks.
(A) No person shall sell or store fireworks within 100 feet of any fuel dispensing apparatus.
Fireworks sales and display shall not be permitted within malls, within buildings
where alcohol is sold, and within assembly areas such as halls, theaters, churches
or schools. The designated Fire Official shall determine compliance.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any seller of any fireworks to permit smoking at any site containing
fireworks. “No Smoking” signs must be conspicuously posted and approved
and fire extinguishers must be available for use.
(C) In buildings that do not have an approved automated sprinkling system, retail sales
displays of fireworks shall be limited to a gross weight of 400 pounds of fireworks
and packaging. In buildings that do contain an approved automated sprinkling system,
the amount of fireworks contained in retail sales displays shall be a maximum of
1,000 gross pounds of fireworks and packaging.
(D) The requirements of this chapter are in addition to any requirements imposed by any
building and zoning regulations, fire codes or state law.
(E) Only persons 18 years of age or older may purchase fireworks and the age of the purchaser
must be verified by photographic identification.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-31
(F) Exterior storage, display, sales or transient sales of fireworks are permitted subject to
a site plan review. Site plans shall be submitted for review and approval a minimum
of 30 days before display. A distance of 100 feet shall be provided from the exterior
display to adjacent buildings, combustibles or flammable liquids. No manufacturing,
sales or storage for commercial purposes shall occur on residentially zoned property
or properties used for educational purposes or assemblies.
(G) A list of all consumer fireworks displayed for sale and stored on the property shall be
available at all times. The list shall document the name, weight and quantity of the
fireworks and be accompanied by the material safety data sheets.
(H) Manufacturing, warehouse buildings or sale displays in excess of the quantities listed
in division (C) above for retail consumer fireworks shall be classified as an H occupancy
as defined in the Building Code and protected as such, similar to explosives
and aerosols and in accordance with Explosives Article 77 of the Fire Code.
(I) A handout describing fireworks shall be provided to each consumer purchasing fireworks.
650.04 Use and Possession.
(A) It is unlawful to use, fire or discharge any fireworks along the route of and during any
parade, in any place of public assembly, on any public property, or in any commercial/
industrial zoning district, except as provided in § 650.05, in accordance with
M.S. §§ 624.2 through 624.25.
(B) It is unlawful at any time to throw, toss or aim any fireworks at any person, animal,
vehicles or other thing or object, or used in any manner that may threaten or cause
possible harm to life or property.
(C) The discharge of fireworks shall be prohibited inside a building and within 15 feet of
any building.
(D) The Fire Official may ban fireworks if dry or windy conditions occur.
(E) Juveniles may not possess fireworks unless under the direct supervision of a responsible
adult.
(F) Fireworks may not be discharged in such a manner that may create a nuisance nor between
the hours of 12:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Fireworks use shall also be subject to any
additional ordinances such as noise and/or assembly.
650.05 Fireworks Displays.
(A) Fireworks displays by the city, Fair Association or other organizations, are allowed in
accordance with M.S. §624.2 through 624.25.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-32
(1) A fireworks display may be conducted only when supervised by an operator
certified by the state’s Fire Marshal.
(2) An application for a permit must be made in writing to the Municipal Clerk at
least 15 days in advance of the date of the display.
(3) After a permit has been granted, sales, possession, use and distribution of fireworks
for a display are lawful for that purpose only. A permit is not transferable.
650.99 Penalties.
(A) Materials that violate and/or pose a threat to public safety may be confiscated and destroyed.
Costs associated with disposal shall be assessed back to the property owner
or permit holder.
(B) Violations of this chapter or state statute may result in revocation of the permit.
(C) Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Each incident shall be a separate violation.
Chapter 655 –Nuisances Caused by Sound
655.01 It is declared to be a public nuisance for any person to make or assist in the making of any
nuisance noise or any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or any sound which annoys, disturbs,
or affects the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others in the city.
655.02 Nuisance Noises. The following are declared to be nuisance noises:
(A) Horns or Sirens. The sounding of any siren or any horn, siren, or other signaling device
on a motor vehicle, except in cases of eminent danger or emergency, or blowing
of a locomotive whistle or steam whistle, except to give notice of the time to begin or
stop work or as a warning of fire or danger.
(B) Radios, Stereos, Tape Recorders, Etc. The use or operation of a radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, stereo, tape recorder, or other machine or device
used for production or reproduction of sound at a volume in excess of that reasonably
necessary for the convenient hearing of the person or persons in the room, vehicle, or
changer in which the same is being operated.
The operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, stereo,
tape recorder, or other machine or device for the reproducing or producing of sound
between 11:00 pm. and 7:00 a.m. shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
ordinance if sound therefrom is plainly audible:
1. In an apartment or hallway of a multi-family building adjacent to the unit
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-33
where the device is operating.
2. At the boundary of the real property on which the device is operated.
3. At a distance of 50 feet from any motor vehicle in which the device is operating.
(C) Loudspeakers, Amplifiers, Sound Trucks. The use or operation of any loudspeaker,
sound amplifier, sound truck, or vehicle equipped with sound amplifying devices
or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is used
to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure, business, vehicle, or
other area.
(D) Human Noise. Yelling, shouting, screaming, whistling, or singing at any time or place
so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of any persons in any office,
dwelling, hotel, motel, other place of residence, or in the vicinity of the source.
(E) Animal Noises. The frequent or continued barking, howling, or other noise from any
animal or bird not confined within a building.
(F) Vehicle Loading and Exhaust. The discharge of the exhaust of any motor vehicle
into the ambient air except through a muffler which is free of holes, cracks, or other
defects. The operation, loading, or unloading of any motor vehicle in such manner as
to create loud and unnecessary grading, grinding, rattling, or other noise which shall
disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.
(G) Construction Activities. The erection, demolition, alternation, or repair of any
building or earth moving or excavation activities occurring between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday or on Sunday except as undertaken by
persons working on single family residences occupied by them or as authorized by
the building official based upon emergency for the protection of health and safety.
(H) Schools, Courts, Churches, and Hospitals. Any activity which generates sound occurring
adjacent a school, court, church, or hospital while the same are in use and
which unreasonably interferes with the use thereof.
(I) Loud Parties. Sound emanating from any party or gathering between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of a sufficient volume so as to disturb the peace, quiet, or
repose of other persons within the city.
It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this ordinance if the sound of the
party or gathering is audible to a human ear at a distance of 50 feet from the building,
dwelling unit, or area from which the sound emanates.
655.03 Persons Liable
Any person who participate in a party or gather which generates nuisance noise shall be
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-34
guilty of maintaining a public nuisance. In the event that any party or gathering is determined
by a city official to generate nuisance noise, all persons, except the owner or permanent
occupant, shall promptly leave the premises in an orderly manner.
A violation of this ordinance shall be deemed to be the act of the owner of the residential
dwelling unit wherein it occurs, as well as the persons on the premises who violate the ordinance,
except that the owner of a dwelling unit occupied by others shall be liable only for
those violations occurring after a written notice of violation of this ordinance shall have
been received.
655.04. Exceptions. Activities for which a permit has been obtained from the City and activities
coordinated through the Princeton Area Chamber of Commerce, Mille Lacs County Fairgrounds,
and/or Princeton Speedway and approved by the City shall be exempt from this
Ordinance, provided that such activities are limited to those activities reasonably within the
scope of the City’s permit or approval.
655.05 Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor
and shall be punished as provided by §100.99.
Chapter 660 – Hours of Operation for City Parks and Recreation Facilities
660.01 Definitions.
Park – City owned real estate purchased or dedicated for use by the public for recreation or
leisure activities.
Recreation Facilities – City owned buildings or equipment purchased, constructed, leased,
or dedicated for use by the public for recreation or leisure activities.
660.02 Hours of Operation
(A) All city park and recreation facilities shall be open and available for public use from
sunrise until 10:00 p.m., at which time they shall be closed to all people and activities.
(B) The following exceptions are hereby made:
(1) Riverside Park – open at sunrise; close at 10:00 p.m., except that overnight
camping in the campground is permitted.
(2) Triangle Park - open at sunrise; close at 10:00 p.m., except that overnight
camping in the campground is permitted.
(3) Mark Park – open at sunrise, close at 10:00 p.m., except to accommodate
league softball and baseball games only.
(4) Civic Center – by reservation and payment of rent, open at sunrise and close at
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-35
1:00 a.m.
660.99 Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor
and shall be punished as provided by §100.99.
Chapter 665 –Alcoholic Beverages in Riverside Park and Campground
665.01 Definitions. Amended 10-25-12 ord #693
“Alcoholic Beverage” – Any liquid for drinking which contains any part alcohol, whether
it be intoxicating or non-intoxicating.
“Riverside Campground” – That area of publicly owned property south of 3rd street
North, East of Rum River Drive, North of 2nd Street North and west of the Rum River.
“Riverside Park” – That area of publicly owned property south of Minnesota State Highway
95, east of Rum River Drive, north of 3rd Street North, and west of the Rum River.
“Display” – To place in view, exhibit, or show to the public an object in such a manner as
one does not have to go out of one’s way, strain, or maneuver into position to see said object.
665.02 Prohibition. The consumption and/or possession of alcoholic beverages or container shall
at all times be prohibited in Riverside Park but shall be allowed from noon until 10 p.m by
registered campers in the Riverside campground. Amended 10-25-12, ord #693
665.99 Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor
and shall be punished as provided by §100.99.
Chapter 670 – Peddlers, Hawkers, Solicitors, Transient Merchants, and Food Vendors
Amended 9-11-14 #712, Amended 5-11-17 #750, amended 9-13-18 #767
670.01 Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the conduct of selling food,
goods and merchandise in any manner where the sale or solicitation does not occur within a
building, store, or structure or outside of a structure on property owned or leased by a business
entity and properly zoned for commercial uses. The purpose of this chapter is also not
to regulate sales at craft shows, flea markets, farmer’s market, trade shows, fairs or similar
events sponsored by a bone fide civic group, club or organization being held on non-public
property. Similar events being held on public municipal property must have the prior permission
of the City Council. This chapter does not regulate personal and household effects
sold at a “garage” or estate sale held at or in a residential property which is regulated under
Ordinance 550.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-36
670.02 Definitions. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply.
1. “Door-To-Door Advocacy” - includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering
as a method for the dissemination of religious, political and other ideas.
2. “Mobile Food Unit” means a food and beverage service establishment that is a
vehicle mounted unit, such as:
a. Motorized or trailered, operating no more than twenty-one (21) days annually
at any one place, or operating more than twenty-one (21) days annually at
any one place with the approval of the regulatory authority as defined in
Minnesota Rules, part 4626.0020, subpart 70; and a self-contained unit, in
which food is stored, cooked, and prepared for direct sale to the consumer.
b. Operated in conjunction with a permanent business licensed under Chapter
157 or Chapter 128A of the Minnesota State Statutes at the site of the permanent
business by the same individual or company, and readily movable,
without disassembling, for transport to another location; and a selfcontained
unit, in which food is stored, cooked, and prepared for direct sale
to the consumer.
c. Food Cart: A food and beverage service establishment that is a nonmotorized
vehicle self-propelled by the operator.
d. Ice Cream novelty Truck: A motor vehicle utilized as the point of retail
sales of pre-wrapped or prepackaged ice cream, frozen yogurt, frozen custard,
flavored frozen water or similar frozen dessert products.
3. 2. “Peddler” - a person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, businessto-
business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose
of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or attempting to
sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares, products, merchandise
or other personal property that the person is carrying or otherwise
transporting. The term peddler shall have the same meaning as the term hawker.
4. 3. “Person” - any natural individual, group, organization, corporation, partnership
or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations, partnerships
and associations, the term shall include each member, officer, partner, associate,
agent or employee.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-37
5 .“Regular Business Day” - any day during which the City Hall is normally open
for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law
shall not be counted as regular business days.
6. “Solicitor” - a person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, businessto-
business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose
of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products, merchandise,
other personal property or services of which the person may be carrying
or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by other
means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time. The
absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of this
section if the actual purpose of the person’s activity is to obtain or attempt to
obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall have the same meaning as the
term “canvasser.”
7. “Transient Merchant” - a person who temporarily sets up business to sell or
purchase out of a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, hotel/motel, other portable shelter,
or empty storefront for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling
or attempting to sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise
or other personal property, and who does not remain or intend to remain in any
one location for more than 14 consecutive days. The purpose of this chapter is
also not to regulate sales at craft shows, flea markets, farmer’s market, trade
shows, fairs or similar events sponsored by a bone fide civic group, club or organization
being held on non-public property. Similar events being held on
public municipal property must have the prior permission of the City Council.
8. "Bone Fide Civic Group, Club or Organization" - A charitable, civic, educational
or political organization with offices in the Princeton area and which
primarily serves the greater Princeton area with its services.
Exceptions to Definitions.
A. For the purpose of the requirements of this Section, the terms MOBILE FOOD UNIT,
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person
selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products, merchandise
or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by the wholesaler. The
terms also shall not apply to any person who is personally known by the person being
solicited or who is first contacted by the person being solicited.
B. Persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as garage sales, rummage sales,
or estate sales, as well as those persons participating in an organized multi-person bazaar,
flea market, farmer’s market or festival, shall be exempt from the definitions of
MOBILE FOOD UNIT, PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, and TRANSIENT MERCHANTS,
as shall any person conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer,
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-38
or any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the definitions
for the scope of this Section shall not excuse any person from complying with
any other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance.
C. Nothing in this section prohibits or restricts door-to-door advocacy. Persons engaging
in door-to-door advocacy are not required to register as solicitors under section 670.06
of this Section.
670.03 Licensing; Exemptions. – amended 5-11-17 #750
A. City License Required. Except as otherwise provided for by this section, no person
shall conduct business as either a mobile food unit, peddler, solicitor or a transient
merchant without first obtaining a license from the City. This license is nontransferable.
1. Charitable, Civic, Non Profit, and educational or political organizations with
offices in the Princeton area and which primarily serves the greater Princeton
area with its services need not be licensed, but are required to register with the
City under Subdivision 6 of this section.
2. Mobile food units or transient merchants operating on private property need not
be licensed, but are required to register with the City under Subdivision 6 of
this section.
B. Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as a mobile food unit,
peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall be made sufficiently prior to when the
applicant wishes to begin conducting business such that the application can be thoroughly
processed. Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the
City Council and available from the office of the City Clerk. All applications shall be
signed by the applicant and shall include the following information:
1. Applicant’s full legal name and date of birth;
2. All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to which the
applicant officially answers;
3. A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color, height, weight, and
distinguishing marks and features);
4. Full address and telephone number of applicant’s permanent residence;
5. Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed or operated
by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent;
6. Full address and telephone number of applicant’s regular place of business (if
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-39
any);
7. The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a license and a
general description of the items to be sold or services to be provided;
8. Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license;
9. The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business, and if the
applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days the applicant will be
conducting business in the City.
10. Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant can be reached
while conducting business within the City, including the location where a mobile
food unit or transient merchant intends to set up business;
11. Written permission of the property owner or the property owner’s agent for any
property to be used by a mobile food unit or transient merchant;
12. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted within the last
five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for violation of any
state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than traffic offenses;
13. A list of the three most recent locations where the applicant has conducted
business as a mobile food unit, peddler or transient merchant;
14. Proof of any required county, state or federal license;
15. A general description of the items to be sold or services to be provided;
16. The applicant’s driver’s license number or other acceptable form of
identification;
17. The license plate number, registration information and vehicle identification
number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the licensed business and a
description of the vehicle;
18. All additional information deemed necessary and applicable by the City Council.
19. A photocopy of the driver’s license for each and every member, officer, partner,
associate, agent or employee engaged in the vender activity.
C. Fee. All applications for a license under this Section shall be accompanied by the fee
established by ordinance.
D. Procedure. Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of the license fee,
the City Clerk shall determine if the application is complete. An application is deterCity
of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-40
mined to be complete only if all required information is provided. If the City Clerk determines
that the application is incomplete, the City Clerk shall inform the applicant
what required information is missing. If the application is complete, the City Clerk
shall order any investigation, including background checks, necessary to verify the information
provided with the application. Upon completion of the background check,
the City Clerk shall issue the license unless there are grounds for denying the license
under Section 670.04 of this Section, in which case the Clerk must deny the license. If
the City Clerk denies the license, the applicant must be notified in writing of the decision,
the reason for denial, and of the applicant’s right to appeal the denial by requesting,
within 20 days of receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing before the City
Council. The City Council shall hear the appeal within 20 days of the date of the request.
The decision of the City Council following the public hearing can be appealed
by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a Writ of Certiorari.
E. Duration. An annual license granted under this Section shall be valid for one calendar
year from the date of issue. All other licenses granted under this Section shall be valid
only during the time period indicated on the license.
F. License Exemptions.
1. No license shall be required of any person going from house-to-house, door-todoor,
business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of place-to-place when
the activity is for the purpose of exercising that person’s State or Federal Constitutional
rights such as the freedom of speech, press, and religion, except that this
exemption may be lost if the person’s exercise of Constitutional rights is merely
incidental to a commercial activity.
2. Professional fundraisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt person or
group shall not be exempt from the licensing requirements of this Section.
3. No license shall be required of any person or group that is a tax-exempt mobile
food unit, peddler, solicitor or transient merchant. Registration is still required
pursuant to 670.06 of this Section.
4. Any person claiming to be exempt from the licensing or registration requirements
of this section shall, when requested, present to the City Clerk proof of
qualification for such exemption.
5. For Community Events, the City will request the sponsoring group to provide
contact information and necessary state licenses on Mobile Food units and Transient
Merchants to the City Clerk.
670.04 License Ineligibility. The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-41
Section:
A. The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having obtained any state or
Federal license (if required).
B. The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the information requested by the
City as a part of the application, or the failure to sign the application, or the failure to
pay the required fee at the time of application.
C. The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the date of application
for any violation of any federal or state statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance,
which adversely reflects on the person’s ability to conduct the business for which the license
is being sought in an honest and legal manner. Those violations shall include but
not be limited to burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices,
and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person.
D. A person and/or company whose license for a regulated activity was revoked by the city
or another governmental body within five years before the application date.
E. A person and/or company who has been denied a license for regulated activity by the
city or another governmental body because of circumstances that occurred within five
years before the application date.
F. The Applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad business
reputation shall include, but not be limited to, the existence of more than three complaints
against the applicant with the Better Business Bureau, the Attorney General’s
Office, or other similar business or consumer rights office or agency, within the proceeding
12 months, or three complaints filed against the applicant within the preceding
five years.
670.05 Suspension and Revocation.
A. Generally. Any license or Certificate of Registration issued under this section may be
suspended or revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the
following:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the application form.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course of the
licensed activity.
3. Failure to exhibit the license or Certificate of Registration when requested to do so
by any prospective customer or city employee.
4. Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could have been denied
under Subdivision 670.04 of this Section.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-42
5. Violation of any provision of this section.
B. Multiple Persons Under One License. The suspension or revocation of any license
issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct business as mobile
food units, peddlers, solicitors, or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall
serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person’s authority to conduct
business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee whose license is
suspended or revoked.
C. Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this Section, the City
shall provide the license holder with written notice of the alleged violations and inform
the licensee of the right to a hearing on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered
in person or by mail to the permanent residential address listed on the license
application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business address provided on
the license application.
D. Public Hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in of this Subdivision, the licensee
shall have the right to request a public hearing. If no request for a hearing is received
by the City Clerk within 10 regular business days following the service of the notice,
the City may proceed with the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed
notices, service shall be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the
mail. If a public hearing is requested within the stated timeframe, a hearing shall be
scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within three regular business
days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its decision.
E. Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to the health or
safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a mobile food unit, peddler,
Solicitor, or transient merchant licensed under this Section, the City Council may immediately
suspend the person’s license and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent
public hearing as prescribed in Subparagraph D. of this Subdivision.
F. Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this section shall
have the right to appeal that decision in court.
670.06. Registration. Any person exempt from the licensing requirements of this under Subdivision
670.03 of this Section, shall be required to register with the City. Persons engaging
in door-to-door advocacy shall not be required to register. Registration shall be made on
the same form required for a license application, but no fee shall be required. Immediately
upon completion of the registration form, the City Clerk shall issue to the registrant
a Certificate of Registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of Registration are
nontransferable.
670.07. Prohibited Activities. No mobile food unit, peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall
conduct business or otherwise behave in any of the following manners:
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-43
A. Calling attention to the business or items to be sold by means of blowing any horn or
whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by the use of a loudspeaker system, so as to be
unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
B. Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public right-of-way.
C. Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health, safety and welfare of
any individual or the general public.
D. Failing to provide proof of identification and license or Certificate of Registration,
when requested; or using the license or Certificate of Registration of another person.
E. Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service being sold,
including untrue statements of endorsement. No mobile food unit, peddler or transient
merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the City solely based on the City
having issued a license to that person.
F. Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to otherwise conduct
business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating
or abusive.
670.08. Exclusion by Placard. No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do
so by the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose of
conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant when the property is
marked with a sign or placard with print of at least 48 point in size stating “No Peddlers,”
“No Solicitors,” “No Transient Merchants,” “Peddlers and Solicitors Prohibited,”
or other comparable statement. No person other than the property owner or tenant
shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section.
670.09 Severability. In the event any portion of this chapter is hereafter declared or held to be
invalid, that shall not affect the remaining provisions of this chapter which shall remain
in full force and effect.
670.10 Restrictions
A. Transient merchants.
1. Except for those people specified in Chapter 670, a Transient Merchant must
clearly display a city issued license.
2 Off-street parking required. No license for a transient merchant shall be issued
for sales from any location which does not have sufficient parking for customers
or for areas where customer parking would interfere with normal traffic
flow.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-44
3 Location near intersection. No transient merchant license shall be issued, and
no sales shall take place, if the proposed location for transient merchant sales is
within 150 feet of any intersection.
4. Duration of sales. No transient merchant license shall be issued for more than
365 days. At the time of the application for the transient merchant license, the
applicant shall state the times within the license period to be used by the applicant.
5. Hours of Transient Merchant operations allowed - 8am to 9pm
6. Operation on public property. The City Council must approve a transient merchant
to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise on any public
lands or public right-of-way within the city.
7. Operation on private property. No transient merchant shall sell or offer for sale
any goods, wares, or merchandise within the city from a stationary location on
private property at any location where such sales would not be permitted by
Chapter 670, and without first registering with the city.
8. The merchandise displayed shall not occupy more than 100 square feet unless
approved by council.
9. Overnight storage. No overnight storage of transient merchant equipment or
merchandise shall be permitted unless approved by council.
10. Signs. No signage shall violate the provisions of this Code relating to size and
number of business signs.
B. Peddlers and solicitors, and non-profits
1. Except for those people specified in Chapter 670, a peddler, solicitor and nonprofit
must carry the city issued license and a driver's license or state identification
card.
2. Hours for unsolicited calls are limited to Monday through Saturday, 10:00 am to
6:00 p.m.
3. Only one peddler, solicitor or Non-profit shall approach each residence and no
one from the same company can approach the same residence again unless invited
back by the resident.
4. The license is not transferable to another person.
5. Must not conduct business in a manner that creates a health or safety hazard.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-45
6. Must conduct business in a reasonably courteous manner at all times, must not
engage in offensive, obscene, or abusive language, must not push open a door not
opened by an occupant, must not place any portion of a person's body through an
opened doorway without the invitation of an occupant, and must not physically
attempt to stop an occupant from closing a door.
7. Must immediately leave private property when requested to do so by an occupant
and must leave immediately upon completion of a transaction or an unsuccessful
attempt to contact the occupant.
8. When entering onto a residential property go directly to the most visible door of
the house, unless there is an adult present outside of the house or in an open garage.
9. A person conducting business shall not make untrue statements to the people contacted
regarding the purpose of the contact, orders placed by the neighbors, or the
goods or services offered.
10. Must not make statements to the people contacted indicating or implying city
endorsement of their activities or products by the city.
11. No shouting, blowing a horn, ringing a bell, or use any sound devices upon any
of the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places of the city or upon any private
premises in the city.
D. For mobile food units
1. State License. Mobile food units shall hold a valid license from the State of
Minnesota Department of Health or Department of Agriculture. Any conditions
of the State Health Department shall be incorporated into the license issued under
this Section, in addition to any other conditions by the City of Princeton.
2. Insurance. A certificate of insurance evidencing the following forms of insurance:
I. Commercial General Liability insurance, including Products and Completed
Operations coverage, with a limit of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000) each occurrence/two million dollars ($2,000,000) aggregate.
II. Automobile liability insurance with a limit of not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000) combined single limit.
III . The City of Princeton shall be named as an additional insured and provided
a certificate of insurance.
3. Hold harmless. A mobile food unit operating on city property, including public
right-of-way, must submit a signed statement that the license shall hold harmless
the city and its officers and employees, and shall indemnify the city and its officCity
of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-46
ers and employees for any claims for damage to property or injury to persons
which may be occasioned by any activity carried on under the terms of the license.
4. Duration of sales. An annual license shall be valid for one year but the mobile
food unit can’t operate in, or in front of, the same location for more than 21 days
each year within the City of Princeton
5. Overnight storage. No overnight storage of a mobile food unit shall be permitted
unless approved by council.
6. Signs. No signage shall violate the provisions of this Code relating to size and
number of business signs.
7. Noise. No shouting, blowing a horn, ringing a bell, or use of any sound devices
upon any of the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places of the city or upon
any private premises in the city. Ice cream trucks traveling through a residential
district may have outdoor music or noise-making devices to announce their presence.
8. Parking. Mobile food units must be located on a paved surface. A mobile food
unit may not operate in a traffic lane, on a sidewalk, or in any location which
causes an obstruction of traffic, such as queuing of patrons or advancement of
vehicles. A mobile food unit may operate on eligible public streets and occupy no
more than two parking spaces. No parking or sales shall take place within 60 feet
of an intersection of two or more streets, within 30 feet of a driveway that enters
a public street.
9. Hours of operation shall be allowed from 8:00 am to 9pm, except in a residential
district in which sales shall be allowed from 10:00 am to 8:00 pm.
10. Waste Disposal. Mobile food units shall provide waste disposal and clean up all
litter and garbage generated by the mobile food unit before moving from the location.
11. Self-Containment. Mobile food units can’t connect to public utilities. Any generators
must be self-contained.
12. Inspections. Mobile food units shall comply with all applicable Fire Codes and
may be inspected by a City Fire Official prior to operation.
13. Locations. Mobile food units shall be allowed in public right-of-way only in
zoning districts where retail sales are allowed as permitted or special uses under
the city’s zoning code. Except that mobile food units may be located on privately
owned property in the Commercial, Industrial, and Downtown zoning areas of
the city with registration with the City.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-47
14. City parks. Mobile food units are allowed in city parks, with the exception of
Mark Park, which requires City Council approval.
15. Mobile food units may not provide external seating unless located in an industrial
zoning district.
16. Ice cream novelty trucks are allowed to operate within the public right-of-way in
residential districts.
17. Mobile Food Units are prohibited from vending activities within 500 feet of an
Community event unless they are specifically authorized by the event organizer
to participate in the event.
18. Mobile Food Units may not be located within 200 feet of any same or similar
food establishment as measured from the Mobile Food Unit to the food service
building.
670.99. Enforcement and Penalties.
A. It shall be the duty of the Princeton Police Department to require any person
observed in a mobile food unit, peddling, hawking, or soliciting, and who is not
known by such officer to have obtained a license hereunder, to produce said license
and to enforce the provisions of this ordinance against person found to be violating
the same.
B. Any person failing to exhibit his license when requested by the Princeton Police
Department or any officer thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Chapter 675- Alcoholic Beverages in Mark Park Softball Field Areas
675.01 Definitions.
Mark Park Softball Field Areas – that area within 75’ (seventy five feet) of the Concession
Stand and the fenced in area for softball play.
675.02 Prohibition. The consumption and/or possession of alcoholic beverages or containers
and/or food items not purchased from the concession stand shall be prohibited in the Mark
Park Softball Field areas during those times when the concession stand is open.
675.99 Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor
and shall be punished as provided by §100.99.
Chapter 685 Adult Establishments
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-48
685.01: Authority. The United States Supreme Court has ruled that sexually-explicit speech, including
nude dancing, is entitled to some level of protection under the First Amendment to
the United States Constitution. As a result, municipalities may not ban adult establishments.
However, the Supreme Court has ruled that municipalities may adopt contentneutral
zoning and licensing provisions to regulate and control the adverse secondary effects
of adult establishments on the municipality.
685.02: Findings of the City Council of the City Of Princeton. The Minnesota Attorney General’s
Office and the cities of St. Paul, Alexandria, and Rochester, Minnesota, as well as Indianapolis,
Indiana; Phoenix, Arizona; Los Angeles, California; Seattle, Washington, St.
Croix County, Wisconsin; and Adams County, Colorado; have conducted studies of the impact
of adult establishments on their respective communities. These studies have concluded
that adult establishments have an adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhoods.
Those impacts include increased crime rates, lower property values, increased transiency,
neighborhood blight and potential health risks. The City Council of the City of Princeton is
relying on such studies, recognizing that the same or similar adverse impacts could occur in
a small city such as Princeton. The findings are based upon the experiences of other cities
where such businesses have located. Based on these studies, the City Council of the City of
Princeton adopts the following findings regarding the need to regulate adult establishments:
(A) Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts on the types set forth above.
(B) The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments tend to diminish if adult establishments
tend to diminish if adult establishments are governed by location and licensing
requirements.
(C). The City may adopt regulations to promote the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare.
(D). The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be promoted by regulations
governing adult establishments.
(E). Adult establishments can contribute to increased criminal activity and police calls in
the area in which they are located, taxing law enforcement services.
(F). Adult establishments can be used as fronts for prostitution and other criminal activity.
The experience of other cities indicates that the proper management and operation
of such businesses can, however, minimize this risk.
(G). Adult establishments can cause or contribute to public health problems by the presence
of live adult entertainment in conjunction with food and/or drink on the same
premises.
(H). Many members of the public perceive areas within which adult establishments are
located to be less safe than other areas that do not have such uses.
(I). The adverse impact that adult establishments have on the surrounding area diminishes
as the distance between populated areas and public gathering places and the adult
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-49
establishments increases.
(J). A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of
reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the adult establishment. A
licensing procedure will place an incentive on the operators to require that the adult
establishment is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its
patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the City. It is appropriate to require
reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually-oriented
business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring
therein.
(K). The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexuallyrelated
crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that
conduct in contravention of this Ordinance.
(L). The barring of individuals with sexually-related criminal convictions from the management
of adult establishments for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents
conduct which may lead to the transmission of sexually-transmitted diseases.
(M). The general health, safety, and welfare of the community is promoted by prohibiting
nudity in adult establishments. This prohibition is based on concerns of potential adverse
effects such as prostitution, the transmission of sexually-transmitted diseases,
exposure to minors, obscenity and unsanitary conditions in public places.
(N). Small cities and towns experience many of the same adverse impacts of adult establishments
present in larger communities.
685.03: Purpose. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to regulate adult establishments to promote the
health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the Town and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to:
(A). Prevent criminal activity within the City;
(B). To allow for efficient and effective law enforcement services in the City;
(C). Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its consequent adverse effect on real estate
values of properties within the neighborhood;
(D). To locate adult establishments a suitable distance from residential areas, schools,
parks and places of worship;
(E). To provide a content-neutral, objective, licensing program that allows the City to
monitor adult establishments for violations of building, health and criminal codes;
(F). Prevent ownership of adult establishments by persons with prior, relevant criminal
convictions.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-50
685.04: Reasonable Opportunity. The provisions of this Ordinance do not prohibit adult establishments
from having a reasonable opportunity to locate in the city. This Ordinance is not
for the purpose of, nor is it intended to, impose a limitation or restriction on the content of
any communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the
intent nor effect of this Ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials
protected by the First Amendment or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of
adult-oriented entertainment to their intended market.
685.05: Definitions. For purposes of this Ordinance the terms defined in this section have the
meanings given them.
(A). “Adult Establishment.”
(1) any business that devotes a substantial or significant portion of its inventory,
stock in trade, or publicly-displayed merchandise, or devotes a substantial or
significant portion of its floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms,
basements, or any portion of the business not open to the public) to, or
derives a substantial or significant portion of its gross revenues from items,
merchandise, devices or other materials distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on material depicting, exposing, simulating, describing, or relating to
Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas; or
(2) any business that engages in any Adult Use as defined in this section.
(B). “Adult Use” means any of the activities and businesses described below:
(1) "Adult Body Painting Studio." An establishment or business that provides the
service of applying paint, ink, or other substance, whether transparent or nontransparent,
to the body of a patron when the person is nude.
(2) “Adult Bookstore." An establishment or business used for the barter, rental, or
sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape,
videotape, movies, or motion picture film if a substantial or significant portion
of its inventory, stock in trade, or publicly-displayed merchandise consists of,
or if a substantial or significant portion of its floor area (not including storerooms,
stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business not
open to the public) is devoted to, or if substantial or significant portion of its
gross revenues is derived from items, merchandise, devices or materials that
are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, exposing,
simulating, describing, or relating to Specified Sexual Activities or Specified
Anatomical Areas.
(3) "Adult Cabaret." A business or establishment that provides dancing or other
live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on: (1) the
depiction of nudity, Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas;
or (2) the presentation, display, or depiction of matter that seeks to evoke,
arouse, or excite sexual or erotic feelings or desire.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-51
(4) "Adult Companionship Establishment." A business or establishment that provides
the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities
or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(5) "Adult Conversation/Rap Parlor." A business or establishment that provides
the services of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or
Specified Anatomical Areas.
(6) "Adult Health/Sport Club." A health/sport club that is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical
Areas.
(7) "Adult Hotel or Motel." A hotel or motel that presents material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(8) "Adult Massage Parlor/Health Club." A massage parlor or health club that provides
massage services distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified
Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(9) "Adult Modeling Studio." A business or establishment that provides live models
who, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification,
engage in Specified Sexual Activities or display Specified Anatomical Areas
while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed,
or otherwise depicted.
(10) "Adult Motion Picture Arcade." Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited where coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically
controlled or operated still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are used to show images to five or fewer persons
per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing Specified
Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(11) "Adult Motion Picture Theater." A motion picture theater that as a prevailing
practice presents material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas for observation by
patrons.
(12) "Adult Novelty Business." An establishment or business that devotes a substantial
or significant portion of its inventory, stock in trade, or publiclydisplayed
merchandise or devotes a substantial or significant portion of its
floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any
portion of the business not open to the public) to, or derives a substantial or
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-52
significant portion of its gross revenues from items, merchandise, or devices
that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis of material depicting or
describing Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas, or
items, merchandise or devices that simulate Specified Sexual Activities or
Specified Anatomical Areas, or are designed for sexual stimulation.
(13) "Adult Sauna." A sauna that provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for
the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the service provided by the
sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities
or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(14) "Adult Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility." A building or portion of a building
used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of
pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the service provided by the steam
room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.
(C). "Nude" or "Specified Anatomical Areas" means:
(1) Human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts below a
point immediately above the top of the areola which are not completely and
opaquely covered; and
(2) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
(D). "Specified Sexual Activities" means:
(1) An act of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
genital to genital, anal to genital, or oral genital intercourse, whether between
human beings or between a human being and an animal;
(2) Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a person
who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing costume or the condition
of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restricted on the part of
one so clothed;
(3) Masturbation or lewd exhibitions of the genitals including any explicit, closeup
representation of a human genital organ clothed or unclothed; and
(4) Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the clothed or unclothed
pubic areas or buttocks of a human male or female, or breasts of a female,
whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between
humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-53
(E). “Substantial or Significant Portion” means 25% or more.
(F). “Premises” means the licensed real property and all building and structures located
on the real property.
685.06: Other Laws. No Adult Establishment shall engage in any activity or conduct or permit any
other person to engage in any activity or conduct in the establishment that is prohibited by
any ordinance of the City, the laws of the State of Minnesota, or the United States of America.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as authorizing or permitting conduct that
is prohibited or regulated by other statutes or ordinances, including but not limited to statutes
or ordinances prohibiting the exhibition, sale, or distribution of obscene material generally,
or the exhibition, sale, or distribution of specified materials to minors.
685.07: Existing Adult Establishments. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, existing
Adult Establishments must comply with all requirements of this Ordinance immediately
upon its effective date.
685.08: Hours of Operation. No Adult Establishment shall be open to the public from the
hours of 2:00 a.m. until 10:00 a.m. weekdays and Saturdays, any time after 2:00 a.m. on
Sundays, or at any time on holidays as defined in Minn. Stat. § 645.44.
685.09: Business Operations. Adult Establishments are subject to the following business regulations.
(A). Off-site Viewing Prohibited. An Adult Establishment must prevent off-site viewing
of its activities or merchandise or any materials depicting, describing or relating
to “Specified Sexual Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas” by any visual or
auditory media, including display, decoration, sign, show window, sound transmission
or other means.
(B). Liquor Sales Prohibited. Adult Establishments shall not sell or dispense intoxicating
liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor nor shall the Adult Establishment be located in a
building or on a premises that contains a business that sells or dispenses intoxicating
liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor.
(C). Liquor Consumption Prohibited. The sale and consumption of alcohol is prohibited
on the premises of an Adult Establishment, including, but not limited to, any parking
areas or lots that are owned or leased by the Adult Establishment or its owner, or
used by patrons when they are at the Adult Establishment.
(D). Entrances Visible. All entrances to an Adult Establishment, with the exception of
emergency fire exits, that are not useable by patrons to enter the business, shall be
visible from a public right-of-way.
(E). Layout. The layout of any display areas shall be designed so that the management of
the Adult Establishment and any law enforcement personnel inside the store can observe
all patrons while they have access to any activities or merchandise offered for
sale or viewing including but not limited to books, magazines, photographs, video
tapes, or any other material, or any live dancers or entertainers.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-54
(F). Illumination. Illumination of the premises exterior shall be adequate to observe the
location and activities of all persons on the exterior premises.
(G). Signs. Signs for Adult Establishments shall not contain representational depiction
of an adult nature or graphic descriptions of the adult theme of the operation. An
Adult Establishment must prominently display at the entrance of the business no
more than two feet from the door-opening device of the establishment, at eye level, a
sign that states “This business sells or displays material containing adult themes.
Persons under eighteen (18) years of age shall not enter.” The sign must contain letters
between three-eighths (3/4) inch and two (2) inches in height.
(H). Access by Minors. No minor shall be permitted on the premises of an Adult Establishment.
Adult goods or materials may not be offered, sold, transferred, conveyed,
given or bartered to a minor, or displayed in a fashion that allows them to be viewed
by a minor, whether or not the minor is on the licensed premises.
(I). Additional Conditions for Adult Cabarets. The following additional conditions
apply to adult cabarets:
(1) No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall be under 18 years old.
(2) All dancing or live entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for that
purpose and which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor.
(3) No dancer or performer shall fondle, caress, or touch any patron and no patron
shall fondle, caress, or touch any dancer or performer.
(J). No Nudity. No person may be nude on the premises of any Adult Establishment.
685.10: License Required. It is unlawful for any person or entity to own, lease, rent, manage or
operate an Adult Establishment without a valid license issued by the City of Princeton pursuant
to this Ordinance.
685.11: Existing Businesses. Within ten (10) working days of the effective date of this Ordinance,
any existing Adult Establishment must apply for a license from the City. Failure to apply
for a license is a violation of this Ordinance and is subject to penalty under section 685.33.
685.12: Application for License. An application for a license must be made on a form provided by
the City. The completed application must contain the following information:
(A). All applicants. For all applicants:
(1) Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership, or other
form of organization.
(2) The legal description of the premises to be licensed, along with a sketch or
diagram showing the floor plan of the premises. The floor plan of the premises
shall detail all internal operations and activities, including a statement of
the total floor space occupied by the business. The floor plan need not be
professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-55
with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus
or minus six inches.
(3) The name and street address of the business. If the business is to be conducted
under a designated name, or style other than the name of the applicant, a
certified copy of the certificate required by Minn. Stat. § 333.01 shall be
submitted.
(4) Whether the applicant has had a previous Adult Establishment license suspended
or revoked.
(5) The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or other agent(s) in charge of the
business and all of the information concerning each manager, proprietor or
agent that is required of the applicants in paragraph B of this section.
(B). Applicants who are natural persons. If the applicant is a natural person:
(1) The name, place, and date of birth, street, city and mailing address, and phone
number of the applicant.
(2) Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name other than
the applicant’s name, and if so, the name or names used and information concerning
dates and places where used.
(3) The street and city addresses at which the applicant has lived during the preceding
two years.
(4) The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in which the
applicant has been engaged during the preceding two years and name(s) and
address(es) of the applicant’s employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding
two years.
(5) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a gross misdemeanor or felony
relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or Adult Establishments.
(6) The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or other agent(s) in charge of the
business and all of the information concerning each manager, proprietor or
agent that is required of the applicants in paragraph B of this section.
(C). Applicants that are partnerships. If the applicant is a partnership:
(1) The name(s) and address(es) of the partnership, the name(s) and address(es) of
all partners and all of the information concerning each partner that is required
of applicants in paragraph (b) of this section.
(2) Whether the partnership is general or limited.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-56
(3) A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application.
If the partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade name pursuant
to Minn. Stat. § 333.01, a certified copy of the certificate shall be attached
to the application.
(4) The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or other agent(s) in charge of the
business and all of the information concerning each manager, proprietor or
agent that is required of the applicants in paragraph B of this section.
(D). Corporate or other applicants. If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
(1) The name of the corporation or business form, and if incorporated, the date and
state of incorporation.
(2) A true copy of the Certificate of Incorporation, Articles of Incorporation or Association
Agreement and Bylaws shall be attached to the application. If the
applicant is a foreign corporation, a Certificate of Authority as required by
Minn. Stat. § 303.06, shall be attached. If the entity is a limited liability
company, then true and accurate copies of the Articles of Organization and
any Membership Agreements shall be attached to the application.
(3) The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or other agent(s) in charge of the
business and all of the information concerning each manager, proprietor or
agent that is required of the applicants in paragraph B of this section.
(4) Accurate and complete business records showing the names, addresses, and
dates of birth of all officers, directors and controlling stockholders for the
business.
(5) The name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered
office for service of process.
685.13: Information Kept Current. Changes in the information provided on the application or
provided during the investigation must be brought to the attention of the City by the applicant
or licensee. If such a change takes place during the investigation, or during the license
period, it must be reported to the City Clerk in writing. A failure by an applicant or licensee
to timely report such a change may result in a denial or revocation of a license.
685.14: License Pre-Conditions. The City will issue a license to an applicant within 45 days of the
application unless one or more of the following conditions exist:
(A). The applicant is under 18;
(B). The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the license application;
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-57
(C). The applicant gives false, fraudulent, or untruthful information on the license application;
(D). The applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor, gross misdemeanor or felony relating
to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or Adult Establishments;
(E). The Adult Establishment is not in full compliance with the City Zoning Regulations
and all provisions of state and federal law;
(F). The applicant has not paid the required license fee;
(G). The applicant has been denied a license by the City or any other Minnesota municipal
corporation to operate an Adult Establishment, or such license has been suspended or
revoked, within the preceding twelve (12) months;
(H). The applicant is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is issued;
or
(I). The Adult Establishment premises holds an intoxicating liquor, beer or wine license.
685.15: Requalification after Disqualification. An applicant may re-qualify for a license:
(A). After one year has elapsed in the case of a previous license revocation;
(B). After two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement in the case of a misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor offense;
(C). After five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release
from confinement for the conviction, whichever is later, in the case of a felony
offense; or
(D). After five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release
from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is later, if the conviction is
of two or more misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor
or gross misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.
685.16: Expiration and Renewal. An Adult Establishment license expires at the end of the calendar
year.
(A). Renewal. A licensee may renew a license by completing an application as provided
in this ordinance. Applications for renewal licenses required by this ordinance shall
be completed and filed with the City Clerk no later than November 15 of the year
preceding the year for which application is made. Any renewal application not completed
and filed by that date shall be treated as a waiver of license renewal. If the
City denies the renewal, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-58
the date of denial.
685.17: Causes of License Suspension. The City may suspend a license for a period not to exceed
30 days if it determines that the licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
(A). Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this Ordinance;
(B). Allowed or engaged in the sale or use of alcoholic beverages while on the Adult Establishment
premises other than at an Adult Hotel or Motel;
(C). Refused to allow an inspection of the Adult Establishment as authorized by this Ordinance;
or
(D). Knowingly permitted unlawful gambling by any person on the Adult Establishment
premises.
685.18: Notice. A suspension by the City shall be preceded by written notice to the licensee and a
public hearing. The notice shall give at least 10 days’ notice of the time and place of the
hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The notice may be
served upon the licensee personally, or by leaving the same at the licensed business premises
with the person in charge thereof, or by mailing the notice by U.S. Mail to the last known
address of the owner or agent authorized to receive legal notices for the business, as listed
on its license application.
685.19: Causes of Revocation. The City may revoke a license if it determines that:
(A). A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the City
during the application process;
(B). A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances on the premises;
(C). A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(D). A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the Adult Establishment during a period
of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
(E). A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in Section 685.14, for which the
time period required in Section 685.15 has not elapsed; or
(F). A cause of suspension described in Section 685.17 occurs and the license has been
suspended at least once before within the preceding 12 months.
(G). Except in the case of an Adult Hotel or Motel, a licensee or an employee has knowingly
allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation
to occur in or on the licensed premises.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-59
685.20: Effect of Appeals. The fact that a revocation, suspension or nonrenewal is being appealed
shall have no effect on the validity of the action on the license.
685.21: Granting a License After Revocation. When the City revokes a license, the revocation
shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued an Adult Establishment license
for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation,
the City finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became
effective. If the license is revoked due to a criminal conviction under Section 685.14
(D), an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years
required under Section 685.15, has elapsed.
685.22: Appeals Provided. Denials, non-renewals, suspensions and revocations of an Adult Establishment
license are governed by the following provisions.
685.23: Notice and Hearing. In the event that the City proposes to deny, refuse to renew, suspend
or revoke a license, the City will notify the licensee in writing of the basis for the action.
The City Council will hold a hearing for the purpose of determining whether to deny, renew,
suspend, or revoke the license. The hearing must be within 30 days of the date of service
of the notice. The City Council must determine whether to deny, renew, suspend or
revoke a license and notify the applicant of its decision, within 30 days after the close of the
hearing or within 60 days of the date of service of the notice, whichever is sooner.
685.24: Effect of City Action. A non-renewal, suspension or revocation is effective 15 days after
service of notice of the decision to the licensee. Denial of a license is effective immediately
upon service of notice of the decision to the applicant
685.25: Service of Notice. All notices to the applicant or licensee required to be served under this
ordinance shall be served by U.S. mail at the last known address of the applicant or licensee
as described in the application. Notices to the City Council shall be served on the City
Clerk at the office of the City Clerk.
685.26: Appeals. An applicant or licensee aggrieved by any decision of the City Council may appeal
to the District Court of Mille Lacs or Sherburne County or, in the event a federal question
is cause for grievance, to the Federal District Court. Any appeal shall be served upon
the City Clerk and filed with the appropriate Court Administrator within 33 days of service
of notice of the decision of the City Council from which appeal is taken. Service of all notices
is complete upon deposit of such notice, properly addressed, with adequate postage, in
the United States mail.
685.27: Posting. The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the person or entity to
whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the Adult Establishment. The license
must be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the Adult Establishment.
685.28: Fees. An applicant for any license under this ordinance shall deposit with the City Clerk, at
the time an original application is submitted, an investigative fee to cover the costs inCity
of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-60
volved in verifying the license application and to cover the expense of any investigation
needed to assure compliance with this ordinance shall be paid to the city clerk and placed in
the general fund. The amount of the investigation fee shall be set by ordinance and reviewed
annually. The investigative fee shall be paid in full before the application for a license
is considered. The investigation fee is non-refundable.
The annual license fee for Adult Establishments shall be set by ordinance, reviewed annually and
shall be paid to the City Clerk for deposit into the general fund of the City.
685.29: Inspection. An applicant or licensee shall permit health officials, peace officers, representatives
of the sheriff department, fire department, building inspector, and other official
authorized by the City to inspect the premises of an Adult Establishment for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. The licensee
is at all times responsible for the conduct, activity and operation of the business.
685.30: Refusal to Permit Inspections. Refusal to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by
authorized persons at any time it is occupied or open for business is a violation of this Ordinance.
Refusal to permit inspections may result in non-renewal, suspension or revocation
of the license.
685.31: Exceptions. The provisions of Section 685.29 do not apply to areas of an Adult Hotel or
Motel that are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary
habitation. Temporary habitation is defined as a period of time of at least 12 hours.
685.32: Transfer of License. A licensee shall not transfer this license to another, nor shall a licensee
operate an Adult Establishment under the authority of a license at any place other than
the address designated in the application.
685.33: Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties for a misdemeanor as prescribed
by state law. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate misdemeanor
offense punishable by a separate misdemeanor penalty. The City may also enforce
any provision of this Ordinance by mandamus, injunction or any other appropriate
civil remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction. Upon conviction under this section, the
city shall be entitled to reimbursement by the violator of the costs of prosecution, including
reasonable attorney fees.
685.34: Severability. Every section, provision, or part of this Ordinance is declared severable
from every other section, provision, or part thereof to the extent that if any section, provision,
or part of this Ordinance be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction it shall
not invalidate any other section, provision, or part thereof.
Chapter 685 – Regulating the use of and behavior in City Parks
686.01: Purpose
This subchapter is enacted to govern the conduct of members of the public during their use and enCity
of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-61
joyment of the city park system so as to further the safety, health, enjoyment, and welfare of all persons
in the use of those facilities and to protect public property and resources for posterity.
686.02: General Conduct
(A) Defacement, destruction of property and resource prohibited.
(1) No person may tamper with, climb on, injure, deface, destroy, disturb, damage,
move, or remove any part of any park building, portable bathrooms, structure, sign,
light pole, drinking fountain, hydrant, picnic table, grill, trash receptacle, equipment,
statue or other property found in the park. This does not prohibit appropriate use of
play equipment.
(2) No person may deface, disturb, or remove in any manner any soil, plant, artifact,
fossil, rock, or other natural resource.
(3) No person may excavate any ditch, trench, tunnel, or hole in any park.
(B) Preservation of vegetation.
(1) No person may injure, cut, destroy, mutilate, uproot, disturb, or remove any flower,
tree, shrub, or any plant whether wild or cultivated, or any part thereof.
(2) No person may make any unauthorized use of any park which is detrimental to the
turf and soil conditions.
(3) No person may remove any device, apparatus or material installed for the protection,
support, or preservation of any tree, shrub or plant.
(C) Animals, whether wild, pet or domestic.
(1) No person owning, being in custody, or having custody or control of an animal,
may cause or allow the animal to roam or be at large in any park.
(2) No person having custody or control of any animal may allow the animal to disturb,
harass, or interfere with other park users or their property.
(3) Any unattended animal found roaming or at large within any park may be impounded.
(4) All state and local ordinances relating to the licensing and muzzling of animals
apply to any park.
(5) It is unlawful for any person who owns, harbors, or has custody or control of an
animal to permit the animal to defecate on any public property unless such person
immediately removes the excrement and properly disposes of it.
(D) Fires.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-62
(1) No person may start or maintain a fire in any park except small recreational fires
in fireplaces, fire rings, and grills provided for that purpose in areas specifically designed
for such use. Private grills may be used in designated areas provided that all
ashes and residue are disposed of in containers provided for such disposal.
(2) Any person who starts or maintains a fire in an authorized area must exercise continuous
supervision from the time the fire is kindled until it is extinguished. No fire
may cause damage or constitute a threat to site vegetation and resources, nor may it
cause discomfort to other park users.
(3) The Council may, at its discretion, prohibit fires for limited periods at any location
for any purpose when it is necessary for the continued protection of park property
and resources.
(E) Waste and litter.
(1) No person may throw, cast, drop, pour, spill or discharge, or permit to escape in
or upon any land, pond, river, creek, stream, ditch, storm sewer, or drain flowing into
or through any park, any substance, matter or thing whether solid, liquid, or gas,
which may result in the pollution of the waters, interfere with the conservation management
of the water resource, or endanger the health of the public.
(2) No person may deposit in public trash receptacles any household refuse, tree or
lawn clippings, leaves, weeds, waste resulting from building construction, remodeling
or demolition, and other waste products, unless the refuse is the result of authorized
activities in the park in which the public receptacles are located.
(3) No person may drop, throw or otherwise leave unattended in any park lighted
matches, burning cigars, cigarettes, tobacco, paper, or other combustible material.
(F) Firearms, weapons, fireworks.
(1) No person may possess, fire, discharge, or set off any firearm, missile, fireworks,
or explosives in any park.
(2) No person, except a peace officer or any person in possession of a valid permit to
carry a firearm, shall possess or carry a firearm of any description in any park. No
person may possess or carry in any park any air gun, bow and arrow, knife with a
blade greater than three inches, paint ball gun, slingshot, dart, or projectile thrower,
or any other dangerous or illegal weapon.
(3) Any unauthorized or illegal weapon within any park is subject to seizure by a
peace officer.
(G) Disturbing the peace - conduct.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-63
(1) No person, or group of persons, may disturb the peace and good order in any park
by either word or act.
(2) No person, or group of persons, may use threatening, abusive, insulting, obscene
or indecent language or commit, perform or engage in any lewd, lascivious, obscene
or indecent act.
(3) No person, or group of persons, may engage in fighting, quarreling, wrangling, riotous
clamor, or tumult.
(4) No person, or group of persons, may disturb, harass, or interfere with any park user
or the user's property.
(5) No person may solicit or ask anyone to commit, perform or engage in any lewd,
lascivious, obscene, or indecent act or behavior.
(6) No person may enter or occupy any park or park property while under the influence
of alcohol to the extent his or her blood alcohol content meets or exceeds the
level of 0.08% alcohol per milliliter of blood and any person who a peace officer
has probable cause to believe is under the influence of alcohol as described is subject
to chemical testing by portable breath test and any person who refuses to properly
perform a portable breath test when offered by a peace officer is subject to immediate
removal from park property.
(H) Audio devices. No person may operate or play any musical instrument, radio, television, record
or tape players, loudspeaker, public address system or sound amplifying equipment of
any kind in any park in such a manner that the sound emanating therefrom is audible beyond
the immediate vicinity of the set or instrument, and subsequently interferes with the use of
the park by other users or disturbs the residents of adjacent property.
(I) Alcoholic and intoxicating beverages. Except as specifically authorized within the City of
Princeton’s code of ordinances, no person may possess, have within their immediate control,
display, consume or use intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor in any park, provided however,
that the City Administrator may issue park permits authorizing the possession, immediate
control, display, consumption and use of wine and beer at the location and in conjunction
with the park permit and subject to the limitations contained in the permit.
(J) Games. No person may engage in any potentially dangerous games involving thrown or propelled
objects, such as horseshoes, golf balls, darts, paint balls, or similar objects except in
appropriate areas specifically designated for such usage.
(K) Skateboards.
(1) No person shall operate a skateboard carelessly or heedlessly in disregard of the
rights of others, in a manner that endangers or is likely to endanger persons, property
or the operator of the skateboard, or in a place where the surface or traffic conditions
render the place unsafe for skateboarding.
City of Princeton Title 6 Nuisances and Offenses
6-64
(2) An operator of a skateboard must yield the right-of-way to any other type of vehicle
or a pedestrian while the operator is entering or traveling upon a street, alley,
sidewalk, bicycle path, or other paved surface.
(L) Unlawful sales.
(1) No person may sell, offer for sale, hawk, peddle or lease any object, merchandise
or service or carry on any manner of business or commercial enterprise except those
concessions authorized or operated by the city.
(2) No person may park or occupy a vehicle, stand or booth to sell any farm produce,
flowers, merchandise or any other product or for conduct any business or the selling
of services unless authorized by park permit.
(M) Peace officers and employees.
(1) No person may willfully resist, refuse or fail to comply with any order, direction
or request lawfully given by any peace officer, or city employee acting under the authority
of the City Council or City Administrator and in accordance with this section.
(2) No person may interfere with, or in any manner hinder any city employee, city
contractor, or peace officer during the performance of their assigned duties.
(N) Posted regulations, directional signs and graphics. No person may disregard or fail to comply
with any posted regulations, directional signs and graphics, barriers or other control devices located
within any park or on any parkway.
686.03 VIOLATIONS.
(A) Violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be a misdemeanor.
(B) Any person violating any section of this ordinance or any other local or state laws which occur
on any city parks, may be expelled, ejected, or ousted from a park at the discretion of a peace
officer.
(C) Any person who a peace officer has probable cause to believe has engaged in conduct prohibited
by this ordinance, or any violation of any local or state laws which occur on any city park,
may be banned from city parks for a period of one year by action of the City Council.
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-1
TITLE 7. TRAFFIC/VEHICLES
Chapter 700 Traffic Regulations
Chapter 710 Self Propelled Motor Vehicles
Chapter 720 Parking Regulations ord # 726, amended 11-12-15
Chapter 730 Truck Parking
Chapter 740 Bicycles, Skateboards and the Like
Chapter 750 Recreational Motor Vehicles (Snowmobiles and ATVs)
Chapter 760 Motorized Golf Carts
Chapter 770 Unauthorized Vehicles (added 2-13-14, ord #703)
Chapter 700 - Traffic Regulations
700.01 State Highway Traffic Regulations Adopted by Reference.
(A) The Highway Traffic Regulations Act is hereby adopted by reference. The regulatory
provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time, are hereby
adopted as a traffic ordinance regulating the use of highways, streets and alleys
within the city and are hereby incorporated in and made a part of this section as
completely as if set out in full herein.
(B) The penalty for violation of the provisions of state statutes adopted by reference in
this section shall be identical with the penalty provided for in the statues for the same
offense.
700.02 Trucks Prohibited on Certain Streets.
(A) The City Council by resolution may designate streets on which travel by commercial
vehicles in excess of 10,000 pounds axle weight is prohibited. Appropriate signs
shall be erected on those streets. No person shall operate a commercial vehicle on
posted streets in violation of the restrictions posted.
(B) The weight restrictions established in division (A) shall not apply to city or
emergency vehicles, public school buses or to garbage and refuse trucks making
regular collections and are under contract with the city, nor shall the weight
restrictions in division (A) apply if a commercial vehicle must use the particular
street in question for the purpose of local pick-up or delivery.
Penalty, see §100.99
700.03 Stop Intersections. The city may designate intersections as stop intersections and require
all vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to those intersections. The city shall post signs
at those designated intersections, giving notice of the designation as a stop intersection. It
shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey the markings or signs posted under this
section.
Penalty, see § 100.99
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-2
700.04 Through Streets and One-Way Streets. The City Council by resolution may designate
any street or portion of a street as a through street or one-way street where necessary to
preserve the free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents. No trunk highway shall be so
designated unless the consent of the Commissioner of Transportation to the designation is
first secured. The city shall cause appropriate signs to be posted at the entrance to
designated streets. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey the markings or signs
posted under this section.
Penalty, see § 100.99
700.05 Turning Restrictions.
(A) The City Council by resolution may, whenever necessary to preserve a free flow of
traffic or to prevent accidents, designate any intersection as one where turning of
vehicles to the left or to the right, or both, is to be restricted at all times or during
specified hours. No intersection on a trunk highway shall be so designated until the
consent of the Commissioner of Transportation to the designation is first obtained.
(B) The city shall mark by appropriate signs any intersection so designated.
(C) No person shall turn a vehicle at any intersection contrary to the direction on those
signs.
Penalty, see § 100.99
700.06 U-Turns Restricted. No person shall turn a vehicle so as to reverse its direction on any
street in the Business District or at any intersection where traffic is regulated by a traffic
control signal.
Penalty, see § 100.99
700.07 Excessive Noise.
(A) As used in this section, “light-motor vehicles” means any automobile, van,
motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, motorscooter, go cart, minibike, trail bike or truck
with a gross vehicular weight of less than 10,000 pounds.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to operate or use a light-motor
vehicle in a manner as to cause or allow to be caused excessive noise levels as a
result of unreasonable rapid accelerations, deceleration, revving of engine, squealing
of tires, honking of horns or as a result of the operation of audio devices, including
but not limited to radios, phonograph, tape players, compact disc players or any other
sound-amplifying device on or from the light-motor vehicle.
(C) No person shall operate, cause to operate or use a light-motor vehicle in violation of
the noise standards contained in Minn. Rules parts 7030.1050 and 7030.1060, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(D) No person shall operate, cause to operate or use a light-motor vehicle that discharges
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-3
its exhaust other than through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud
or explosive noises. No person shall operate, cause to operate or use a light-motor
vehicle whose exhaust system has been modified, altered or repaired in any way,
including the use of a muffler cut-out or by-pass that amplifies or otherwise increases
noise above that emitted by the light-motor vehicle as originally equipped.
(E) The following are exempted from the provisions of this section:
(1) Sound emitted from sirens of authorized emergency vehicles;
(2) Burglar alarms on light-motor vehicles of the electronic signaling type which
also transmit an audible signal to a receiver which can be carried by the owner
or operator of the vehicle.
Penalty, see § 100.99
700.08 Exhibition Driving Prohibited. No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise
operate a motor vehicle within the city in a manner which causes unnecessary engine noise
or backfire, squealing tires, skidding, sliding, swaying, throwing of sand or gravel or in a
manner simulating a race. Unreasonable squealing or screeching sounds emitted by tires or
the unreasonable throwing of sand or gravel by the tires is prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section.
Penalty, see § 100.99
700.09 Cruising Prohibited.
(A) As used in this section, “cruising” means the operation of a motor vehicle as defined
in M.S. §169.01, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time, past a traffic
control point as determined by a police officer on a street in an area designated “No
Cruising Zone” by City Council resolution four or more times between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 3:30 a.m.
(B) The passing of a traffic-control point under the conditions previously stated shall
constitute unnecessary repetitive driving and is a violation of this section.
(C) The following use of vehicles shall constitute valid exceptions to this prohibition:
taxicabs for hire, buses, authorized emergency vehicle, vehicles used by or under
contract with any governmental jurisdiction and any vehicle being used to conduct
legitimate business activities.
(D) This section may be enforced only in an area that has been posted as a “No Cruising
Zone.” Signs shall be posted at the beginning and the end of any public street, alley
or highway or portion thereof which is a no cruising zone.
700.10 Definitions. For the purpose of §§ 700.10 through 700.20, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-4
(A) “Parade” means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or
procession of any kind or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk, park or
other public place in the city.
(B) “Parade permit” means a permit required by §§ 700.10 through 700.20.
(C) “Parking lot” means any paved or unpaved area used by a place of business or
shopping center for the parking of vehicles of their customers, but shall not include
those operated for hire.
700.11 Permit Required.
(A) No person or persons shall engage or participate in, aid, form or start any parade
unless a parade permit has been obtained from the City Administrator or other
authorized city official.
(B) This section shall not apply to:
(1) Funeral processions;
(2) Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational
activities, provided that the conduct is under the immediate direction and
supervision of the proper school authorities;
(3) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
Penalty, see § 100.99
700.12 Application for Permit.
(A) Generally. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application
with the City Administrator.
(B) Filing period. The application for a parade permit shall be filed not less than 21 days
but not more than 60 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the
parade. Failure to file an application 21 days in advance will not result in automatic
denial of the permit, provided that the applicant shows reasonable grounds why the
application could not be filed 21 days in advance.
(C) Required information. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the
parade;
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of the
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-5
organization;
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade
chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted;
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point;
(6) The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles which will
constitute the parade, the type of animals, if any, and the description of the
vehicles;
(7) The hours when the parade will start and terminate;
(8) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the
width of the streets, sidewalk, park or other public place proposed to be
traversed;
(9) The location by street of any assembly area for the parade;
(10) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any assembly
area or areas;
(11) The interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade;
(12) If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person
other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file a communication
in writing from the person authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on
his or her behalf;
(13) Any additional information reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to
whether a permit should be issued;
(14) If part of the route includes a county road or state highway, approval must be
obtained from the county or state before the city permit may be issued.
(D) Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a parade permit a fee
in an amount as established from time to time by ordinance of the Council. The
applicant shall also bear the cost of additional traffic control required by the event.
Penalty, see § 100.99
700.13 Standards for Issuance of Permit. The City Administrator shall issue a permit when,
from a consideration of the application and from other information obtained, he or she finds
that:
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-6
(A) The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly
movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
(B) The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of
police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas
contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city;
(C) The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade
will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance
service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas;
(D) The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement of
emergency vehicles;
(E) The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination
expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
Penalty, see § 100.99
700.14 Notice of Rejection of Permit Application. If the City Administrator disapproves the
application, he or she shall mail to the applicant within the three regular business days after
the date on which the application was filed a notice of his or her action stating the reasons
for his or her denial of the permit.
700.15 Appeal Procedure When Permit Denied. Any person aggrieved shall have the right to
appeal the denial of a parade permit to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken within
30 days after notice of denial. The City Council shall act on the appeal within 30 days after
its receipt.
700.16 Alternative Permit. The City Administrator or other authorized city official, in denying an
application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade
on a date, at a time or over a route different than that named by the applicant. An applicant
desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file a written notice of his or her acceptance. An
alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a
parade permit under this chapter.
700.17 Notice to City and Other Officials When Permit Issued. Immediately on the issuance of
a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be sent to the Police Chief and the Fire Chief.
700.18 Duties of Permittee. A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairperson or other
person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit on his or her person
during the conduct of the parade.
Penalty, see § 100.99
700.19 Public Conduct During Parades.
(A) Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere
with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-7
participating or used in a parade.
(B) Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle except a police car or other
emergency vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade
when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a
parade.
(C) Parking on parade route. The Police Chief or other authorized city official shall
have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles in the marshaling area along a street or other public thoroughfare or part
thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. Signs shall be posted to the effect,
and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street or other public
thoroughfare unless signs have been posted in accordance with this section.
Penalty, see § 100.99
700.20 Revocation of Permit. The city shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
hereunder on application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.
Chapter 710 – Self Propelled Motor Vehicles
710.01 Definitions.
(A) Self-propelled Motor Vehicles. Self-propelled motorized vehicles include
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor scooters, mini-bikes, dune buggies, trail
bikes, go-carts and golf carts.
(B) Public property. Property owned by a governmental body that may be used by the
public, subject to reasonable regulations by the government body, including: public
parks; county, city and school parks, grounds and yards; but excluding state, city and
county streets and roads and parking lots.
710.02 Prohibition of Self-Propelled Motor Vehicles on Public Property. No person shall drive,
operate or be in physical control of any motor vehicle on any public property as defined in
§ 710.01. This section does not apply to the parking or use of motor vehicles, campers,
trailers or equipment in connection with any municipality-approved carnival, festival, race,
parade or other gathering to include approved overnight camping sites.
710.99 Penalty. It is a misdemeanor to violate any provision of this chapter and any person
violating the terms of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a
misdemeanor and penalized as provided in § 100.99.
Chapter 720 - Parking Regulations ord # 726, amended 11-12-15, ord #784, 11-19-19
720.01 Restricted Parking.
(A) In order to facilitate snow removal from the public streets of the City of Princeton
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-8
from November 1 through March 31 of each year, no vehicle shall be parked on any
public street in the city between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(B) In order to facilitate snow removal and sweeping of surfaces on Rum River Drive
from 3rd Street South South to the south end of the Dunn Memorial Bridge and, on
1st Street from 4th Avenue South to 8th Avenue South, no vehicle shall be parked
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. year round.
(C) In order to facilitate snow removal and sweeping of surfaces from the public parking
lots in the City of Princeton, no vehicle shall be parked in the following parking lots
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. year round, with the exception of 3 and
4 below
(1) Princeton Mall parking lot in Block 2, Damon’s Addition;
(2) Riverside Mall parking lot in Block 5, Original Townsite; and
(3) From November 1st to March 31st, the following parking lot between the hours
of 9:00pm and 5:00am city parking lot in Block 3, Damon’s Addition, center
two rows of parking only (this chapter does not pertain to the southernmost nor
northernmost rows of parking in this lot). Lot commonly known as the K-Bob
lot
(4) From November 1st to March 31st the North 2 rows of the following parking lot
block 7, Lot 3, Original Townsite (Legal Description: & N 56 of E 118.5 FT of
Lot 2, Block 7 & Lot 10, Blk 7 & vacated alley between lots 3 & 10 between
the hours of 9:00pm to 5:00am. Commonly known as the Lot East of City Hall
720.02 Parking Duration Limited. In order to assist in snow removal operations, the recovery of
stolen or abandoned vehicles, and the public use of the city-owned parking lots, no vehicle
shall be permitted to be parked, abandoned or left standing in any parking lot for a period
of excess of 72 hours at any time of the year.
720.03 Stopping, Standing and Parking.
(A) Upon any street or highway outside of a business or residence district, no person
shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicles, whether attended or unattended, upon
the paved or improved or main traveled part of the highway when it is practical to
stop, park or so leave the vehicle off the part of the highway, but in every event a
clear and unobstructed width of at least 20 feet of such passage of other vehicles and
a clear view of the stopped vehicle be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon the highway.
(B) This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on
the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a highway in such a manner and to
such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the
disabled vehicles in such position.
(C) This section shall not apply to the driver of a school bus stopped for the purpose of
receiving or discharging any school child or school children and is displaying the
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-9
flashing red lamps and stop arm required.
720.04 Police May Move Cars.
(A) When any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or highway in
violation of any of the provisions of § 720.03, such officer is hereby authorized to
move the vehicle or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to
move the same to a position off the paved or main traveled part of the highway.
(B) When any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street or highway or
upon any bridge or causeway where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic,
the officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of the vehicle and remove
the same to the nearest convenient garage or other place of safety.
720.05 Prohibitions, Stopping, Parking. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
(A) On a sidewalk;
(B) In front of a public or private driveway;
(C) Within an intersection;
(D) Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
(E) On a crosswalk;
(F) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(G) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control
signal located at the side of a roadway;
(H) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb
immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone unless a different length is indicated
by signs or markings;
(I) Opposing traffic, by parking on the side of any street or highway in a direction other
than the direction of traffic in the immediately adjacent lane of travel;
(J) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street
opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance when properly
sign-posted;
(K) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when the stopping,
standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
(L) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
(M) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or highway or within a
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-10
street or highway tunnel, except as otherwise provided by ordinance;
(N) At any place where official traffic-control devices prohibit stopping; and
(O) In order to facilitate public safety, street maintenance, street sweeping and street
snow removal of/from the public streets located within any industrial zone of the city
as per the official zoning map, no vehicle shall be parked on said street at any time.
720.06 Moving Vehicle by Non-Owner. No person shall move a vehicle not owned by the person
into any prohibited area or away from a curb the distance as is unlawful.
720.07 Parking House Trailers. No person shall, for camping purposes, leave or park a house
trailer on or within the limits of any street or highway or on any highway right-of-way,
except where signs are erected designating the place as campsite. No person shall leave or
park a house trailer on any streets or highway or the right-of-way thereof for a longer
period than six hours.
720.08 Traffic Officer Directions. No person shall stop or park a vehicle on a street or highway
when directed or ordered to proceed by any peace officer invested by law with authority to
direct, control or regulate traffic.
720.09 Display for Sale. No vehicle shall be parked on any street for the purpose of displaying it
for sale.
720.10 Fire Escape. No person shall park a vehicle so as to block a fire escape or the exit from
any building, whether public or private property.
720.11 Police Order. No person shall park any vehicle where temporary signs are posted reading
“No Parking - Police Order,” as long as such signs are in place.
720.12 Fire Lane. No person shall park in any area designated as a fire lane.
720.13 Existing Parking Signs. Existing signs which have been posted by direction of the
Council, engineer or the Chief of Police regulating parking of vehicles shall be recognized
as properly placed under this chapter until changed by proper direction of the Council.
720.14 Parking in Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether attended or
unattended, upon any alley within the municipality; provided that this shall not prohibit the
parking of the vehicles for less than a period of one hour along any such alley for the
purpose of having access to any property abutting thereon for the purpose of loading or
unloading merchandise or other material when the access cannot conveniently be secured
upon the property itself.
720.15 Limited Time Parking Zones. The Council may designate no parking or limited time
parking zones by a resolution setting forth the location of the zone, and in the case of a
limited time parking zone, the time limit imposed. The Chief of Police shall post signs at
locations so designated which shall either indicate, in accordance with the resolution, a no
parking zone or the specified time limit for parking, and if there is a concrete curb, the curb
shall be painted yellow at the designated parking zone.
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-11
720.16 Operation and Parking of Vehicles on Private Parking Lots. No person shall operate a
motor vehicle on any private parking lots within the municipality at a speed greater than is
safe and reasonable under the conditions of traffic when existing therein, and in no event at
a speed exceeding 15 mph. Parking of vehicles on the lots shall conform to any stalls or
positions for parking designated on the surface of the parking area and no vehicle shall be
parked or allowed to stand in any area of the parking lot which has been designated or is
used for a lane for moving traffic so as to interfere with the movement of traffic thereon.
The Council may authorize the Chief of Police or engineer to post signs at any entrance to a
private parking lot from a public street, which shall designate one-way traffic for entrances
or exit, and the driver of any vehicle entering or leaving such lot shall comply with any
one-way signs so posted.
720.17 Truck Parking. No person shall park any of the following described vehicles on any street,
alley or public property in any residential or multiple dwelling zoned district within the
municipal limits for more than one hour:
(A) Trucks of a capacity of more than one ton, according to manufacturer’s rating;
(B) Trucks having an over-all length of more than 20 feet or a width at any point of more
than eight feet;
(C) Dump trucks, tractors, truck-tractors, trailer, semi-trailers or any heavy equipment or
machinery; and
(D) Any truck, trailer, semi-trailer, tractor or other vehicle which is being used, or has
been used, for the transporting of any fowl or livestock, or any pieces or parts
thereof.
720.18 Removal of Vehicles in Violations Thereof. The City Administrator, any police officer or
other duly sworn authorized person may immediately order any vehicle violating any
provision of this chapter, thereby constituting a public nuisance, to be removed and
impounded in the manner provided for in Princeton City Ordinance #318.
720.19 Maintenance/Emergency Situations. The foregoing restrictions shall not apply to duly
authorized maintenance, law enforcement or fire and rescue personnel while on or in the
performance of their duties or in the event of other emergencies.
720.20 Snow Emergencies. The Director of Public Works will declare a snow emergency if there
is a snow event with accumulation of three inches or more predicted by NOAA, or such
conditions warrant.
(A) The City of Princeton web site, the City of Princeton Facebook page, the City of
Princeton Digital Community Sign and WQPM will be used as a means to notify
residents that a snow emergency is declared. A six-hour notification of a snow
emergency will be given prior to the snow emergency going into effect.
(B) Unless otherwise stated by the Director of Public Works or the Public Works
Supervisor, when a snow emergency is enacted, the snow emergency will go into
effect at 2:00 a.m. the morning after the snow emergency is enacted. The snow
emergency will continue until canceled by the Director of Public Works or the Public
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-12
Works Supervisor, or streets are plowed curb to curb.
(C) Any police officer or duly sworn authorized person may tow, immediately, any
vehicle that is parked on any street or public right of way within the City of Princeton
when a snow emergency has been declared. The towing may continue until the snow
emergency has been canceled.
720.99 Penalty. Violation of this chapter shall be a petty misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to
exceed that permitted by state law.
Chapter 730 - Truck Parking
730.01 Parking of Certain Vehicles Restricted. No person shall park any of the following
described vehicles on any street, alley or public property in any residential or multiple
dwelling zoned district within the municipal limits for more than one hour:
(A) Trucks of a capacity of more than one ton, according to manufacturer’s rating;
(B) Trucks having an over-all length of more than 20 feet or a width at any point of more
than 8 feet;
(C) Dump trucks, tractors, truck-tractors, trailers, semi-trailers or any heavy equipment
or machinery;
(D) Any truck, trailer, semi-trailer, tractor or other vehicle which is being used, or has
been used, for the transporting of any fowl or livestock or any pieces or parts thereof.
730.99 Penalty. Any person found guilty of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be penalized as provided in § 100.99.
Chapter 740 - Bicycles, Skateboards and the Like
740.01 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) “Bikeway” means that area of a right of way parallel to a roadway with a hard
surface, designated by the City Council as a bikeway, and intended to be used by
pedestrians, bicycles, skateboards and in-line skates.
(B) “Non-motorized vehicle” means bicycle, skateboard, in-line skate.
740.02 Designation of Bikeway.
(A) The purpose of the bikeway is to encourage the safe and efficient travel of
non-motorized traffic through the downtown business district, while causing a
minimum of disruption to other users.
(B) The sidewalk on the east side of Rum River Drive shall be designated as a “bikeway”
and non-motorized vehicles shall be permitted.
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-13
(C) Any person operating a non-motorized vehicle shall be in complete control of the
non-motorized vehicle at all times and shall operate the non-motorized vehicle in a
manner which does not cause injury or annoyance to any other person.
(D) All operators must yield to pedestrians at all times.
(E) All operators must use caution at intersections and may not enter an intersection at a
speed greater than a speed similar to an ordinary walking speed.
740.03 Prohibited Activities.
(A) The following and similar activities shall be prohibited upon the designated bikeway.
(1) Any trick operation or any operation which causes the operator to change
speed and/or direction frequently or abruptly.
(2) Any activity which reasonably could result in an unsafe condition.
(3) Any activity which causes another person to have to quickly react to the
actions of the non-motorized vehicle to avoid an accident.
(B) The use of skate boards, bicycles or skate type shoes, or other similar devices, on any
sidewalk in the business district, unless designated as a bikeway, is prohibited. The
business district is the area along Rum River Drive for its entire length from Smith
Systems Road to TH 95. The area also includes 1st Street (CSAH 31) from 4th
Avenue to 7th Avenue.
740.04 Marking.
(A) The Public Works Director shall mark the bikeway by causing diamond shaped
markings on the pavement to be affixed to the pavement at regular intervals not more
than 100 feet apart. The markings shall be at least 12 inches in diameter and of a
uniform color and design.
(B) The Public Works Director shall cause signs to be erected along the bikeway
indicating that it is a bikeway, indicating the pavement diamond markings, indicating
the route may be used by skate boards, bicycles and skate-type shoes, and indicating
that all non-motorized vehicle uses must yield to pedestrians.
740.99 Penalty.
(A) Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and punishable as provided for in
Minnesota State Statutes.
(B) In addition, a police officer may impound the non-motorized vehicle used at the time
of the violation and hold the vehicle until the payment of an impound fee as set from
time to time by the City Council. Initially, the fee shall be $25.00, plus the cost of
storage.
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-14
(C) If the operator causing the violation is under 18 years of age at the time of the
violation, the operator’s parent(s) or guardian must retrieve the impounded vehicle.
Chapter 750 – Recreational Motor Vehicles (Snowmobiles and ATVs)
750.01 Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, have the
meanings as set out herein:
(A) “Recreational Motor Vehicle” (RMV) means a self-propelled vehicle designed for
travel on snow, ice or natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners. Snowmobiles
and All-Terrain Vehicles (ATV) are RMVs.
(B) “Operate” means to ride in or on and control the operation of an RMV.
(C) “Operator” means every person who operates or is in actual physical control of an
RMV.
(D) “Owner” means a person, other than a person with a security interest, having a
property interest in or title to an RMV and entitled to the use and possession of
the vehicle.
(E) “Person” includes an individual, partnership, corporation, the state and its agencies
and subdivisions and any body of persons, whether incorporated or not.
(F) “Public road right-of-way” means the entire right-of-way of a public road, including
the traveled portions, banks, ditches, shoulders and medians of a roadway that is not
privately owned.
(G) “Register” means the act of assigning a registration number to an RMV.
(H) “Snowmobile Trails” mean the property designated and posted for use by RMVs.
(I) “Street” means any public roadway, including streets, highways and alleys.
750.02 Intent. It is the intent of this ordinance to limit the use of snowmobiles and ATVs within
the city of Princeton. Persons riding snowmobiles and ATVs may travel only the most
direct route to travel to and from recreational trails outside the city but may not use city
streets for excursion driving.
750.03 Operation on Street.
(A) (1) All provisions of this code as to traffic regulation and parking shall apply to
the operation of RMVs upon the streets and other public property of this
municipality, except for those relating to required equipment and except those
which by their nature have no application.
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-15
(2) All provisions of the Highway Traffic Regulations Act, M.S. Ch. 169, as it
may be amended from time to time, and all ordinances of the city regulating
traffic shall apply to the operation of RMVs upon streets and highways, except
those which by their nature have no application.
(B) When operating an RMV upon a street, all such operation shall be at the extreme
right of the street as near to the curb or shoulder thereof as practical under the
circumstances.
(C) No person shall operate an RMV upon the roadway, shoulder or inside bank or slope
of any trunk, county state aid or county highway in the city.
(D) An RMV may make a direct crossing of a street or highway at any hour of the day,
provided:
(1) The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction
of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe
crossing;
(2) The RMV is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main
traveled way of the highway;
(3) The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic which constitutes an
immediate hazard;
(4) If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour before sunset to
one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility, only if both
front and rear lights are on.
(E) No person shall operate an RMV within the corporate limits of this municipality
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and sunrise, except that occasional operation upon a
public street or a city approved trail or path after said hour shall be permitted when
the operator is proceeding directly to his or her home from outside the municipality.
(F) When two or more RMVs shall be operated together or as a group, they shall stay in
single file while operating upon any street and not more than three RMVs shall
proceed in any single group.
750.04 Unlawful Operation. Unless otherwise noted, it is unlawful for any person to operate an
RMV:
(A) At any place while under the influence of alcohol or of a controlled substance, as
defined in or referred to in M.S. §169.121, as it may be amended from time to time,
which statutes are hereby incorporated herein by reference;
(B) At any rate of speed greater than 20 miles per hour on city streets;
(C) In a careless, reckless or negligent manner or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-16
safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, or cause
injury or damage to any person or property;
(D) So as to tow any person or thing on a public street or highway;
(E) In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to disturb or
interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons;
(F) Unless the RMV has been registered or licensed as required by State Statutes
(G) Unless the driver is in possession of a valid Driver’s License (not required for
snowmobile use);
(H) On airport property;
(I) Without fully complying with the provisions of M.S. §84.81 through 84.915,
inclusive, and M.S. §84.92 through 84.929, inclusive, and as may be amended from
time to time, and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, and all other state
statutes regulating such activities, which statutes and rules and regulations are hereby
adopted and made a part hereof.
750.05 Unlawful Operation on Streets and the Like. Except as herein permitted, it shall be
unlawful for any person to operate an RMV in the city under the following circumstances:
(A) On private property without the express permission to do so by the owner and
occupant of the property;
(B) On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, winter recreational areas, golf
courses, cemeteries or any other public places, except on posted “Snowmobile Trail”
locations, unless the operator has the express permission by the proper public
authority;
(C) No RMV shall be operated on public sidewalks or boulevards;
(D) On the portion of any public road right-of-way used for motor vehicle travel or the
roadway of a state, trunk, county state aid or county highway, except that a city street
may be used only to gain access to and from those areas not restricted by this
chapter. Except where prohibited by state statutes or other provisions of this chapter,
RMVs may also be operated upon the ditch bottom or outside of trunk, county state
aid and county highways where such highways lie within the corporate limits of the
city;
(E) No RMV shall enter any intersection without yielding the right-of-way to any
vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection or so close to the intersection as to
constitute an immediate hazard;
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-17
(F) The operator of an RMV shall make every effort to be visible to oncoming traffic
from any direction.
(G) Only the operator of the RMV shall be on the vehicle. No RMV shall be operated
with any additional passengers except, as provided by State Statutes, a parent or
guardian may operate an ATV carrying one (1) passenger who is under 16 years of
age and who wears a safety helmet approved by the Minnesota Commissioner of
Public Safety..
750.06 Equipment. No RMV shall be operated within the city unless it shall have the following
equipment:
(A) Mufflers which are properly attached, which are in good working order and which
blends the exhaust noise into the overall RMV noise, is in constant operation to
prevent excessive or unusual noise as is required by law and the rules and regulations
of the State of Minnesota pertaining thereto, and no person shall use a muffler
cut-out, by-pass, straight pipe or any similar device on a snowmobile;
(B) At least one headlamp, one tail lamp, each a minimum candle power as prescribed by
regulations of the State of Minnesota, reflector material of a minimum area of 16
square inches mounted on each side forward of the handlebars;
(C) Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the RMV under
any condition of operation;
(D) A safety or so-called “dead-man” throttle in operating condition; a safety or
“dead-man” throttle is defined as a device which, when pressure is removed from the
accelerator or throttle, causes the RMV to come to a stop.
750.07 Age Restrictions. No person shall operate an RMV in violation of the age requirements
established by Minnesota State Statutes.
750.08 Emergency Operation. Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this chapter, an RMV may be
operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the periods of time when, and at
all locations where, snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile impractical.
750.09 Organized RMV Events. In accordance with M.S. §84.87, Subd. 1a., as it may be
amended from time to time, and M.S. §84.87, Subd. 3, nothing in this chapter shall
prohibit the use of RMVs within the city in organized events or contests, provided the
organized events or contests are conducted as hereinafter set forth.
(A) Authorization. Any incorporated veterans’ organization and/or club, incorporated
religious corporation or non-profit corporations may organize and conduct within the
incorporated limits of the city an organized RMV event or RMV contest, provided
the organization shall first apply to the city for and obtain a permit authorizing such
organized RMV event or RMV contest.
(B) Term. The permits issued for said organized RMV event or contest may be for one,
two, but not more than three consecutive days.
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-18
(C) Permit required. No organized RMV event or RMV contest shall be conducted
within the city unless the sponsoring organization shall have first obtained from the
city a permit therefore as provided herein, which the organizing corporation shall
comply with all terms and conditions of this chapter and of the permit issued
pursuant hereto.
(D) Application. Any corporation as herein defined desiring to obtain a permit to give or
hold or conduct an organized RMV event or RMV contest shall make verified
application to City Hall upon blanks to be furnished by the City Administrator. The
application shall set forth in reasonable detail the dates, hours, place or places,
description of event or contest to be conducted, description of security facilities and
personnel, if any, and information as the Chief of Police of the city may thereafter
demand. The application shall also be accompanied by acceptable documentary
evidence that the applicant has or will have in force public liability insurance which
will protect both the city and all members of the public who might attend the
organized event and which insurance shall be in a minimum of $600,000.00. The
applicant shall pay to the city at the time of application a fee in an amount as the
Council of this city shall set from time to time hereafter. The Chief of Police shall
thereupon investigate the applying organization, the application for permit and all
related fact-statements made therein and make a report to the City Council
recommending either issuance or rejection of the application for permit.
(E) Issuance of permit. The Administrator of this city, upon approval by the City
Council, may issue a permit authorizing the applicant to organize and conduct such
RMV organized event or RMV contest within the city for a period not to exceed
three consecutive days.
(1) The Administrator is hereby authorized, upon recommendation of the Chief of
Police, to suspend and/or alter and change existing city ordinance and
regulations regulating the operation of snowmobiles within the city so as to
permit the operation thereof, under different terms and conditions, in said
RMV organized events.
(2) The Administrator may authorize operating a RMV during said organized
RMV event on any public property and/or city-owned property, not including
the municipal airport, and, further, may establish minimum required safety
regulations and provisions to govern the operation of RMV during such RMV
organized events.
(a) These regulations and provisions may include authorizing persons 12
years of age or older to so operate, providing that each such snowmobile
operator shall have in his or her immediate possession a valid State of
Minnesota snowmobile safety certificate.
(b) The said terms, regulations and provisions may also require the wearing
by all RMV operators at all times of State of Minnesota-approved safety
helmets.
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-19
750.99 Penalties. Any person violating the terms of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be as provided in §100.99.
Chapter 760 - Motorized Golf Carts
760.01 Use of City Streets.
(A) Motorized golf carts shall only be operated on city streets which the Council shall by
resolution designate as cart routes.
(B) Only persons who have a valid permit issued by the city under the conditions in
§760.02.
(C) When a person holding a valid permit does not reside on a designated cart route, the
permit holder may use the most direct route available to reach a designated route
from the residence, but shall not operate the cart on any other street not designated as
a cart route. Where the permit holder’s destination is not on a designated route, the
permit holder may use the most direct route between the destination and the nearest
designated route.
(D) Motorized golf carts may only be operated on designated routes from sunrise to
sunset. They shall not be operated in inclement weather or when visibility is impaired
by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions or at any time when there is insufficient
light to clearly see persons in vehicles on the roadway at a distance of 500 feet.
(E) Motorized golf carts shall display the slow moving vehicle emblem provided for in
M.S. § 169.522, as it may be amended from time to time, when operated on
designated routes.
(F) Every person operating a motorized golf cart under permit on designated routes has
all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under the
provisions of M.S. Ch. 169, as amended from time to time, except when those
provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts and except as
otherwise specifically provided in M.S. § 169.045, Subd. 7, as amended from time to
time.
760.02 Requirement for Permit.
(A) Each person desiring a permit for the operation of a motorized golf cart must submit
an application provided by the city accompanied by an application fee as established
by the City Council by resolution.
(B) Each application shall show evidence of the name and address of the applicant,
evidence of insurance which meets the requirements of M.S. § 65B.48, Subd. 5, as
amended from time to time, and such other information as the city may require.
(C) Each permit must be renewed annually and each renewal must meet the requirements
City of Princeton Title 7 Traffic/Vehicles
7-20
set forth in this section.
(D) A permit may be revoked at any time if it is shown the permittee cannot safely
operate the motorized golf cart on the designated routes or if the person has had a
valid driver’s license revoked for traffic violations.
760.03 Liability. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the
city for any injuries to persons on property which may result from the operation of a
motorized golf cart by a permit holder or the failure by the city to revoke the permit.
760.99 Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and punished as provided in § 100.99.
Chapter 770 – Unauthorized Vehicles
Added 2-13-14, Ord #703
770.01 Definitions: The following words and phrases, when used in Chapter 770.have the
meanings set out herein:
“Vehicle” includes all self-propelled devices such as automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor
scooters, mini-bikes, dune buggies, trail bikes, go-carts, golf carts, any vehicle designed for
travel on snow, ice or natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners, including
snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles and recreational motor vehicles.
770.02 Intent: It is the intent of this ordinance to prohibit vehicular travel on certain streets,
parking lots and other public places in order to preserve their use for public safety vehicles,
vehicles engaged in public safety functions, and other vehicle usage by the City, as determined
by the City Council.
770.03 Streets And Places Designated: The City Council shall by resolution designate streets,
parking lots and other places at which the driving, operating or physical control of an
unauthorized Vehicle as defined herein, is prohibited, and shall authorize the placement of signs
which clearly prohibit the presence of an unauthorized Vehicle.
770.04 Authorization For Certain Public Functions: The City Council shall by resolution
designate the public functions and public officers and employees performing such public
functions, which are authorized to drive, operate or be in physical control of a vehicle on the
streets, parking lots and other places designated in Section 770.03.
770.05 Violations: It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for any person to
drive, operate or be in physical control of an unauthorized Vehicle on a street or other place
where unauthorized Vehicles are prohibited by resolution of the City Council and signs have
been placed which clearly prohibit the presence of unauthorized Vehicles.
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-1
TITLE 8. STREETS/SIDEWALKS
Chapter 800 Right-of-Way Regulations
(Revised 04-11-19; Ord. 781)
Chapter 800 - Right-of-Way Management
800.1 Findings, Purpose, and Intent. This Chapter of this code relates to right-of-way permits
and administration. This Chapter imposes reasonable regulation on the placement and
maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within the City’s rights-of-way or to be
placed therein at some future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of
state and federal agencies. Under this Chapter, persons excavating and obstructing the
rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work through the recovery of outof-
pocket and projected costs from persons using the public rights-of-way.
800. 2 Adoption of Rules by Reference. This Chapter shall be interpreted consistently with
1997 Session Laws, Chapter 123, substantially codified in Minnesota Statutes, Sections
23(7)16, 23(7)162, 23(7)163, 23(7)79, 23(7)81, and 238.086 (the “Act”) and the other laws
governing applicable rights of the City and users of the right-of-way. This Chapter shall also
be interpreted consistent with Minnesota Rules 7819.0050 – 7819.9950 where possible.
To the extent that any provision of this Chapter cannot be interpreted consistently with the
Minnesota Rules, the interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory
and case law is intended. This chapter shall not be interpreted to limit the regulatory
and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect
the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
800.3 Election to Manage the Public Rights-of-Way. Pursuant to the authority granted to
the City under state and federal statutory, administrative and common law, the City
elects pursuant Minnesota Statutes, Section 23(7)163 subdivision 2(b), to manage
rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
800.4 Definitions. The following definitions apply in this Chapter of this code. References to
“Sections” are unless otherwise specified references to Section in this Chapter.
(A) “Abandoned Facility” means a facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other facility, that is
in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned unless declared so by the
right-of-way user or deemed abandoned by this chapter.
(B) “Applicant” means any person requesting permission to collocate or place a facility
in the right-of-way or to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way.
(C) “City” means the City of Princeton, Minnesota. For purposes of this Chapter, City
means its elected officials, officers, employees and agents.
(D) “City Management Costs” The actual costs the city incurs in managing its right-ofCity
of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-2
way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with utility fees; registering
applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way permit applications;
inspecting job sites and restoration determining the adequacy of right-of-way
restoration; restoring work inadequately performed after Management costs do not
include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the rightof-
way, unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by the city including fees
tied to or based on customer counts, access line, or revenues generated by the rightof-
way or the city, the fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of
Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123; Minnesota Statutes Sections 237.162 or
237.163; or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city fees and costs
related to appeals taken pursuant to Section 14.30 of this chapter.
(E) “Collocate or Collocation” To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace
a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing wireless support
structure that is owned privately or by the city.
(F) “Commission” means the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.
(G) “Congested Right-of-Way” means a crowded condition in the subsurface of the
public right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing
underground facilities does not allow for construction of new underground facilities
without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral facilities in conformance
with Minnesota Statutes, Section 216D.0(4) subdivision 3, over a continuous length
in excess of 500 feet.
(H) “Construction Performance Bond” means any of the following forms of security
provided at permittee’s option:
(1) Individual project bond, including a “license and permit” bond;
(2) Cash deposit;
(3) Security of a form listed or approved under Minnesota Statutes, Section.
1(5)73, subdivision 3;
(4) Letter of Credit, in a form acceptable to the City;
(5) Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the City;
(6) A blanket bond for projects within the City, or other form of construction bond,
for a time specified and, in a form, acceptable to the City.
(I) “Degradation” means a decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by
excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct
such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation or disturbance did
not occur.
(J) “Degradation Cost” subject to Minnesota Rules 7819.1100 means the cost to
achieve a level of restoration as determined by the City at the time the permit is
issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in
Minnesota Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-3
(K) “Degradation Fee” means the estimated fee established at the time of permitting by
the City to recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of the right-ofway
caused by the excavation, and which equals the degradation cost.
(L) “Department Inspector” means any person authorized by the City to carry out “
(M) “Director” means Princeton’s City Administrator, or her or his designee.
(N) “Delay Penalty” is the penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in rightof-
way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as established by permit.
(O) “Emergency” means a condition that (1) poses a danger to life or health, or of a
significant loss of property; or (2) requires immediate repair or replacement of
facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
(P) “Equipment” means any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain facilities
in any right-of-way.
(Q) “Excavate” means to dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
(R) “Excavation Permit” The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained
before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An excavation permit allows the
holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit.
(S) “Excavation Permit Fee” Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the costs as
provided in §94.57.
(T) “Excavation Permittee” Any person to whom a permit to excavate a right-of-way has
been granted by the city under this chapter.
(U) “Facility or Facilities” means tangible asset in the public right-of-way required to
provide utility service, including but not limited to, any type of cables, utility poles,
wireless facilities, small wireless facilities, micro wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, and wireline backhaul facilities. The term does not include Facilities to
the extent the location and relocation of such Facilities are preempted by Minnesota
Statutes, Section 16(1)45, governing utility facility placement in state trunk
highways.
(V) “High Density Corridor” means a designated portion of the public right-of-way
within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and competing
facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a common conduit system
or other common structure.
(W) “Hole” means an excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation having a length
less than the width of the pavement or adjacent pavement.
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-4
(X) “Local Representative” means a local person or persons, or designee of such person
or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for that
registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this Section.
(Y) “Management Costs” means the actual costs the City or Princeton Public Utilities
incurs in managing its rights-of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those
associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way
permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining,
supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-way work;
determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately
performed, mapping of “as built” location of facilities located in the right-of-way;
and revoking right-of-way permits and performing all other tasks required by this
Chapter, including other costs the City may incur in managing matters described in
this Chapter. Management costs do not include payment by a telecommunications
right-of-way User for the use of the right-of-way, the fees and cost of litigation
relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123;
Minnesota Statutes, Sections 23(7)162 or 23(7)163 or any ordinance enacted under
those sections, or the City fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to Section
80(2)6(1)
(Z) “Micro Wireless Facility” A small wireless facility that is no larger than 24 inches
long, 15 inches wide, and 12 inches high, and whose exterior antenna, if any, is no
longer than 11 inches.
(AA) “Obstruct” means to place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free
and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
(BB) “Obstruction Permit” means the permit that, pursuant to this Chapter, must be
obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of that right-of-way, for the duration
specified therein, including a blanket permit for a period of time and for types of
work specified by the Director, if deemed appropriate in the Director’s discretion.
(CC) “Obstruction Permit Fee” means money paid to the City by a permittee to cover the
costs as provided in Section 800.1(3)
(DD) “Patch or Patching” means a method of pavement replacement that is temporary in
nature. A patch consists of (1) the compaction of the subbase and aggregate base, and
(2) the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement for a minimum of two feet
beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions.
(EE) “Pavement” means any type of improved surface that is within the public right-ofway
and that is paved or otherwise constructed with paver blocks, bituminous,
concrete, aggregate, or gravel.
(FF) “Permit” has the meaning given “right-of-way permit” in Minnesota Statutes,
Section 23(7)16(2)
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-5
(GG) “Permittee” means any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-ofway,
or to collocate or place a small wireless facility or wireless support structure in
the right-of-way, has been granted by the City and under this Chapter.
(HH) “Person” means an individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state,
however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign, whether
for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or political.
(II) “Potholing” means excavating the area above an underground facility to determine
the precise location of the underground facility, without damage to it, before
excavating within two (2) feet of the marked location of the underground facility, as
required in Minnesota Statutes, Section 216D subd. 3a.
(JJ) “Public Right-Of-Way” has the meaning given it in Minnesota Statutes, Section
23(7)162, subdivision (3)
(KK) “Registrant” means any person who (1) has or seeks to have its equipment or
facilities located in any right-of-way, or (2) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to
occupy or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-ofway
(LL) “Restore or Restoration” means the process by which an excavated right-of-way
and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same
condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.
(MM) “Restoration Cost” The amount of money paid to the city by an excavation
permittee to achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of
Minnesota Public Utilities Commission rules.
(NN) “Right-of-Way Permit” means either an obstruction or Utility permit, depending on
the circumstances. A permit to perform work in a public right-of-way, whether to
collocate or place facilities in the right-of-way or to excavate or obstruct the rightof-
way, including but not limited to, the excavation permit and small wireless
facility permit required by this chapter.
(OO) “Right-of-Way User or Public Right-of-Way” means (1) a telecommunications
right-of-way user as defined by Minnesota Statutes, Section 23(7)162, subdivision
4; or (2) a person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that is used or
intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a right under law,
franchise, or ordinance to use the public right-of-way. (3) the area on, below or
above a public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane and public sidewalk
in which the City and Princeton Public Utilities has an interest, including other
dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements of the city.
Permitted use in all districts, except in districts zoned residential or historical
districts. A Right-Of-Way does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with
regard to cellular or other non-wire telecommunications or broadcast service.
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-6
(PP) “Service or Utility Service” means and includes (1) services provided by a public
utility as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 216B.02, subdivisions 4 and 6; (2)
services of a telecommunications right-of-way user, including transporting of voice
or data information; (3) services of a cable communications system as defined in
Minnesota Statutes, Section 238.02, subdivision 3; (4) natural gas or electric energy
or telecommunications services provided by a local government unit; (5) services
provided by a cooperative electric association organized under Minnesota Statutes,
Chapter 308A; and (6) water and sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling or
heating services.
(QQ) “Service Lateral” means an underground facility that is used to transmit, distribute,
or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a common source to an
end-use customer. A service lateral is also an underground facility that is used in the
removal of wastewater from a customer’s premises.
(RR) “Small Wireless Facility” A wireless facility that meets all of the following qualifications:
(1) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic
feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna
and all its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic
feet; and (2) all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility,
excluding electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation
boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches,
cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and
other services, and any equipment concealed from the public view within or behind
an existing structure or concealment, is in aggregate no more than 28 cubic feet in
volume, and designed matching color and material of the wireless support structure,
unless other materials or colors are approved by the City or Princeton Public Utilities;
or (3) a micro wireless facility; (4) at least 10 feet above ground level at its lowest
point; (5) wireless facility cabinet shall post its name, location identifying information,
and emergency telephone number visible to the public and not exceed 4
inches by 6 inches; (6) wireless facilities and wireless support structures shall not be
illuminated, except in accord with state and federal regulations, or unless illumination
is integral to the camouflaging strategy such as design intended to look like a
street light pole and approved by the City and Princeton Public Utilities; (7) in the
event that a passive cooling system, the decibel rating of such fans and equipment
shall use low noise profile; (8) small wireless facilities and wireless support structures
shall be located in alignment with existing trees, utility poles, and streetlights,
as long as they are not inset with existing electric distribution structures;(9) small
wireless facilities and wireless support located on existing utility poles, and streetlights
have to be approved by the City and Princeton Public Utilities, and can be removed
and replaced, or at a new location where it has been identified that a streetlight
is necessary; (10) small wireless facilities and wireless support structures shall
be located in a manner that does not impede, obstruct, or hinder usual public pedestrian
or vehicular travel or public safety on a right-of-way; (11) small wireless facilities
and wireless support structures shall be located in a manner that does not violate
or conflict the City Code or Princeton Public Utilities guidelines; (12) small wireless
facilities and wireless support structures shall be located in a manner that does not
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-7
violate the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act; (13) small wireless facilities and
wireless support structures shall be located equal distance between trees when possible,
with a minimum of 15 feet separation such that no proposed disturbance shall
occur within the critical root zone of any tree; (14) small wireless facilities and wireless
support structures shall be located with appropriate clearance from existing utilities
and approved by the City and Princeton Public Utilities; (15) it is the City’s
strong preference that whenever an applicant proposes to place a new small wireless
facility that the applicant collocate the same on existing wireless support structures;
(16) applicant provide an aerial map showing the location of the proposed or existing
support structure to which the small wireless facility is proposed to be attached, or
from which a small wireless facility is proposed to be removed’ and the City and
Princeton Public Utilities reserves the right to propose an alternate location for a
small wireless facility and/or wireless support structure to the location proposed in
the application within one hundred feet of the proposed location or within a distance
that is equivalent to the width of the right-of-way in or on which the small wireless
facility and/or wireless support structure is proposed, whichever is greater, which the
operator shall use if it has the right to use the alternate location on reasonable terms
and conditions and the alternate location does not impose technical limits or unreasonable
additional costs.
(SS) “Small Wireless Facility Permit” The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must
be obtained before a person or entity may place a small wireless facility or wireless
support structure in a right-of-way. A small wireless facility permit allows the holder
to install or erect a wireless support structure, or to collocate or place a small
wireless facility on a right-of-way structure, or both, as described in such permit.
(TT) “Small Wireless Facility Permit Fee” Money paid to the city by an applicant for a
small wireless facility permit to cover the costs as provided in this chapter or City of
Princeton Fee Schedule and separate meter for electrical usage.
(UU) “Supplementary Application” means an application made to excavate or obstruct
more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to place more or different facilities in
the right-of-way, or to extend, a permit that has already been issued.
(VV) “Temporary Surface” means the compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the excavation.
(WW)“Trench” means an excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation having a
length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement or adjacent pavement.
(XX) “Telecommunication Right-Of-Way User” means a person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the right-ofway,
that is used or is intended to be used for providing wireless services, or
transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes of
this Chapter, a cable communication system defined and regulated under Minnesota
Statutes, Chapter 238, and telecommunication activities related to providing natural
gas or electric energy services whether provided by a public utility as defined in
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-8
Minnesota Statutes, Section. 216B.02, a city, a municipality, a municipal gas or
power agency organized under Minnesota Statutes, Chapters 453 and 453A, or a
cooperative electric association organized under Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 308A,
are not telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of this chapter, except
to the extent these entities are offering wireless services.
(YY) “Unusable Facilities” Facilities in the right-of-way which have remained unused for
one year and for which the registrant is unable to provide proof that it has either a
plan to begin using it within the next 12 months or a potential purchaser or user of
the facilities.
(ZZ) “Utility Pole” A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate telecommunications
or electric service.
(AAA)“Utility Permit” means the permit that, pursuant to this Chapter, must be obtained
before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. A Utility Permit allows the holder
to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit.
(BBB)“Utility Permit Fee” means money paid to the City by an applicant to cover the
costs as provided in Section 800.1(3)
(CCC) “Wireless Facility” Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of
Wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network,
including: (1) equipment associated with wireless services; (2) a radio transceiver,
antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and
comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and (3) a small
wireless facility.
Wireless facility does not include: (1) wireless support structures; (2) wireline
backhaul facilities; or (3) coaxial or fiber-optic cables between utility poles or
wireless support structures, or that are not otherwise immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with a specific antenna.
(DDD) “Wireless Service” Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum,
including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means of a mobile
device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless service does not include
services regulated under Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended,
including a cable service under United States Code, title 47, section 522, clause
(6).
(EEE) “Wireless Support Structures” A new or existing structure in a public right-ofway
design to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as
reasonably determined by a local government unit and Princeton Public Utilities.
(FFF) “Wireless Backhaul Facility” A facility used to transport communication data by
wire from a wireless facility to a communications network.
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-9
800.5 Administration.
The Director is the principal City official responsible for the administration of the rightsof-
way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances related thereto. The Director may delegate
any or all of the duties hereunder.
800.6 [Intentionally Left Blank]
800.7 Registration and Right-of-Way Occupancy.
(A) Registration. Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the rightof-
way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-of-way, including
persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease or
assignment, must register with the City and Princeton Public Utilities. Registration
will consist of providing application information and paying a registration fee.
Registration shall be renewed annually.
(B) Registration Prior to Work. No person may construct, install, repair, remove,
relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any part thereof in any
right-of-way without first being registered with the City.
(C) Exceptions. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to repeal or amend the
provisions of a City ordinance establishing the rights of and limitations placed on
persons to plant or maintain boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the rightof-
way between their property and the street curb. Persons carrying out or requesting
the following work shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way within the
meaning of this Chapter, and shall not be governed by this Chapter. Such work by
non right-of-way users shall be regulated by other City Code sections, unless
provided otherwise.
(1) Persons planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens.
(2) Persons erecting fences, installing driveways, sidewalks, curb and gutter, or
parking lots.
(3) Persons engaged in snow removal activities.
(4) Persons installing street furnishings.
(5) Persons installing irrigation systems.
(D) Gopher One Call Nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the provisions
of the Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 216D, Gopher One Call Law.
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-10
800.8 Registration Information.
(A) Information Required. The registrant shall provide the following at the time of
registration and shall promptly notify the City of changes in such information:
(1) Registrant’s name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and Gopher
One-Call registration certificate number if required by State law.
(2) Name, street address and email address, telephone number, and facsimile
number of the person responsible for fulfilling the obligations of the registrant.
(3) A Certificate of Insurance from a company licensed to do business in the State
of Minnesota providing coverage in the following amounts:
GENERAL LIABILITY: Public Liability, including premises, products and
complete operations.
Bodily Injury Liability $1,000,000 each person
3,000,000 each occurrence
Property Damage Liability $3,000,000 each occurrence
Bodily Injury and Property Damage
Combined $3,000,000 single limit
COMPREHENSIVE: Automobile Liability Insurance, including owned, nonowned
and hired vehicles.
Bodily Injury Liability $1,000,000 each person
Property Damage Liability $3,000,000 each occurrence
In lieu of 1) and 2) Bodily Injury and
Property Damage combined $3,000,000 single limit
Such certificate shall verify that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising
out of the (i) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees, and (ii) placement and use of
equipment or facilities in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents,
employees and permittees, including but not limited to, protection against
liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground equipment
and collapse of property. Such certificate shall also name the City and
Princeton Public Utilities as an additional insured as to whom the coverages
required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be
provided as to all such coverages. Such certificate shall require that the City
and Princeton Public Utilities be notified 30 days prior to cancellation of the
policy.
(4) 24 hour emergency number.
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-11
(5) An acknowledgement by the registrant of the indemnification pursuant to
Section 800.30.
(6) Certificate of Authority to do business in Minnesota and in the City, if
applicable.
(7) Such other information as the Director may require.
(B) Notice of Changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above
current at all times by providing to the City information as to changes within fifteen
(15) days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge of any change.
800.9 Reporting Obligations.
(A) Operations. If requested by Director, each registrant shall, at the time of registration
and by April 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for
underground facilities with the City. Such plan shall be submitted using a format
designated by the City and shall contain the information determined by the City to be
necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations
and obstructions of rights-of-way. If by April 1 the registrant has not developed its
construction and maintenance information for the coming year, the registrant shall
file such information with the City thereafter as soon as it is developed.
The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the locations and the estimated
beginning and ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the following
April 1 to March 31 period.
(B) Additional Next-Year Projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City will not
deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a project in a plan
submitted to the City if the registrant has used commercially reasonable efforts to
anticipate and plan for the project.
800.10 Permit Requirements.
(A) Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no right-of-way user
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the
appropriate right-of-way permit from the City to do so.
(1) Utility Permit. A utility permit is required by a registrant to excavate that part
of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder free and open
passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities
described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.
(2) Obstruction Permit. An obstruction permit is required by a registrant to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing
equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-12
duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a person
already possesses a valid utility permit for the same project.
(3) Other Permits. Other permits may be required for persons in accordance with
the City Code.
(4) Overhead Facilities. Permits for installation, repair or other work on aboveground
facilities within the meaning of Minnesota Statutes, Section 23(7)163,
subd. 6(b)(4) will be obstruction permits, notwithstanding the need for
excavation, provided the excavation is augered or hand dug for the purpose of
placing a pole type structure.
(5) Security. For companies not operating under a franchise with the City, a surety
bond, letter of credit or cash deposit in the amount determined by the Director
but not less than $5,000, shall be required from each applicant. A surety bond
shall be from a corporate surety authorized to do business in the State. Security
required pursuant to this paragraph shall be conditioned that the holder will
perform the work in accordance with this Chapter and applicable regulations,
will pay to the City any costs incurred by the City in performing work pursuant
to this Chapter; and will indemnify and save the City and its officers, agents
and employees harmless against any and all claims, judgment or other costs
arising from any excavation and other work covered by the permit or for which
the City Council or any City officer may be liable by reason of any accident or
injury to persons or property through the fault of the permit holder, either in
improperly guarding the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the
negligence of the permit holder. The bond, letter of credit or cash deposit shall
be released by the City upon completion of the work and compliance with all
conditions imposed by the permit. For permits allowing excavations within
public streets, such bond, letter of credit or cash deposit shall be held for a
period of 24 months to guaranty the adequacy of all restoration work.
(B) Permit Extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way beyond the
date or dates specified in the permit unless (i) such person makes a supplementary
application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit,
or requests a verbal extension, and (ii) a new permit or permit extension is granted.
Verbal extensions may be granted by the Director for a period no greater than fortyeight
(48) hours or for emergencies.
(C) Diligence in Performing Work; Delay Penalty. Work shall progress in an
expeditious manner as permitted by weather conditions until completion in order to
avoid unnecessary inconvenience. In the event that the work is not performed in
accordance with applicable regulations, excavations and utility connections. If the
work is not done in an expeditious manner, the City may, after 72 hour notice to the
permit holder, fill the excavation and repair the street. The entire cost of such work
shall be paid by the permit holder upon demand made by the City. In accordance with
Minnesota Rule 7819.1000 subp. 3, the City shall establish and impose a delay
penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or
restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by City Council
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-13
resolution. A delay penalty will not be imposed for delays due to inclement weather,
civil strife, acts of God, or other circumstances beyond the control of the applicant.
(D) Permit Display. Permits issued under this Section shall be conspicuously displayed
or otherwise available at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for
inspection by the City.
(E) Routine Obstruction and Excavation. Projects that do not involve excavation of
paved surface and that last less than eight hours in duration may, in the Director’s
discretion, be considered Routine Obstruction and Excavation. Such projects may
include by way of example, switching, replacing fuses, replacing transformers,
placing line guards, animal protection, leak surveys, anode installations and
inspections. Such routine excavations and obstructions are permitted without separate
notice and separate compensation for such projects.
800.11 Permit Applications.
(A) Content of Permit. Application for a permit is made to the City and Princeton Public
Utilities. Right-of-way permit applications shall contain the following information
and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the
following provisions:
(1) Registration with the City and Princeton Public Utilities pursuant to this
Chapter;
(2) Submission of a completed permit application form as provided by the City and
Princeton Public Utilities, including all required attachments, and 5 copies of
scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the
location of all known existing and proposed facilities owned or operated by the
applicant.
(3) Payment of money due the City for:
a. permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management costs;
b. prior obstructions or excavations;
c. any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the City because
of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or
any emergency actions taken by the City and Princeton Public
Utilities;
(4) Payment of disputed amounts due the City or Princeton Public Utilties by posting
security or depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least
100% of the amount owing.
(5) Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for additional facilities
when applicant requests an excavation permit to install additional faciliCity
of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-14
ties and the City or Princeton Public Utilities deems the existing construction
performance bond inadequate under applicable standards.
800.12 Issuance of Permit; Conditions.
(A) Permit Issuance. If the Applicant has satisfied the requirements of this Chapter, the
City shall issue a permit within ten (10) business days of receiving a completed
application.
(B) Conditions. The City may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the
permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the health, safety
and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
(C) Notice of Work. Upon request by the Director, the Permittee shall notify in writing
in a form approved by the Director all residents specified by the Director whose
property is adjacent to the right-of-way where the proposed work is to be done
indicating start and completion dates. Written notification is not required for Routine
Obstruction and Excavation projects described in Section 4-6-9. If Permittee chooses
not to carry out the notice process required with its own staff, Permittee shall
promptly inform the Director. The City may then carry out the notice process using
its own staff, and Permittee shall reimburse the City its costs of providing required
notice, within thirty (30) days of billing.
800.13 Permit Fees.
(A) Fee Schedule and Fee Allocation. The City’s permit fee schedule shall be available
to the public and established in advance where reasonably possible. The permit fees
shall be designed to recover the City’s actual costs incurred in managing the right-ofway
and shall be based on an allocation among all users of the right-of-way,
including the City.
(B) Utility Permit Fee. The City shall establish a utility permit fee in an amount
sufficient to recover the following costs:
(1) City management costs.
(2) Degradation costs, if applicable.
(C) Obstruction Permit Fee. The City shall establish the obstruction permit fee and
shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the City management costs.
(D) Payment of Permit Fees. No utility permit or obstruction permit shall be issued
without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees.
(E) Non Refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the City has revoked
for a breach as stated in Section 800.23 are not refundable.
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-15
(F) Application to Franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise, management
costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the franchise fees imposed
on a right-of-way user in the franchise.
800.14 Right-of-Way Patching and Restoration.
(A) Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the patching and
restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be completed within the dates
specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work could not be done because
of circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as
unseasonal or unreasonable under Section 800.1(7)
(B) Patch and Restoration. Permittee must patch its own work. The City may choose
either to have the permittee restore the surface and subgrading portions of right-ofway
or to restore the surface portion of right-of-way itself.
(1) Permittee Restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way itself, it shall
at the time of application for an Excavation permit post a construction
performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule
7819.3000.
(2) City Restoration. If the City restores the surface portion of the right-of-way,
permittee shall pay the costs thereof within thirty (30) days of billing. If,
following such Restoration, the pavement settles or otherwise fails for reasons
not caused by City’s failure to properly restore, the permittee shall pay to the
City, within thirty (30) days of billing, all costs associated with correcting the
defective work.
(3) Degradation fee in Lieu of Restoration. In lieu of right-of-way restoration, a
right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However, the right-of-way
user shall remain responsible for replacing and compacting the sub-grade and
aggregate based material in the excavation and the degradation fee shall not
include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
(C) Standards. The permittee shall perform patching and restoration according to the
standards and with the materials specified by the City and shall comply with
Minnesota Rule 7819.1100. In exercising authority over restoration, the Director
shall be guided by the following standards and considerations:
(1) The number, size, depth and duration of the excavations, disruptions or damage
to the right-of-way.
(2) The traffic volume carried by the right-of-way; the character of the
neighborhood surrounding the right-of-way.
(3) The pre-excavation condition of the right-of-way; the remaining lifeexpectancy
of the right-of-way affected by the excavation.
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-16
(4) Whether the relative cost of the method of restoration to the permit holder is in
reasonable balance with the prevention of an accelerated depreciation of the right-ofway
that would otherwise result from the exaction, disturbance or damage to the
right-of-way; and
(5) The likelihood that the particular method of restoration would be effective in
slowing the depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise take place.
(D) Duty to Correct Defects. The permittee shall correct defects in patching, or
restoration performed by permittee or its agents. Upon notification from the City,
permittee shall correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method
required by the City. Unless otherwise agreed to by the Director, said work shall be
commenced within two (2) days of receipt of the notice from the City and shall be
completed within fourteen (14) days of commencement of work, not including days
during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force
majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under
Section 800.1(7)
(E) Failure to Restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner
and to the condition required by the City, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete
all restoration required by the City, the City shall notify the permittee in writing of
the specific alleged failure or failures and shall allow the permittee five (5) days from
receipt of said written notice to cure said failure or failures, unless otherwise
extended by the Director. In the event the permittee fails to cure, the City may at its
option perform the necessary work and permittee shall pay to the City, within thirty
(30) days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as
required, the City may exercise its rights under the construction performance bond.
800.15 Joint and Individual Applications.
(A) Joint Trenching. Director may require registrants to jointly apply for permits to
excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
(B) Fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or excavation,
which the City does not perform, may share in the payment of the obstruction or
utility permit fee as established by the City for joint trenching. Registrants must agree
among themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on their
applications.
(C) With City projects. Registrants in a scheduled obstruction or excavation performed
by the City, whether or not it is a joint application by two or more registrants or a
single application, are not required to pay the utility or obstruction and degradation
portions of the permit fee, but a permit is still required.
800.16 Supplementary Applications.
(A) Limitation on Area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-ofway
specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the area specified
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-17
in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee that determines that an area
greater than that specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before
working in that greater area (i) make application for a permit extension and pay any
additional fees required therefor, and (ii) be granted a new permit or permit
extension.
(B) Limitation on Dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in
the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit start date or, except as
provided herein, continue working after the end date. Except in the case of verbal
extensions, if a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must
apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or
an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the previous
permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the permit end date.
800.17 Other Obligations.
(A) Compliance With Other Laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve
permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and
to pay all fees required by the City or other applicable rule, law or regulation. A
permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state and federal laws,
including but not limited to Minnesota Statutes, Section 216D.01-.09 (Gopher One
Call Excavation Notice System and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560). A permittee
shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules
and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to
its permit, regardless of who does the work.
(B) Prohibited Work. Except in an emergency, or with the approval of the City, no
right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally prohibited or
when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
(C) Interference with Right-of-Way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way
that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways
shall be interfered with, unless otherwise approved by the Director. Private vehicles
of those doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit
area, unless parked in conformance with City parking regulations. The loading or
unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area unless
specifically authorized by the permit.
(D) Traffic Control. A permittee shall implement traffic control measures in the area of
the work and shall use traffic control procedures in accordance with the most recent
manuals on uniform traffic control, traffic control devices and traffic zone layouts
published by the State of Minnesota.
(E) Trenchless Excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits, permittees employing
trenchless excavation methods, including but not limited to Horizontal Directional
Drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter
216D and Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7560, and shall require potholing or open cutCity
of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-18
ting over existing underground utilities before excavating, as determined by the Director.
800.18 Denial of Permit.
The City may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and conditions of this
Chapter or if the City determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety,
and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use or for the
following specific violations.
(A) Failure to register pursuant to Section 800.(7)
(B) The proposed exaction is within a street or sidewalk surface that has been constructed
or reconstructed within the preceding five years, unless the Director determines that
no other locations are feasible or unless necessitated by emergency.
(C) The applicant is subject to revocation of a prior permit issued pursuant to this
Chapter.
(D) The proposed schedule for the work would conflict or interfere with an exhibition,
celebration, festival or any other similar event.
(E) The right-of-way would become unduly congested due to the proposed facilities and
equipment when combined with other uses in the right-of-way as provided in Subd. C
of Section 800.2(6)
(F) Businesses or residences in the vicinity will be unreasonably disrupted.
800.19 Installation Requirements.
The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work performed in the
right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minnesota Rules 7819.1100, 7819.5000
and 7819.5100 and other applicable local requirements such as the City Standard
Specifications and Details, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the Minnesota
Statutes, Sections 23(7)162 and 23(7)16(3) Installation of Service Laterals shall be
performed in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7560 and City ordinances. Service
Lateral installation is further subject to those requirements and conditions set forth by the
City in the applicable permits and/or agreements referenced in Section 800.24, Subd. B.
800.20 Inspection.
(A) Site Inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to the City and to all
others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution
of, and upon completion of, the work.
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-19
(B) Authority of Director.
(1) At the time of inspection the Director may order the immediate cessation of any
work that poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety or well-being of the
public.
(2) The Director may issue an order to the permittee to correct any work that does
not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions, or code. If the work failure is a “substantial breach” within the
meaning of Minnesota Statutes, Section 23(7)163 subd. 4(c), the order shall
state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the
permit after a specified period determined by the Director. The permittee shall
present proof to the Director that the violation has been corrected within the
time period set forth by the Director in the order. Such proof shall be provided
no later than the next business day following the day of completion. If such
proof has not been presented within the required time, the Director may revoke
the permit pursuant to Section 800.2(3)
(C) Standards During Construction or Installation. The permit holder shall comply
with the following standards when engaging in the work:
(1) Take such precautions as are necessary to avoid creating unsanitary conditions.
Observe and comply with all laws, rules and regulations of the State, County
and City.
(2) Conduct the operation and perform the work in a manner that ensures the least
obstruction and interference to traffic.
(3) Take adequate precautions to ensure the safety of the general public and those
who require access to abutting property.
(4) If required by the Director, notify adjoining property owners prior to the
commencement of work that may disrupt the use of and access to such
adjoining properties.
(5) In all cases where construction work interferes with the normal use of the
construction area, provide for closing the construction area to traffic or afford
traffic restricted use of the area and comply with Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices (MUTCD) traffic safety signing requirements.
(6) Exercise precaution at all times for the protection of persons, including
employees and property.
(7) Protect and identify excavations and work operations with barricade flags, and
if required, by flagmen in the daytime, and by warning lights at night.
(8) Provide proper trench protection as required by O.S.H.A. when necessary and
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-20
depending upon the type of soil, in order to prevent cave-ins endangering life or
tending or enlarging the excavation.
(9) Protect the root growth of trees and shrubbery.
(10) If installing pipe (utility conduits) under Portland Cement Concrete asphalt
concrete, or other high-type bituminous pavement installation shall be done by
jacking, auguring or tunneling as directed by the Director unless otherwise
authorized. HDPE sleeving shall be an acceptable casing or sleeving material
for telecommunications installations.
(11) When removing pavement of Portland Cement Concrete, asphalt concrete or
high-type built-up bituminous surfacing, remove the pavement on each side of
the trench or excavation a distance of nine inches beyond the trench width and
length, in order to provide a shoulder and solid foundation for the surface
restoration.
800.21 Work Done Without a Permit.
(A) Emergency Situations. Each registrant shall immediately notify the Director of any
event regarding its facilities that the registrant considers to be an emergency.
Excavators’ notification to Gopher State One Call regarding an emergency situation
does not fulfill this requirement. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions
are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within two (2) business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, unless the Director allows a longer time, the registrant
shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the
rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this Chapter
for the actions it took in response to the Emergency. If the Director concludes that a
registrant is required to perform work at the facility solely because of an emergency
created by another registrant and the work is performed in the immediate area of the
emergency work, the Director may waive the permit otherwise required by the
registrant(s) called to the emergency created by another party.
If the City becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the City
will contact the registrant’s emergency phone number as registered with the City or
listed in the phone directory. The City may take any steps it deems reasonable or necessary
to make the area safe. If there is no response from the registrant, the City may
take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of
which shall be borne by the permittee or registrant whose facilities occasioned the
emergency.
(B) Non-Emergency Situations. Except in an emergency, any person who, without first
having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a right-of-way must
subsequently obtain a permit, pay an unauthorized work permit fee in an amount
established from time to time by the City council, deposit with the City the fees
necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the
requirements of this Chapter.
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-21
800.22 Supplementary Notification.
If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date
given on the permit, permittee shall notify the City by Supplementary Application of the
accurate information as soon as this information is known.
800.23 Revocation of Permits.
(A) Substantial Breach. The City reserves its right to revoke any right-of-way permit,
without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of
any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A
substantial breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
(1) The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
(2) An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way
permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the
City or its citizens;
(3) Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-of-way
permit;
(4) The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a permit extension
is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the
permittee’s control; or
(5) The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a
condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to Section 4-6-19.
(B) Written Notice of Breach. If the City determines that the permittee has committed a
substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or
any condition of the permit the City shall make a written demand upon the permittee
to remedy such violation. The demand shall state that continued violations may be
cause for revocation of the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow
the City to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and
remedy the breach.
(C) Response to Notice of Breach. Within a time established by the Director following
permittee’s receipt of notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the City with
a plan to cure the breach, acceptable to the City. Permittee's failure to submit a timely
and acceptable plan, or permittee’s failure to timely implement the approved plan,
shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit.
(D) Reimbursement of City costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also
reimburse the City for the City's reasonable costs, including Restoration costs and the
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-22
costs of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such
revocation.
800.24 Mapping Data.
(A) Rule. Each registrant and permittee shall provide mapping information in a form
required by the City in accordance with Minnesota Rules 7819.4000 and 7819.4100.
Within 90 days following completion of any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee
shall provide the Director accurate maps and drawings certifying the “as-built”
location of all equipment installed, owned and maintained by the permittee. Such
maps and drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all facilities
and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the City’s electronic mapping
system when practical or as a condition imposed by the Director. Failure to provide
maps and drawings pursuant to this Subsection shall be grounds for revoking the
permit holder’s registration.
(B) Service Laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair of Service Laterals,
other than minor repairs as defined in Minnesota Rules 7560.0150 subpart 2, shall
require the Permitee’s use of appropriate means of establishing the horizontal locations
of installed Service Laterals, and the Service Lateral vertical locations in those
cases where the Director reasonably requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors
shall submit to the Director evidence satisfactory to the Director of the installed Service
Lateral locations. Compliance with this subdivision 2 and with applicable Gopher
State One Call law and Minnesota Rules governing Service Laterals installed after
December 31, 2005, shall be a condition of any City approval necessary for 1)
payments to contractors working on a public improvement project including those
under Minnesota Statutes, chapter 429, and 2) City approval of performance under
development agreements, or other subdivision or site plan approval under Minnesota
Statutes, Chapter 46(2) The Director shall reasonably determine the appropriate
method of providing such information to the City. Failure to provide prompt and accurate
information on the Service Laterals installed may result in the revocation of
the permit issued for the work or denial of future permits to the offending Permittee
or its subcontractors.
(C) As-Builts. As-builts will be required in hard copy and electronically if the project
permitted deviates two (2) feet or more from the original plans submitted to the City.
800.25 Undergrounding.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this Section 4-6-24 is to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the public and is intended to foster (i) safe travel over the right-ofway,
(ii) non-travel related safety around homes and buildings where overhead feeds
are connected and (iii) orderly development in the City. Location and relocation, installation
and reinstallation of Facilities in the right-of-way or in or on other public
ground must be made in accordance with this Subdivision. This Subdivision is intended
to be enforced consistently with state and federal law regulating right-of-way
users, specifically including but not limited to Minnesota Statutes, Sections 16(1)45,
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-23
23(7)162, 23(7)163, 300.03, 22(2)37, 238.084 and 216B.36 and the Telecommunications
Act of 1996, Title 47, U.S.C. Section 25(3)
(B) Undergrounding of Facilities. If the City finds that one or more of the purposes set
forth in Section 800.25, Subd. A above would be promoted, the City may require
newly installed or constructed Facilities in the public right-of-way or in other public
property held in common for public use to be located and maintained underground
pursuant to the terms and conditions of this Section and in accordance with applicable
construction standards, subject to the exceptions below. Above-ground installation,
construction, modification, or replacement of meters, gauges, transformers,
street lighting, pad mount switches, capacitor banks, re-closers and service connection
pedestals shall be allowed. The requirements of this Section shall apply equally
outside of the corporate limits of the City coincident with City jurisdiction of platting,
subdivision regulation or comprehensive planning as may now or in the future
be allowed by law.
(C) Undergrounding of Permanent Replacement, Relocated or Reconstructed Facilities.
If the City finds that one or more of the purposes set forth in Section 800.25,
Subd. A. would be promoted, the City may require a permanent replacement, relocation
or reconstruction of a Facility of more than 300 feet to be located, and maintained
underground, with due regard for seasonal working conditions. For purposes
of this Section, reconstruction means any substantial repair of or any improvement to
existing Facilities. Undergrounding may be required whether a replacement, relocation
or reconstruction is initiated by the right-of-way user owning or operating the
Facilities, or by the City in connection with (1) the present or future use by the City
or other local government unit of the right-of-way or other public ground for a public
project, (2) the public health or safety, or (3) the safety and convenience of travel
over the right-of-way.
(D) Exceptions to Undergrounding. The following exceptions to the strict application
of this Section shall be allowed upon the conditions stated:
(1) Transmission Lines. Above-ground installation, construction, or placement of
those Facilities commonly referred to as “high voltage transmission lines” shall
be allowed unless the council requires undergrounding of the Facilities after
providing the right-of-way user notice and an opportunity to be heard. This
provision shall not be construed as waiving the requirements of any other ordinance
or regulation of the City as the same may apply to any such proposed
project.
(2) Technical/Economic Feasibility; Promotion of Policy. Above-ground installation,
construction, or placement of Facilities shall be allowed in residential,
commercial and industrial areas where the council, following consideration and
recommendation by the planning commission, finds that:
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-24
a. Underground placement would place an undue financial burden upon the
landowner, ratepayers, or right-of-way user or would deprive the landowner
of the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights; or,
b. Underground placement is impractical or not technically feasible due to
topographical, subsoil or other existing conditions that adversely affect underground
Facilities placement.
c. Failure to promote the purposes of undergrounding. The right-of-way user
clearly and convincingly demonstrates that none of the purposes under Section
800.25, Subd. A would be advanced by underground placement of Facilities
on the project in question, or the City determines on its own review
that undergrounding is not warranted based on the circumstances of the
proposed undergrounding.
(3) Temporary Service. Above-ground installation, construction, or placement of
temporary service lines shall only be allowed:
a. During new construction of any project for a period not to exceed three (3)
months;
b. During an emergency in order to safeguard lives or property within the City;
c. For a period of not more than seven (7) months when soil conditions make
excavation impractical.
(E) Developer Responsibility. All owners, platters, or developers are responsible for
complying with the requirements of this Section, and prior to final approval of any
plat or development plan, shall submit to the Director written instruments from the
appropriate right-of-way users showing that all necessary arrangements with said
users for installation of such Facilities have been made.
800.26 Location and Relocation of Facilities.
(A) Rule. Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with the Act, with
other applicable law, and with Minnesota Rules 7819.3100, 7819.5000 and
7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.
(1) Relocation Schedule Notification Procedure: The Director shall notify the
utility owner at least three months in advance of the need to relocate existing
facilities so the owner can determine if relocation or replacement is required
and plan any required work. The Director shall provide a second notification to
the owner one month before the owner needs to begin the relocation and the
date by which the relocation must be completed. To the extent technically feasible,
all utilities shall be relocated within one month or in a time frame determined
by the Director. The Director may allow a different schedule if it does
not interfere with the City’s project. The utility owner shall diligently work to
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-25
relocate the facilities within the above schedule.
(2) Delay to City Project: If the owner fails to meet the relocation schedule due to
circumstances within the utility’s control, the City may charge the utility owner
for all costs incurred by the City because the relocation is not completed in the
scheduled timeframe.
(3) Joint Trenching: All Facilities shall be placed in appropriate portions of rightof-
way so as to cause minimum conflict with other underground Facilities.
When the City determines that it is technically appropriate and no safety hazards
are created, all utilities shall be installed, constructed or placed within the
same trench. Notwithstanding the foregoing, gas and electric lines shall be
placed in conformance with Minnesota Rules pt. 7819.5100, subd. 2, governing
safety standards.
(B) Corridors. The City may assign a specific area within the right-of-way, or any particular
segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities that are or,
pursuant to current technology, the City expects will be located within the right-ofway.
All excavation, obstruction, or other permits issued by the City involving the installation
or replacement of Facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities
at issue. A typical crossing section of the location for utilities may be on file
at the Director’s office. This Section is not intended to establish “high density corridors”.
Any Registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position at variance with
the corridors established by the City may remain at that location until the City requires
Facilities relocation to the corridor pursuant to relocation authority granted
under Minnesota Rules part 7819.3100 or other applicable law.
(C) Limitation of Space. To protect the public health, safety, and welfare or when necessary
to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the City shall have the power to
prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way.
In making such decisions, the City shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate
all existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by
considerations of the public interest, the public's needs for the particular utility service,
the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities,
the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future City plans for
public improvements and development projects that have been determined to be in
the public interest.
800.27 Pre-excavation Facilities Location.
In addition to complying with the requirements of Minnesota Statutes, Sections 216D.01-
.09 (“One Call Excavation Notice System”) before the start date of any right-of-way excavation,
each registrant who has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall be
responsible to mark the horizontal placement of all said facilities, to the extent technically
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-26
feasible. To the extent its records contain such information, each registrant shall provide
information regarding the approximate vertical location of their facilities to excavators upon
request. Nothing in this Section is meant to limit the rights, duties and obligations of the
facility owners or excavators as set forth in Minnesota Statutes, Sections 216D.01-.09.
800.28 Interference By Other Facilities.
When the City does work in the right-of-way in its governmental right-of-way management
function and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move a registrant's facilities to carry
out the work without damaging registrant’s facilities, the City shall notify the local
representative as early as is reasonably possible. The City costs associated therewith will be
billed to that registrant and must be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of billing.
Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-ofway
that it or its facilities damages.
800.29 Right-of-Way Vacation – Reservation of Right.
(A) Reservation of Right. If the City vacates a right-of-way that contains the equipment
of a registrant, and if the vacation does not require the relocation of registrant facilities
and equipment, the City shall reserve, to and for itself and all registrants having
facilities and equipment in the vacated right-of-way, the right to install, maintain and
operate any facilities and equipment in the vacated right-of-way and to enter upon
such right-of-way at any time for the purpose of reconstruction, inspecting, maintaining
or repairing the same.
(B) Relocation of Equipment. If the vacation requires the relocation of registrant facilities
and equipment; and (a) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by the registrant,
the registrant must pay the relocation costs; or (b) if the vacation proceedings are initiated
by the City, the registrant must pay the relocation costs unless otherwise agreed
to by the City and the registrant; or (c) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by a
person or persons other than the registrant or permit holder, such other person or persons
must pay the relocation costs.
800.30 Indemnification and Liability.
By registering with the City, or by accepting a permit under this Chapter, a registrant or
permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the City in accordance with the provisions of
Minnesota Rule 7819.1250.
800.31 Abandoned Facilities.
(A) Discontinued Operations. A registrant who has decided to discontinue all or a
portion of its operations in the City must provide information satisfactory to the City
that the registrant's obligations for its facilities in the right-of-way under this Chapter
have been lawfully assumed by another registrant.
(B) Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall
remove them from that right-of-way pursuant to Minnesota Rule Part 7819.3300,
City of Princeton Title 8 Streets/Sidewalks
8-27
unless the requirement is waived by the Director.
800.32 Appeal.
A right-of-way user that:
(1) has been denied registration;
(2) has been denied a permit;
(3) has had permit revoked; or
(4) believes that the fees imposed are not in conformity with Minnesota Statutes, Section
23(7)163, Subd. 6; or
(5) disputes a determination of the Director regarding Section 800.24, subd. B of this
Ordinance may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition or decision reviewed,
upon written request, by the City council. The City council shall act on a timely
written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting provided the right-of-way user
has submitted its appeal with sufficient time to include the appeal as a regular agenda
item. A decision by the City council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee
imposition will be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the
reasonableness of the decision.
800.33 Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers.
A permittee’s or registrant’s rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the
City to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the public.
800.34 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Chapter is for any reason
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction,
such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and
such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. If a regulatory
body or a court of competent jurisdiction should determine by a final, non-appealable order
that any permit, right or registration issued under this Chapter or any portions of this Chapter
is illegal or unenforceable, then any such permit, right or registration granted or deemed
to exist hereunder shall be considered as a revocable permit with a mutual right in either
party to terminate without cause upon giving sixty (60) days written notice to the other.
The requirements and conditions of such a revocable permit shall be the same requirements
and conditions as set forth in the permit, right or registration, respectively, except for conditions
relating to the term of the permit and the right of termination. Nothing in this Chapter
precludes the City from requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed
by law, in addition to requirements set forth herein.
800.35 Waiver.
The Director may waive any or all of the requirements of 800.7 through 800.13 if compliance
is not deemed to be reasonably necessary, in the discretion of the Director, to serve the
purposes of this Chapter. The decision of the Director is not subject to appeal to the City
council. Waiver may be rescinded by the Director at any time upon written notice to the
person subject to the requirement.
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-1
TITLE 9. SEWER AND WATER
Chapter 900 Sewer and Water – amended 9-27-12 ord 690
Chapter 910 Charges
Chapter 920 Sewers
Chapter 925 Fats, Oils and Grease (FOG)
Chapter 930 Certification of Past Due Accounts
Chapter 940 Water
Chapter 950 Storm Water
Chapter 960 Storm Sewer Utility
Chapter 900 - Sewer and Water
900.01 Minimum Unit Charge. The sewer access charge (SAC) and the water access charge
(WAC) shall be as established from time to time by ordinance.
900.02 Connection Requirements. All premises which have access to either the municipal water
system and/or municipal sewers and from which sewage or organic waste products of any
nature, including milk waste, are drained, are hereby required to be connected with the municipal
sewers for proper treatment in the sewage treatment plant of the city and the municipal
water system. The City shall not provide a connection to city sewer services, nor shall
the Public Utilities Commission (PUC) provide a connection to the PUC’s water system to
any owners of properties located outside the corporate boundaries of the City without said
properties first being annexed into the City
900.03 Consent to Rules, Regulations and Charges. By making connection with the municipal
sewer or water system, the owner, as to SAC and WAC, and to the owner, lessee and occupant
of the premises, as to user charges, are deemed to agree to pay the established rates as
provided from time to time by ordinance or resolution or regulations duly adopted, and further
agrees to abide by the reasonable rules and regulations heretofore and hereafter adopted
for the protection of the systems.
900.04 Prohibited Materials. All flammable or poisonous products, grease, oils, acid materials,
hair, fur, fabric and all other materials which may interfere with the proper treatment of
sewage at the plant or ponds shall be trapped or otherwise prevented from entering such
sewers and, if it appears that any substance entering such sewers is hampering the proper
operation of the sewage plant, the Council may declare the drainage of such substance a
nuisance and require the practice to be abated.
900.05 Storm Sewage Prohibition. No roof drains, basement drains (except for floor drains) or
storm sewers of any kind shall be connected with the city sanitary sewer system.
900.06 Connections, Applications, Fees.
(A) Any person desiring a permit to connect to the municipal sanitary sewer or water system
shall make written application to the City Building Inspector on a form furnished
by the city. Application for such permits shall contain an exact description of the
property to be served, the location of the connection and service main, the materials
to be used, the nature and quantity of the sewage to be discharged and such other inCity
of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-2 Revised September 2012
formation as may be reasonably required.
(B) The applicant shall pay both charges SAC and WAC before receiving a building or
occupancy permit. The WAC and SAC for the construction, improvement, and repair
of potable water and sewage treatment facilities including wells, lift stations, pumps,
mains, and related facilities. The SAC and WAC are in addition to other charges and
fees that may be required by law. No taps into the main for sewer or water and no
backfilling of excavation may be done before inspection by a representative of the
city.
(C) The City of Princeton operates a sewage collection system to serve the needs of the
community. A Sewer Trunk Area Charge (STAC) is needed to fund and/or reimburse
the city for the establishment, construction, repair, replacement, maintenance, enlargement
and improvement of said system. The STAC is payable by the developer
of every lot, parcel or piece of property that will connect to the sewage collection system,
or cause additional use or excessive discharge of sewage, whether residential,
commercial or industrial, or, in some cases, the construction of additional units upon
land already connected to the system. The amount of this area charge shall be established
by ordinance based on calculations provided by the City Engineer pursuant to
the Trunk Sanitary Sewer Charge Policy adopted by the City Council.
900.07 WAC and SAC Charges.
(A) Residential SAC and WAC. One SAC and one WAC shall be payable for each residential
dwelling unit which is designated, used or intended for use or occupancy by a
single family.
(B) Non-residential SAC and WAC. Units of SAC and WAC for non-residential occupancies
shall be calculated as follows:
TYPE OF FACILITY PARAMETER UNITS
Arenas 110 seats 1
Automobile Service Center 2 service bays 1
Ballroom w/o Liquor 825 sq. feet 1
Ballroom w/Liquor 590 sq. feet 1
Bank 2,400 sq. feet 1
Banquet Room - food catered 2,060 sq. feet 1
food catered w/dish wshg. 1,180 sq. feet 1
food prepared w/dish wshg. 825 sq. feet 1
food prepared dish wshg. liq. 590 sq. feet 1
Barber Shop 4 chairs 1
Beauty Salon 4 stations 1
Boarding House 5 beds 1
Body Shop (no vehicle washing) 14 employees 1
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-3
Bowling Alley (not including bar or dining) 3 alleys 1
TYPE OF FACILITY PARAMETER UNITS
Car Wash (self service) 1 stall 3
Car Wash special determination -
Cash Wash (Service Station) - 6
Churches (Sanctuary only) 275 seats 1
(for remainder use other criteria)
Cocktail Lounge 23 seats 1
General Office Building 2,400 sq. feet 1
Handball and Racquet Ball Courts 1 court 2
Laundromats 274 gallons 1
(require water collection for
cycle time, 8 cycles per day)
Motels and Hotels (assumes 2 persons/rm) 2 rooms 1
Nursing Home 3 beds 1
Restaurant (drive in) 9 spaces 1
(No additional for 24-hour service
or cocktail lounge service)
Restaurant (fast food) 22 seats 1
Restaurant 8 seats 1
Retail Store 3,000 sq. feet net 1
Rooming House 7 beds 1
Schools (elementary) 18 students 1
Schools (nursery)
number of students licensed for: 14 students 1
Schools (secondary) 14 students 1
Service Stations (gas pump only) - 1
Service Stations (w/service center) - 2
Service Stations (w/service & car wash) - 8
Swimming Pool (Public) 900 sq. ft. pool area 1
Tennis Courts (Public) 1 court 2
Theater 2 screens or 275 seats
(whichever is greater) 1
Theater (drive-in) 55 spaces 1
Warehouses 7,000 sq. feet 1
Units of SAC and WAC for non-residential occupancies not listed above shall be determined
according to the listings published in the “Service Availability Charge Procedural
Manual” (January 2010) as published by the Environmental Services DiviCity
of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-4 Revised September 2012
sion of the Metropolitan Council (St. Paul Minnesota).
(C) Determination of Occupancy. The Building Inspector shall calculate the SAC and
WAC based on the guidelines in § 900.07(A) and (B). In cases where the occupancy
is not exactly as listed, the Building Inspector shall determine which of the occupancies
is most similar in sewer and water usage and calculate the SAC and WAC accordingly.
Applicants may appeal the decision of the Building Inspector to the City
Administrator in writing stating the facts and giving reasons why the determination of
the Building Inspector is in error. The Administrator shall provide a written determination
either supporting or modifying the Building Inspector's determination. The applicant
may then appeal to the City Council which shall make a final determination.
(D) Each structure shall have a separate connection to the sewer and water main. The city
shall approve the design and materials for such connections. Multiple occupancies in
a single structure may be allowed a common connection to the main if approved by
the city.
The SAC and WAC charges for any use not listed above shall be set according to the Twin
City Area Metropolitan Council’s “Service Availability Charge Procedure Manual” dated
January, 2005, and as amended from time to time.
900.08 Sewer and Water Charges. The following user charges may be set from time to time by
ordinance of the City Council: amended 2-9-21 #680
(A) SAC and WAC;
(B) Sewer user charges;
(1) The sewer user charges shall be based on water usage and may include a minimum
usage for each connection. If actual water usage is not available, the city
shall estimate usage by considering similar occupancies.
(2) Each dwelling unit or commercial or other occupancy shall be charged a separate
fee.
(3) The Sewer Fee Schedule adopted by ordinance upon enactment of this chapter
shall be published in the local newspaper and shall be effective upon publication.
(4) Discharge of wastewater with strength in excess of Normal Domestic Strength
Wastewater (NDSW) shall be billed as defined in Chapter 920. Sewer usage
shall be metered.
(C) Sewer Trunk Area Charge
900.09 Collection of Charges. Unpaid SAC and WAC are hereby made a charge against the owner;
and sewer user charges are hereby made a charge against the owner, lessee or occupant
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-5
of any premises served by the sewer and water connections. Upon failure of the owner, lessee
or occupant to pay said charges as described in this section, the city shall have the right
to recover said amounts, together with reasonable attorney’s fees, in any court of competent
jurisdiction, and may certify the unpaid charges, attorney’s fees, court costs, and disbursements
to the County Auditor to be collected with taxes against the property as other taxes
are collected.
Chapter 910 - Charges
910.01 Sewer Fee Schedule. amended 2-9-12 ord #680, amended 6-28-12 ord #688
(A) (1) The City hereby establishes a Sewer Fee Schedule. All revenue collected from
users of the wastewater treatment facilities will be used for annual operation,
maintenance, replacement and capital costs. Each user shall pay a proportionate
share of operation, maintenance and replacement costs based on the users proportionate
contribution to the total wastewater flow and loading.
(2) Charges to users of the wastewater treatment facility shall be determined and
fixed in the Sewer Fee Schedule. The Sewer Fee Schedule shall include charges
for both wastewater flow and extra strength wastewater. Subsequent changes
in the sewer service fees and charges shall be adopted by Council ordinance
and published in the local paper.
(3) Unless noted otherwise in this ordinance, for commercial and residential users
of the sewer system, the monthly sewer fee shall be determined by the average
monthly usage for the four winter months (December, January, February and
March) times the rate adopted by Council ordinance. That rate shall be recalculated
every April and then used for the following twelve (12) months.
(4) For commercial car wash facilities, the monthly sewer fee shall be determined
by the actual water usage for the billing month times the rate adopted by Council
ordinance.
(5) The minimum monthly usage for a residential property shall be 2,000 gallons
times the rate adopted by Council ordinance and the minimum monthly usage
for a commercial property shall be 4,000 gallons times the rate adopted by
Council ordinance.
(6) Revenues collected through the Sewer Fee Schedule shall be deposited in a
separate fund known as the Sewer Service Fund (SSF).
910.02 Reporting Forms for Commercial, Institutional and Industrial. Each commercial, institutional
or industrial building requires a separate reporting form named PS 78-A and PR
78-B and must be completed by indicating the occupancy, the address of the facilities, the
number of employees, the total square feet and the type of facility or business. The assignment
of units will be based on the completed forms, if they are not listed in the standard
units. All industrial users must complete these forms which will be reviewed and approved
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-6 Revised September 2012
prior to the issuance of the building permit by the Sewer Superintendent and the Sewer
Commissioner.
910.03 Use of Sewer Usage Monies. From the fund shall be paid all reasonable costs of operating,
maintaining and repairing the sanitary sewer system and sewage treatment plant of the city
and all inspection costs of connecting to the system.
Chapter 920 - Sewers
920.01 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. amended 2-9-21 #680
(A) “Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also referred to as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, 33. USC 1251 et seq.
(B) “BOD5” or “Biochemical Oxygen Demand” means the quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in
five days at 20 degrees Centigrade and as expressed in terms of milligrams per liter
(mg/l).
(C) “Building drain” means that point of a building which conveys wastewater to the
building sewer, beginning immediately outside the building wall.
(D) “City” means the area within the corporate boundaries of the City of Princeton, the
City Council or its authorized representative.
(E) “Debt service charge” means a charge to users of the wastewater treatment facility for
the purpose of repaying capital costs.
(F) “Extra Strength Wastewater” means wastewater with concentrations of
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5), total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN), total
phosphorus (TP) or total suspended solids (TSS) in excess of the definition of
normal domestic strength wastewater (NDSW).
(G) “Industrial user” means:
(1) Any entity as defined in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual (latest
edition) as categorized, that discharge wastewater to the public sewer.
Division A: Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;
Division B: Mining;
Division D: Manufacturing;
Division E: Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Sewers;
Division I: Services
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-7
(2) Any user whose discharges, singly or by interaction with other wastes:
(a) Contaminate the sludge of the wastewater treatment system;
(b) Injure or interfere with the treatment process;
(c) Create a public nuisance or hazard;
(d) Have an adverse effect of the waters receiving wastewater treatment
plant discharges;
(e) Exceed NDSW limitations;
(f) Exceed normal residential unit volumes of wastewater.
(H) “Infiltration/Inflow (I/I)” means water other than wastewater that enters the sewer
system from the ground or from surface runoff, as defined in Minnesota Rules.
(I) “MPCA” means Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
(J) “National categorical pretreatment standards” means federal regulations establishing
pretreatment standards for introduction of pollutants in publicly owned wastewater
treatment facilities. Section 307(b) of the Act.
(K) “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit” means a permit
issued by the MPCA, setting limits on pollutants that a permittee may legally discharge,
pursuant to Sections 402 and 405 of the Act.
(L) “Natural outlet” means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewers,
which flows into a body of surface water or ground water.
(M) “Normal Domestic Strength Wastewater (NDSW)” means wastewater with biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD5) concentration not greater than 250 mg/l, total
Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) concentration not greater than 45 mg/l, total phosphorus
(TP) concentration not greater than 7 mg/l or total suspended solids (TSS) concentration
not greater than 300 mg/l. Exceeding any one of these parameters individually
or in combination shall be cause for exceeding NDSW.
(N) “Normal Domestic Strength Waste (NDSW)” means wastewater that is primarily introduced
by residential users with BOD5 concentrations not greater than 250 mg/l and
total suspended solids (TSS) concentrations not greater than 300 mg/l.
(O) “Non-residential users” means a user of the treatment facility whose building is not
used as a private residence and discharges NDSW.
(P) “Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Costs (OM&R)” means expenditures
necessary to provide for the dependable, economical and efficient functioning of the
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-8 Revised September 2012
treatment facility throughout its design life, including operator training, and permit
fees. Replacement refers to equipment replacement costs, not the cost of future replacement
of the entire facility.
(Q) “Residential user” means a user of the treatment facility whose building is used primarily
as a private residence and discharges NDSW.
(R) “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
(1) “Building sewer” means the extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal, also referred to as a service connection. The
responsibility of maintaining the building sewer is the property owner’s.
(2) “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer designed to carry only liquid and water-carried
wastes from residential, non-residential and industrial sources, together with
minor quantities of I/I.
(3) “Storm sewer” means a sewer intended to carry unpolluted surface and subsurface
water from any source.
(S) “Sewer fee schedule” means the total of the user charge and the debt service charge.
(T) “Slug” means a discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration or in quantity
of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than 5
times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
(U) “State Disposal System (SDS) Permit” means a permit issued by the MPCA pursuant
to M.S. § 115.07 for a disposal system, as defined by M.S. § 115.01, Subd. 8, as
amended from time to time.
(V) “Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN)” means the sum of the concentrations of organic nitrogen,
ammonia and ammonium in the wastewater.
(W) “Total Phosphorus (TP)” means the sum of the concentrations of organic and inorganic
phosphorus in the wastewater and includes both soluble and particulate phosphorus.
(X) “Total Suspended Solids (TSS)” means the total suspended matter that either floats
on the surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and is removable
by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater (latest edition).
(Y) “Unpolluted water” means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria
in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards.
An example could be non-contact cooling water.
(Z) “User charge” means a charge to users of a treatment facility for the user’s proporCity
of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-9
tionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement.
(AA) “Wastewater” means liquid and water-carried wastes from residential, non-residential
and industrial users, together with any ground water, surface water and storm water
that may be present.
(BB) “Wastewater treatment facilities” or “treatment facilities” means the land, devices,
facilities, structures, equipment and processes owned or used by the city for the purpose
of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal
wastewater and the disposal of residues resulting from such treatment.
920.02 Control by the Authorized Representative. The Public Works Director or other authorized
employee shall have control and general supervision of all public sewers and service
connections in the community and shall be responsible for administering the provisions of
this chapter to ensure that a proper and efficient public sewer is maintained. The Public
Works Director or other authorized employee may delegate responsibilities to designated
representatives.
920.03 Use of The Public Sewers And Water Systems Required.
(A) Within 60 days of receiving official notification, the owners of all properties within
150 feet of either or both a sanitary sewer collection system or a city water system
shall install a suitable service connection at their own expense in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(B) In the event an owner shall fail to connect to either or both in compliance with a notice
given under this chapter, the City and/or Public Utilities Commission will have
the connection made and shall assess the cost against the benefitted property.
(C) Except as provided hereinafter, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any private
facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater or the acquisition of potable
water.
920.04 Private Wastewater Disposal.
(A) Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of this chapter, the building
sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with
the provisions of this section.
(B) Before construction of an onsite sewage treatment system the applicant shall apply
for a permit and pay a fee as set from time to time by ordinance of the City Council.
The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and make a finding that the
proposed construction cannot be served economically by the municipal sewer system,
that an onsite system will provide adequate treatment, and that an onsite treatment
system will not be injurious to the public health or welfare. The applicant may appeal
the Zoning Administrator's decision to the Planning Commission and then to the City
Council. The applicant shall provide information necessary for the review of the
permit application. The City Council shall set an application fee by ordinance from
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-10 Revised September 2012
time to time.
(C) The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall
comply with all requirements of Minn. Rules Ch. 7080, as amended from time to
time, and applicable local ordinances.
(D) The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a
sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the community or sewer district.
(E) When the public sewer becomes available to a property serviced by a private
wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
within 60 days in compliance with this chapter and within an additional 30 days private
wastewater disposal systems will be cleaned of all sludge. The bottom shall be
broken to permit drainage and the tank or pit filled with suitable material.
(F) No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be imposed by the MPCA, the State Department of
Health or other responsible federal, state or local agencies.
920.05 Building Sewers and Connections Design.
(A) (1) No person(s) shall make any alterations to the public sewer or any appurtenances
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. No private
building drain shall extend beyond the limits of the building or property for
which the permit has been given.
(2) Any new connection to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited unless
sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities, including, but not
limited to capacity for flow, BOD5 and TSS as determined by the authorized
representative.
(B) (1) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each building.
Old building sewers may be used to service new buildings only when they are
found to meet all requirements of this chapter.
(2) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, wastewater shall be
lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
(C) The construction and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the State of Minnesota Building and Plumbing Code, applicable
rules and regulations of the city and the materials and procedural specifications
set forth in the American Society of Testing Materials (ASTM) and the Water
Environment Federation (WEF) Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall
be made gas and watertight and verified by proper testing to prevent I/I.
(D) No unpolluted water sources shall be connected to the sanitary sewer.
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-11
(E) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building
sewer is ready for connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under
the supervision of a designated representative.
(F) An appropriate construction permit is required to install a service connection. Any
person desiring a permit shall apply in writing to the City Council, providing satisfactory
evidence of the applicant’s qualifications.
(G) A permit for sewer service connection installation shall not be issued until a certificate
of insurance is filed and approved by the city. The permittee will indemnify the
City from all suits, accidents and damage that may arise by reason of any opening in
any street, alley or public ground, made by the permittee or by those in the permittee's
employment.
(H) The Council may suspend or revoke any permit issued under this section for any of
the following causes:
(1) Giving false information in connection with the application for a permit;
(2) Incompetence of the permittee;
(3) Willful violation of any provisions of this section or any rule or regulation pertaining
to the making of service connections;
(4) Failure to adequately protect and indemnify the city and the user.
920.06 Use of Public Wastewater Treatment Facilities. amended 2-9-21 #680
(A) No unpolluted water or stormwater shall be discharged to the sanitary sewer. Such
water shall be discharged only to storm sewers or to natural outlets approved by the
city and other regulatory agencies.
(B) No person(s) shall discharge any of the following substance to the public sewer:
(1) Liquids, solids, gases or other substances which singly or by interaction with
others may cause fire or explosion;
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer;
(3) Wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater than 9.5 or having any other
corrosive or caustic property capable of causing damage or hazard;
(4) Wastewater containing toxic pollutants, as defined in Section 307(a) of the
Water Pollution Control Act and M.S. § 115.01, Subd. 14, as amended from
time to time.
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-12 Revised September 2012
(C) Wastewater with BOD5 TKN, TP or TSS levels above NDSW, except as may be
permitted by specific written agreement with the city or through a discharge permit
issued by the city, subject to division (K) of this section.
(D) (1) In the event of discharges to the public sewers which contain substances or
possess characteristics prohibited in §920.07 or which in the judgment of the
representative may have a deleterious effect to the treatment facility, receiving
waters, soils, vegetation or which create a hazard or nuisance, the representative
may:
(a) Refuse to accept the wastes;
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public
sewers, pursuant to Section 307(b) of the Act and all addenda thereof;
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
(d) Require payment to cover all the added costs of handling, treating and
disposing of wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges. Added
costs shall include capital costs, as well as operation and maintenance
costs for that portion of the facilities used for handling, treating and disposing
of these waters.
(2) If the representative permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design, installation, maintenance and efficient operation of the facilities and
equipment shall be at the owner’s expense and shall be subject to review and
approval by the city pursuant to the requirements of the MPCA.
(E) No user shall increase the use of process water or in any manner attempt to dilute a
discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance
with the limitations contained in this section, the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards and any state or local requirement.
(F) (1) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided at the owner’s expense
when, in the opinion of the representative, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The owner shall be
responsible for the maintenance of interceptors, including proper removal and
disposal of the captured materials by appropriate means, and shall maintain a
record of dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the representative.
(2) Any material removal and hauling must be performed by the owner’s personnel
or a currently licensed waste disposal firm and in compliance with all applicable
laws and regulations.
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-13
(G) Where required by the representative, industrial users shall install and maintain at
their own expense a suitable structure or control manhole with such necessary meters
and other testing equipment needed to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement
of wastewater. The manhole will be safe and accessible at all times. The
Council may require submission of laboratory analyses to illustrate compliance with
this chapter and any special conditions for discharge established by the Council or
responsible regulatory agency. All measurements, tests and analyses to which reference
is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition
of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the
American Public Health Association and kept for a period of five years.
(H) (1) Where required by the representative, users shall provide protection from an
accidental discharge of substances regulated by this chapter. Where necessary,
facilities to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited materials shall be provided
and maintained at the owner’s expense. Detailed plans and operating
procedures of said facilities shall be submitted to the representative for review
and approval prior to construction of the facility. Approval of such plans and
operating procedures shall not relive user from the responsibility of modifying
the facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Users shall notify the representative immediately if a slug or accidental discharge
of wastewater occurs in violation of this chapter. Notification will allow
measures to be taken to minimize damage to the treatment facilities. Notification
will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the
treatment facilities or for fines imposed on the community or sewer district by
any state or federal agency as a result of their actions.
(3) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or other
prominent place advising employees of the emergency notification procedure
in the event of a slug or accidental discharge.
(I) (1) No person shall permit any substance or matter which may form a deposit or
obstruction of flow to be discharged into the public sewer. Whenever any service
connection becomes clogged, obstructed, detrimental to the use of the
public sewer or unfit for the purpose of drainage, the owner shall make repairs
as directed by the representative.
(2) Each day that the owner neglects to make said repairs, shall constitute a separate
violation of this section. The representative may cause the work to be done
and recover related expenses from the owner or agent by an action in the name
of the city.
(J) In addition to penalties that may be imposed for violation of any provision of this
section, the city may assess against the user/owner the cost of repairing or restoring
sewers and associated facilities damaged as a result of the discharge of prohibited
wastes and may collect the assessment as an additional charge for the use of the pubCity
of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-14 Revised September 2012
lic sewer system.
(K) No statement contained in this section shall prevent any special agreement or arrangement
between the city and any industrial user. Industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the facility for treatment, subject to adequate
payment by the industrial user, providing that National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards and the city’s NPDES and SDS permit limitations are not violated.
920.07 Prohibition of Tampering and Vandalism to Wastewater Treatment Facilities. No person(
s) shall willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with
any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the wastewater treatment facilities.
Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the
charge of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in § 100.99.
920.08 Powers and Authority of Inspectors.
(A) Duly authorized employees of the community, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter all properties for inspection, observations, measurement,
sampling, testing, repair and maintenance in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
(B) Industrial users shall be required to provide information concerning industrial processes
which have a direct bearing on the type and source of discharge to the collection
system. An industry may withhold information considered confidential. However,
the industry must establish that the information in question might result in an advantage
to competitors and that the industrial process does not have deleterious results
on the treatment process.
920.99 Penalties.
(A) Upon determination that a user has violated or is violating applicable provisions of
this chapter or related permits, the authorized representative may issue a notice of violation.
Within one business day of such notification, the violator shall submit to the
authorized representative an adequate explanation for the violation and a plan for the
correction and prevention of such occurrences, including specific actions required.
Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the violator of liability for any violations
occurring before or after the issuance of the notice of violation. A violation is a
misdemeanor, punished as provided for in § 100.99. Each day a violation continues is
a separate offense.
(B) Any violation is also subject to a charge not exceeding $1,000. Each day in which
any such violation occurs shall incur an additional charge. These charges may be
added to the user’s next sewer service charge and will hence be subject to the same
collection regulations as specified in this chapter. Users desiring to dispute a charge
must file a request for the Public Works Director or other authorized employee to reconsider
within five business days of the issuance of the fine. If the Public Works Director
or other authorized employee believes that the request has merit, a hearing on
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-15
the matter shall be convened within 21 days of the receipt of this request.
(C) To collect delinquent sewer service charge accounts, the city may file a civil action
suit or levy a lien against the violator. Related attorneys fees fixed by court order
shall also be collected. The violator shall be liable for interest on all balances at a rate
of 12% annually. Delinquent sewer service charges may be certified by the City Administrator
and forwarded to the County Auditor for collection with taxes levied
against the property.
(D) Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the
city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation.
Chapter 925 – Discharge of Fats, Oil and Grease (FOG)
Added 6-23-11 ord #660, Amended 5-28-15 ord #718
925.01. Purpose and Policy. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for Food Service Establishments
(FSEs) that discharge wastewater to the City of Princeton sanitary sewer.
The objectives of this chapter are:
(A) To prevent the excessive introduction of fats, oil and grease (FOG) into
the sewer system and the wastewater treatment plant;
(B) To prevent the accumulation of grease within the sewer system which can
lead to sanitary sewer pipe blockages and subsequent back-ups and sanitary sewer
overflows (SSO);
(C) To reduce the costs of maintaining the sewer system by preventing the accumulation
of grease and residue within the sewage system lines and ensure that the cost of
maintaining the public sewer system is equitably distributed amongst users;
(D) To clarify grease disposal requirements for FSEs;
(E) To protect public health and safety from pollution caused by SSO.
925.02. Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Public Works Director, Waste
Water Treatment Plant Manager or designated representative, shall administer, implement,
and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
925.03. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following definitions
represent the meanings of terms as they are used in this chapter:
(A) “Best Management Practices (“BMPs”)” – A schedule of activities, prohibition of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce
the introduction of FOG to the sanitary sewer system.
(B) “Fats, Oils, and Grease (“FOG”)” – Any substance, such as vegetable, animal or other
product that is used in, or is a by-product of, the cooking or food preparation proCity
of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-16 Revised September 2012
cess, and that turns or may turn viscous or may solidify with a change in temperature
or other conditions. FOG may originate from, but not limited to, discharges from
scullery sinks, pot and pan sinks, dishwashing machines, soup kettles and floor drains
located in areas where grease-containing materials may exist.
(C) “Food Service Establishment (“FSE”)” – Food service facility licensed by
the City of Princeton that prepares and/or provides food for consumption.
“Class 1 FSE” - Any establishment where a grill, deep fry unit, broaster, wok or
grease producing process is used to prepare food. All new Class 1 FSEs are required
to install approved Grease Interceptor(s). All new and existing Class 1 FSEs are required
to implement and adhere to the best management practices in this Ordinance.
“Class 2 FSE” – Any establishment using only a heat-producing device, such as a microwave,
conventional oven, toaster oven, hot dog rotisserie, coffee maker, etc. to
prepare food and/or any food establishment that prepares and/or serves meals two or
fewer times per week or satellite food service establishments where primary food
preparation is conducted offsite or initial preparation of foods does not occur. A satellite
food service facility is one that maintains thoroughly cooked food hot. All Class
2 FSEs must implement and adhere to the best management practices in this Ordinance.
(D) “Food Waste Disposal Unit” - A device that shreds or grinds up solid or semisolid
waste material into smaller portions for disposing it in the sanitary sewer. These devices
are also referred to as grinders, garbage grinders and garbage disposals.
(E) “Grease Interceptor” - A vault that is located on the exterior of the building which
has a minimum of two compartments. The capacity of the interceptor provides adequate
residence time so that the wastewater has time to cool, allowing grease to congeal
and rise to the surface where it accumulates until the interceptor is cleaned.
(F) “Grease Interceptor Waste” - Any grease, food particles, organic or inorganic solid or
semisolid waste collected and intercepted by a grease interceptor usually in layers of
floatable, suspended and settleable substances, which are ultimately removed for
proper disposal.
(G) “Grease Trap” – A grease removal device located within the facility, which helps to
protect the internal plumbing from grease clogs.
(H) “Grease Removal Device” - An interceptor, trap or other mechanical device designed,
constructed, and intended to remove, hold, or otherwise prevent the passage
of grease to the sanitary sewer.
(I) “Sanitary Sewer Overflow” (SSO) – Any unplanned discharge from the separate sanitary
sewer system.
(J) “Twenty-five percent rule” - A requirement of when grease interceptors shall be fully
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-17
pumped out and cleaned. This rule requires that when the combined FOG (including
floating solids) and the settled solids accumulation reaches 25% of the total designed
hydraulic depth of the grease interceptor, the grease interceptors shall be fully
pumped out and cleaned. This requirement will help to ensure that the minimum hydraulic
detention time and the required available hydraulic volume are maintained to
effectively intercept and retain FOG in the interceptor.
Additional definitions relevant to this chapter are contained in Chapter 920.01 of the Princeton City
Ordinances.
925.04. Facilities Required to Remove Grease. All new Class 1 FSEs shall install grease interceptors
to prevent the discharge of FOG to the building drainage system and the public sewer system.
Grease interceptors shall be installed to receive the drainage from plumbing fixtures and equipment
with greaseladen wastewater located in FSEs. Grease interceptors are not required for residential
dwelling units.
Existing Class 1 FSEs shall install grease interceptors when they make substantial equipment
upgrades or repairs, or when they make substantial structural alterations or expansions,
or any time the City Council finds that septage from a Class 1 FSE exceeds 300 milligrams
of FOG per liter. All Class 1 and Class 2 FSEs shall implement and adhere to the
BMPs in this Ordinance.
925.05. Best Management Practices. To minimize the discharge of FOG into the sanitary sewer
system, the following Best Management Practices shall be implemented by all classes of
FSEs. This includes kitchen practices and employee training that are both essential in minimizing
FOG discharges:
(A) Installation of drain screens. Drain screens shall be installed on all drainage pipes in food
preparation areas. This includes kitchen sinks, floor drains and mop sinks.
(B) Segregation and collection of waste cooking oil. All waste cooking oil shall be collected
and stored properly in recycling receptacles. Such recycling receptacles shall be maintained
to ensure that they do not leak. Licensed waste haulers or an approved recycling
facility must be used to dispose of waste cooking oil. This would not apply to FSEs without
deep fry units.
(C) Disposal of food waste. Food wastes shall be disposed of directly into the trash or garbage,
and not into the public sanitary sewer or storm water system.
(D) Employee training. All FSE’s shall provide all employees with BMP training as part of
the normal orientation process and annually thereafter including, at a minimum, the following
subjects.
1. How to “dry wipe” pots, pans, dishware and work areas before washing to remove
grease.
2. How to properly dispose of food waste and solids in enclosed plastic bags prior to
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-18 Revised September 2012
disposal in trash bins or containers to prevent leaking and odors.
3. The location and use of absorption products to clean under fryer baskets and other locations
where grease may be spilled or dripped. All FSEs are responsible to safely
install materials to meet this requirement.
4. How to properly dispose of grease or oils from cooking equipment into a grease receptacle
without spilling.
5. Training shall be documented and employee signatures retained indicating each employee’s
attendance and understanding of the practices reviewed. Training records
shall be available for review at any reasonable time by a City inspector.
(E) Kitchen signage. FOG control practices shall be posted in food preparation and dishwashing
areas at all times.
(F) Grease removal devices. All FSEs shall maintain their grease removal devices in accordance
with this Ordinance.
925.06. New Construction. All new Class 1 FSEs shall install grease interceptors in accordance
with the Plumbing Code. All classes of FSEs are required to submit the drainage plumbing plans to
the Public Works Director, Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager, or designee for approval prior to
obtaining a building permit. Failure to construct in accordance with approved plans is a violation of
this ordinance.
New FSEs that are required to maintain a grease interceptor by this or other applicable ordinances,
shall install such a unit prior to commencement of discharge to the sanitary sewer.
925.07. Existing Users.
(A) Existing Class 1 FSEs not equipped with a grease interceptor shall install an adequately
sized grease interceptor in accordance with the specifications of this ordinance when they
make substantial equipment upgrades or repairs, or when they make substantial structural
alterations or expansions, or any time the City Council finds that septage from a Class 1
FSE exceeds 300 milligrams of FOG per liter.
(B) An Existing Facility changing from a Class 2 FSE to a Class 1 FSE shall be required to
install an approved grease interceptor in accordance with the specifications of this Ordinance.
925.08 Grease Interceptor Sizing Criteria. All grease interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Public Works Director or Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager and shall be so
located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The size, type and location of each grease
interceptor shall be approved by the Public Works Director or Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager
before installation. The Public Works Director or Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager is authorized
to make determinations of grease interceptor adequacy and need, based upon a review of
relevant information regarding grease interceptor performance, maintenance, and facility site and
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-19
building plan review and to require repairs to, and modification or replacement of such interceptors.
(A) The size of the grease interceptor shall be determined using the following flow based criteria:
FIXTURE TYPE # OF FIXTURES FLOW TOTAL FLOW (GPM)
(GPM)
Kitchen Area Sinks:
Single Compartment __________________ x 20 = _________________
Double Compartment __________________ x 25 = _________________
Triple Compartment ___________________ x 30 = _________________
Mop/Clean-up ________ ________________ x 20 = _________________
Dishwashers:
1-30 gal. capacity __________________ x 15 = _________________
30-50 gal. capacity __________________ x 25 = _________________
50-100 gal. capacity __________________ x 40 = _________________
Grand Total Flow = _________________
Detention Time Factor _________________
(x10) =
Required Grease Interceptor Capacity = _________ gallons
(B) FSEs that propose the use of alternate sizing techniques and/or procedures that result in
specifications that differ from requirements calculated under Paragraph (A) 1, must submit
formulas and other basis to support the proposed grease interceptor size/installation
signed by a professional mechanical engineer registered in the State of Minnesota.
925.09 Grease Trap Sizing Criteria. Grease traps control limited amounts of FOG and are considered
voluntary mechanisms to control FOG discharges from FSEs. However, if a FSE decides to
install a grease trap, the following sizing guidelines are recommended. The volume of the fixtures
connected to the grease trap should not exceed two and one half times the flow rate in gallons per
minute of the grease trap. The following table provides the criteria that should be considered for
grease trap sizing:
Maximum allowable
Grease retention fixture volume in
Rate of flow (gpm) Capacity (lbs.) gallons _ .
20 40 50
25 50 62.5
35 70 87.5
50 100 125
925.10 Grease Removal System Maintenance. The owner or lessee of every FSE required to install
or use a Grease Removal Device shall, at its own expense, inspect, clean, and maintain the
Grease Removal Device in efficient operating condition at all times.
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-20 Revised September 2012
(A) Facilities with Grease Interceptors
1. Unless otherwise specified by the Public Works Director or Waste Water Treatment
Plant Manager, each interceptor in active use shall be cleaned at least once every
three months or when the total accumulation of surface FOG (including floating solids)
and settled solids reaches twenty-five percent (25%) of the grease interceptor’s
overall liquid depth (25 Percent Rule), whichever comes first. The Public Works Director
or Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager may specify cleaning more frequently
when quarterly pumping is shown to be inadequate. The Public Works Director or
Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager may change the required maintenance frequency
to reflect changes in actual operating conditions. Any Food Service Establishment
desiring a schedule less frequent than quarterly shall submit a request to the
Public Works Director or Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager along with the
maintenance servicing records, including measurements of the thickness of the floating
FOG and bottom solids layer, and volume removed.
2. A reduction in cleaning frequency may be granted by the Public Works Director or
Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager when it has been determined that the FOG interceptor
has adequate detention time for FOG removal. The cleaning frequency will
depend on variables such as: (a) the capacity of the device, (b) the amount of grease
in the wastewater, (c) the amount of solids in the wastewater and (d) degree of adherence
to the FOG BMPs.
3. FSEs shall require the liquid waste hauler, transporter, or any other person cleaning
or servicing an interceptor to completely evacuate all contents, including floating materials,
wastewater, bottom solids, and grease during servicing. Skimming the surface
layer of waste material, partial cleaning of the interceptor or use of any method that
does not remove the entire contents of the collection device is prohibited. The suction
of the floating materials shall be done prior to removal of other contents. After complete
evacuation, the walls, top, and bottom of the interceptor shall then be thoroughly
scraped and the residue removed. Upon completion of the servicing, the FSE manager
or his/her designated representative shall inspect the interior of the interceptor
and then document this servicing in the facility’s grease removal device maintenance
log. In the event that the interceptor is larger than the capacity of the vacuum truck, it
shall be completely evacuated within a twenty four (24) hour period.
4. The discharge of liquid, semi-solids, or solids back into any waste water system,
storm water system, or any location other than an approved disposal facility during
and/or after servicing is prohibited. Decanting or discharging of any grease removal
device wastes back into the grease removal device, any private sewer, any sewage
drainage piping, any storm sewer system or any other grease removal device is prohibited.
(B) Facilities with Grease Traps.
1. Grease traps shall be serviced at least weekly or when the amount of grease captured
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-21
is at 50% of the trap’s capacity, whichever is sooner. After the accumulated grease
has been removed, the grease trap shall be thoroughly inspected to make certain that
the inlet, outlet, and air relief ports are clear of obstructions.
2. A reduction in cleaning frequency may be granted by the Public Works Director or
Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager when it has been determined that the grease
trap has adequate detention time for FOG removal. The cleaning frequency will depend
on variables such as: (1) the capacity of the device, (2) the amount of grease in
the wastewater, (3) the amount of solids in the wastewater and (4) degree of adherence
to the FOG BMPs.
3. A flow control device must be installed before each grease trap.
4. A dishwasher or food grinder shall not be connected to a grease trap. Exemptions for
existing facilities may be granted.
5. Grease traps must be regularly inspected for leaking seams, pipes, and flow control
fitting(s) and repaired if necessary. Grease traps and their baffles shall be maintained
free of all caked-on FOG and other waste. Removable baffles shall be removed and
cleaned during the maintenance process.
6. Grease and other waste removed from the grease trap shall not be disposed of into
any drain or sewer. Waste must be disposed of in accordance with federal, state
and/or local laws.
(C) Facilities with grease removal devices other than grease traps or grease interceptors must
follow the manufacturer’s recommendations for operation and maintenance.
925.11 Bacteria, Enzymes and other Chemical Additives. The introduction of bacteria, emulsifiers,
de-emulsifiers, surface active agents, degreasers, or enzymes either directly or indirectly into a
grease trap or grease interceptor, other than in typical business operation practices such as dishwashing
or sanitation, is strictly prohibited.
925.12 Interceptor Construction Requirements. Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance
with the Plumbing Code. There shall be a minimum of one (1) manhole per ten (10) feet of
interceptor length to provide access for cleaning. Manhole covers shall be gastight in construction
and have a minimum opening dimension of twenty-four (24) inches. Concrete covers are not acceptable.
In areas where traffic may exist, the interceptor shall be designed for the appropriate traffic
load. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to
prevent surface and ground water from entering the grease interceptor.
925.13 Grease Trap Construction Requirements. Grease traps may be installed on waste lines
leading from kitchen floor drains, mop sinks, food preparation and washing sinks, and other fixtures
or equipment where grease may be introduced into the sewer system. Class 1 FSEs that currently
have grease traps shall retain and maintain them until they install a grease interceptor. FSEs that have
grease traps or those that install them are subject to the requirements below:
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-22 Revised September 2012
(A) The grease trap may be set on the floor or partially or fully recessed in the floor to suit
piping and structural conditions. Baffle systems and all other internal pieces shall be removable
to facilitate cleaning and replacement, but must be in place at all other times.
(B) There shall be sufficient clearance for the removal of the trap cover for cleaning. The trap
shall be equipped with a flow control fitting. A suitable flow control fitting shall be installed
ahead of each trap in the waste line beyond the fixture and as close as possible to
the underside of the lowest fixture. When wastes of two or more sinks or fixtures are
combined for use by one grease trap, a single flow control fitting shall be used. All grease
traps shall have a vented waste line to retain water and prevent siphoning.
925.14 Abandoned Grease Interceptors. An FSE that abandons grease interceptors shall have
them removed.
925.15 Record Keeping and Inspections. Each FSE shall maintain a grease removal device
maintenance log. The log shall include the dates of service, who performed the service and
the disposal method. A record of maintenance, repairs, and a log of pumping and waste
hauling of contents shall be maintained and provided to the pretreatment coordinator upon
request.
(A) All FSEs will be inspected periodically by the City. FSEs shall allow the City ready access
at all reasonable times for the inspection of grease removal devices and all pertinent
maintenance records for the grease removal devices.
(B) Upon the showing of proper credentials, the Public Works Director or Waste Water
Treatment Plant Manager shall have the authority to enter an FSE’s premises for scheduled
or unscheduled inspections. Failure of the Public Works Director or Waste Water
Treatment Plant Manager to make prior arrangements for an inspection shall not be considered
a legitimate reason to refuse admittance. An FSE must keep records associated
with waste cooking oil collection and disposal, interceptor hauling and maintenance records
on-site for a minimum of three (3) years and must be available for inspection by the
Public Works Director or Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager during normal business
hours. A separate maintenance log shall be maintained for each grease removal device.
Grease removal device maintenance logs shall include at a minimum the following information:
1. Identification of the grease removal device.
2. The date that maintenance occurred.
3. The volume of grease removed in gallons.
4. The bottom solids fraction and floating grease layer that are removed and the total
depth of the grease interceptor in inches.
5. The name of the company and person(s) performing the maintenance.
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-23
The waste removed from the grease removal device must be disposed of in accordance
with federal, state and/or local laws.
925.16 Reporting. When the Public Works Director or Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager has
determined that an FSE must provide written reports, these reports shall be submitted in accordance
with the requirements of the Public Works Director or Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager. Written
reports required by this title will be deemed submitted upon actual receipt by the Public Works
Director or Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager.
925.17 Variance from Grease Interceptor Requirements. A variance from the grease interceptor
requirements may be allowed by the Public Works Director or Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager
if it is shown that an alternative pretreatment technology is equally effective in controlling the
FOG discharge. In determining whether or not to grant a variance, the Public Works Director or
Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager shall consider the following:
(A) Whether or not there is adequate space for installation and/or maintenance of a grease interceptor.
The FSE must demonstrate that the installation of a grease interceptor is not
feasible or advisable.
(B) Whether or not the FSE can justify and demonstrate that an alternative pretreatment technology
is equivalent or better than a grease interceptor in controlling its FOG discharge.
(C) Any request for a variance must be made in writing to the Public Works Director or
Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager. The written request must include all the reasons
for the FSE’s failure or inability to comply.
Upon a determination by the Public Works Director or Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager, in
consultation with the Building Official and the Environmental Health Administrator that there are
sufficient reasons to justify a variance, the FSE will be relieved to the extent expressly provided for
in the variance. A variance shall contain terms and conditions that serve as basis for its issuance. A
variance may be revoked at any time if any of the terms and conditions for its issuance are not satisfied
or if the conditions upon which the variance was based change to the extent that the justification
for the variance no longer exists. The variance shall be valid so long as the FSE remains in compliance
with the terms and conditions specified in the variance.
Notice of the approval or denial of a variance shall be mailed to the applicant by United States mail
and the Public Works Director or Waste Water Treatment Plant Manager shall prepare and file an
Affidavit of Mailing.
Denial of a variance is subject to an appeal to the City Council. A written notice of appeal must be
filed with the City Administrator within 15 days of mailing 10 days of receipt of the notice of denial.
If no appeal is filed within the time specified the action of the Public Works Director or Waste Water
Treatment Plant Manager shall be final.
Upon receipt of a notice of appeal the City Administrator shall set a date for a hearing within 15 days
of receipt of the notice of appeal. Notice of the time and place for the hearing shall be served upon
the applicant by United States mail at least five days before the hearing. The City Administrator
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-24 Revised September 2012
shall prepare and file an Affidavit of Mailing. The City Council shall hear such testimony and other
evidence as it deems necessary and expedient and thereupon make its findings and decision, which
shall be final.
925.18 Surcharge For Noncompliant Class 1 Food Service Establishments. Class 1 FSEs
which do not install a grease interceptor shall pay a quarterly surcharge of $_______ which shall be
included in their quarterly utility bill statement. The amount of that surcharge will be determined
pursuant to Section 925.19 of this Ordinance.
925.19 Surcharge Fee Determination. A comprehensive study will be undertaken to collect and
evaluate data based, among other things, on the City’s increased costs due to cleaning FOG from the
sewer system, the cost of the treatment of additional FOG wastes, and any other factors affecting the
elimination of FOGs from the sewer system. The results of that study shall be used to determine the
surcharge amount noted under section 925.18.
925.20 Severability. In the event that any provision of this chapter is held to be invalid, illegal, unconstitutional
or unenforceable under the laws of the State of Minnesota or the United States of
America, such defect shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter which
can be given effect without the defective provision or of this chapter as a whole. To this end, the
provisions of this chapter are declared severable.
925.21 Enforcement. In the event that a FSE fails to maintain a grease removal device as required
in this chapter, the FSE shall be given a seven day notice to perform the maintenance required by this
chapter on the grease removal device. If after the seven day notice, the grease removal device is not
serviced, the City may order the work to be performed by an approved contractor. The cost of the
work shall be billed to the FSE. If the FSE fails to pay the full amount of the bill, the outstanding
amount may be assessed against the property where the maintenance was performed.
925.22 Administrative Fees. No fee will be charged for an annual inspection. However, if the
Food Service Establishment’s grease removal device is not in compliance with this Ordinance, a
$50.00 re-inspection fee may be charged for each inspection thereafter until compliance is achieved.
925.22 Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance, or providing false information
to the City in connection therewith shall, upon conviction therefore, be punished as provided
in the penalty section of this Ordinance.
Chapter 930 – Certification of Past Due Accounts
930.01 Certification of Past Due Accounts. The City hereby establishes a procedure by which the
City, in cooperation with the Public Utility Commission, shall certify severely past due
sewer, water, garbage and electric bills to the appropriate County Auditor for collection
with the subsequent year’s property taxes due against the parcel for which said past due
billing is owed.
(A) As needed, the PUC shall prepare a list of severely past due sewer, water, garbage
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-25
and electrical customers who failed to make their final payment.
(B) Prior to the assessment, a letter shall be sent to the property owner (not the renter)
advising of the delinquency and advising that if the balance is not paid in full within
thirty (30) days of the letter that the amount due on that date will be certified to the
County Auditor for collection with the following year’s taxes. The certified amount
shall include an amount equal to one year’s interest as interest and penalty for the delinquency.
(C) Following the above procedure, the PUC shall send the revised list of delinquent accounts
meeting the above noted criteria to the city.
(D) The City Council shall adopt an resolution certifying all accounts that meet the above
specified criteria to each respective County Auditor for collection with the following
year’s property taxes.
Chapter 940 – Water
940.01 Private Wells – Limitations amended 1-24-13 ord 695
(A) Definitions:
(1) Domestic use means water used for drinking or potable water, nonpotable water
or irrigation purposes, but shall not include water from wells drilled for
such purposes as dewatering, groundwater monitoring, heating or cooling, elevator
borings or environmental bore holes.
(2) Irrigate means to land apply water by any artificial means, including, but not
limited to the diversion of surface waters, the pumping of ground water from
wells, etc.
(3) Private Wells for Domestic Use means any well not owned by Princeton Public
Utilities (PUC) which is drilled for potable water, nonpotable water or irrigation
purposes including sand point or drive point wells. "Private Wells for
Domestic Use" shall not include wells drilled for such purposes as dewatering,
groundwater monitoring, heating or cooling, elevator borings or
environmental bore holes.
(4) Sand point or drive point well means a well created by driving or pounding a
casing into the ground until an aquifer is encountered..
(B) Private Wells for Domestic Use
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-26 Revised September 2012
(1) Proximity to PUC Water Utility Service Lines. The drilling of new private
wells for domestic use on any property to which PUC Water Utility Service is
available within 500 feet is prohibited.
(2) Use of Existing Wells for Irrigation. Wells already existing on the date this ordinance
was passed may continue to be used for irrigation purposes only pursuant
to the PUC’s policy regarding such use.
940.02 Reserved
940.03 Lawn Watering - Limitations
(A) The use water from the city water system to water trees, bushes and plants by use of
a standard garden hose is permitted at all hours of the day, except:
1. when there is a fire in any area served by the water system. At that point, all
lawn and garden watering operations shall cease. All other unnecessary use of
water must also cease.
2. as further regulated in section (C), below.
(B) Whenever Princeton Public Utilities determines that a shortage of water supply
threatens the Public Utilities’ service area, it may, by published notice, limit the times
and hours during which water may be used for lawn or garden watering, irrigation,
car washing, swimming pools, air conditioning or other uses. Notice of the limitations
must be mailed or delivered to a violator, and the person may not violate the
limitations after receipt of the notice. In addition, the Public Utilities may discontinue
water service to any customer who causes or permits water to be used in violation of
the provisions of the notice.
(C) To conserve water resources, prevent the wasteful and harmful effects of sprinkling
during mid-day hours, and allow the Public Utilities' water system adequate opportunity
to replenish the water supply in the Public Utilities' water storage tanks, certain
limitations must be placed on the use of the Public Utilities' water supply. During
the period of May 1 through September 30 of any year, a person may only sprinkle or
irrigate lawns, sod, seeded areas, gardens, shrubs, or other vegetation in the Public
Utilities’ service area:
1. Before 11:00 a.m. and after 5:00 p.m.; and
2. On calendar dates ending in an odd number on property with street addresses
ending in an odd number, or on calendar dates ending in an even number on
property with street addresses ending in an even number.
3. No use of water for these purposes may occur between the hours of 11:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m. on any day or in violation of the odd/even system established
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-27
above.
4. Exceptions. The restrictions established in paragraphs 2 and 3 do not apply to
the use of water:
a. From a hose that a person holds by hand;
b. Under the conditions of a permit issued by the General Manager of the
Princeton Public Utilities for special situations such as the watering of
new sod; or
c. From a source of water other than the Public Utilities' water system if the
water user has registered the other source with the Public Utilities, obtained
a water appropriation permit if required under Minn. Stat.§
103B.211, Subd. 4, and posted a sign provided by the Public Utilities
that clearly informs the public of the alternative water source.
If a person claims the privilege of an exception, the Public Utilities may inspect
the person's property during reasonable times to ensure that there is compliance
with this provision.
5. Penalties.
a. A violation of the restrictions contained in paragraphs 1 through 3 is a petty
misdemeanor, except that a violation that is preceded within the previous 12
months by two or more violations of these paragraphs is a misdemeanor.
b. In addition, a civil penalty may be imposed for each day of violation. This penalty
will be collected with water usage charges for the premises where the violation
took place. The penalty will be $50.00 for the first violation and will increase
by the sum of $25.00 each time for each succeeding violation. A penalty
may be appealed by a written request for an appearance before the Public Utilities
Commission, at their regularly scheduled meeting pursuant to Public Utilities
regulations.
Chapter 950 – Storm Water
Section 950.01 Title
Section 950.02 Purpose and Intent
Section 950.03 Definitions
Section 950.04 Scope
Section 950.05 Storm Water Pollution Control Plan
Section 950.06 Review
Section 950.07 Modification of Plan
Section 950.08 Financial Securities
Section 950.09 Notification of Failure of the Storm Water Pollution Control Plan
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-28 Revised September 2012
Section 950.10 Enforcement
Section 950.11 Right of Entry and Inspection
Section 950.12 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
Section 950.13 Other Statues, Rules and Ordinances
Section 950.14 Severability
950.01 Title. This Article shall be known as the “Urban Storm Water Quality Management
and Discharge Control Ordinance” and may be so cited.
950.02 Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this Article is to ensure the health, safety, and
general welfare of citizens, and protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and
water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33
U.S.C. §1251 et seq.) by reducing pollutants in storm water discharges along with soil erosion
and sedimentation in the City of Princeton. It establishes standards and specifications
for practices and planning activities minimizing storm water runoff pollution, soil erosion,
and sedimentation.
950.03 Definitions. The terms used in the Article shall have the following meanings:
(A) “Applicant” Any person or entity applying for a building permit, subdivision or site
plan approval, or a permit on behalf of an Owner to allow construction activities.
Applicant also means that person’s agents, employees and others acting under this
person’s direction.
(B) “Best Management Practices” Activities, practices and procedures to prevent
or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the municipal storm
drain system and waters of the state. Best Management Practices (BMPs) include but
are not limited to; treatment facilities to remove pollutants from storm water; operating
and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff,
spillage or leaks of non-storm water, waste disposal, and drainage from materials
storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of specific activities,
practices, and procedures and such other provisions as the City determines appropriate
for the control of pollutants. Examples of BMPs can be found in Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency publication: “Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas,
Best Management Practices for Dealing with Storm Water Runoff from Urban, Suburban
and Developing Areas of Minnesota”, March 1, 2000, as amended. The document
is available at City of Princeton, City Hall or the Internet at
http://www.pca.state.mn.us/water/pubs/sw-bmpmanual.html.
(C) “Construction Activity” Any land change that may result in soil erosion and
the movement of sediments into waters of the state, drainage systems or into ad adjacent
properties, including clearing, grading, filling and excavating of one (1) or
more acres.
(D) “Final Stabilization” Means that all soil disturbing activities at the site have been
completed, and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of seventy
(70) percent of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent strucCity
of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-29
tures has been established, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as
the use of riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
(E) “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)/State Disposal System
(SDS)” Means the programs for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating,
monitoring, and enforcing permits under the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §
1251 et seq.) and Minnesota Statutes, Section 115.03, and any subsequent amendments
thereto.
(F) “Owner” The person or party possessing the title of the land on which the construction
activity will occur; or if the construction activity is for lease holder, the party or
Individual identified as the lease holder.
(G) Storm Water Pollution Control Plan (SWPCP) Means the same as a StormWater
Pollution Prevention Plan prepared in accordance with the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency, General Permit Authorization to Discharge Storm Water Associated
with Construction Activity Under the NPDES/SDS Program (Permit No. MN
R100001). The SWPCP shall contain appropriate temporary and permanent erosion
and sediment control measures that will decrease off-site non-point source pollution.
(H) “Waters of the State” Means those waters as defined in Minnesota Statutes,§ 11.01,
subd. 22.
950.04 Scope. This Article applies to an Owner defined as a person, firm, sole proprietorship,
partnership, public or private corporation, governmental subdivision or other entity proposing
a construction activity of one (1) acre or more within the City of Princeton. An Owner
shall apply to the City for the approval of a Storm Water Pollution Control Plan
(SWPCP). No land shall be disturbed until the City approves the SWPCP conforming to
the standards set forth herein.
950.05 Storm Water Pollution Control Plan (SWPCP). The SWPCP shall contain appropriate
temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control measures that will decrease off-site
non-point source pollution.
(A) Requirement of the Storm Water Pollution Control Plan. The SWPCP shall contain
the following information in addition to that required within Permit No. MN
R100001, Part III, A. 1-3:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the following individuals:
a. Owner
b. Applicant, if different than Owner
c. Person or firm responsible for SWPCP preparation
(2) A project description that includes the nature and purpose of the construction
activity, the amount of grading, utilities, and building construction involved
and the location of the project.
(3) A site map including existing topography, property information, steep slopes
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-30 Revised September 2012
(>12%) and one hundred (100) year flood plain boundary, if available from a
Flood Insurance rate Map (FIRM) or other water management authority.
(4) A site construction plan including location of the proposed construction activity
and the plan for the maintenance and inspection of the storm water pollution
control measures, including the plan for disposal of collected sediment and
floating debris.
(5) Provisions to prevent sediment damage to adjacent properties and other designated
areas such as drainage ditches, streams, wetlands and lakes.
(6) A narrative plan for removal of temporary erosion and sediment control
measures at the end of the project.
(7) Calculations that were made for the design of such items as storm water runoff
rate control, sediment basins, wet detention basins, diversions, waterways, infiltration
zones and other applicable practices.
(B) Minimum Storm, Water Pollution Control Measures. These minimum control
measures are required where bare soil is exposed. Where additional control measures
are needed, they will be specified at the discretion of the City.
(1) The Applicant or his designated representative must properly install sediment
control measures before the construction activity begins.
(2) Divert Channeled runoff around disturbed areas and protect the channel.
(3) If a storm water management plan involved directing some or all of the site’s
runoff to adjacent property, the applicant or his designated representative shall
obtain from adjacent property owners any necessary easements or other property
interests concerning the flowing of such water.
(4) Scheduling the site’s activities to lessen their impact on erosion and sediment
creation, so as to minimize the amount of exposed soil.
(5) Silt fence shall be required to hold all sheet flow runoff generated at an individual
site, until it can either infiltrate or seep through silt fence’s pores.
(6) Temporary soils stockpiles must have silt fence or other effective sediment
controls, and cannot be placed in surface waters, including storm water conveyances
such as curb and gutter systems, or conduits and ditches.
(7) Temporary rock construction entrances are required wherever vehicles enter
and exit a site.
(8) Streets must be cleaned and swept whenever tracking of sediments occurs and
before sites are left idle for weekends and holidays. A regular sweeping schedule
shall be established.
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-31
(9) Water (impacted by the construction activity) removed from the site by pumping
must be treated by temporary sedimentation basins, geotextile filters, grit
chambers, sand filters, up-flow chambers, hydro-cyclones, swirl concentrators
or other appropriate controls. Such water shall not be discharged in a manner
that causes erosion or flooding of the site; receiving channels, adjacent property
or a wetland.
(10) All storm drain inlets must be protected during construction until control
measures are in place with either silt fence or an equivalent. Existing water
bodies and wetlands shall have temporary erosion control devices installed
around their respective perimeters to protect them from sediment deposits created
by a construction activity.
(C) Temporary Sediment Basins For common drainage locations that serve an area with
10 or more acres disturbed at one time, a temporary (or permanent) sediment basin
must be provided prior to the runoff leaving the construction site or entering waters
of the state. In addition to this requirement, the applicant is encouraged to install
temporary sediment basins where appropriate in areas with steep slopes or highly
erodible soils even if less than 10 acres drains to one area.
(D) Permanent Storm Water Pollution Controls
(1) Where a project’s ultimate development replaces vegetation and/or other previous
surfaces with 1 or more acres of cumulative impervious surface, a water
quality volume of ½ inch of runoff from the new impervious surfaces created
by the project must be treated in one of the following ways prior to the runoff
leaving the construction site or entering waters of the state; wet sedimentation
basin, infiltration/filtration, regional ponds, or a combination of practices.
(2) At a minimum these facilities must conform to the most current technology as
reflected in the current version of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s
publication “Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas”.
(3) Permanent storm water pollution controls to be designed by a professional engineer
licensed in the State of Minnesota.
(E) Additional BMPs – Rum River. If a construction activity is within 2,000 feet of the
Rum River, the following BMPs are required in addition to those listed in Section 5
b) through 5e).
(1) All exposed soil areas with a slope of 3:1 or steeper that have a continuous
positive slope to the Rum River must have temporary erosion protection or
permanent cover within 7 days after the area is no longer actively being
worked.
(2) Temporary sediment basins described in Section 5d) must be used for common
drainage locations that serve an area with five (5) or more acres disturbed at
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-32 Revised September 2012
one time.
(3) The water quality volume that must be treated by the project’s permanent storm
water pollution controls described in Section 5e) shall be one (1) inch of runoff
from the new impervious surfaces created by the project.
(4) An undisturbed buffer zone of not less than 100 linear feet from the Rum River
(not including tributaries) shall be maintained at all times. Exceptions from
this requirement for the areas, such as water crossings or limited water access,
are allowed if the Owner fully documents in the SWPCP the circumstances
and reasons the buffer encroachment is necessary.
(F) Inspection & Maintenance of Storm Water Pollution Control Plan’s Measures.
(1) The applicant must inspect the construction site within 24 hours after a rainfall
event where the total rainfall is greater than 0.25 inches in 24 hours.
(2) Inspections may be performed by City staff to observe that erosion and sediment
control measures are properly installed and maintained in accordance
with the SWPCP. Construction stop orders may be issued by the City until erosion
and sediment control measures are corrected in accordance with the
SWPCP.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any necessary easements
or other property interests to allow access to the storm water management facilities
for inspection and maintenance purposes.
(4) All storm water pollution control management facilities must be designed to
minimize the need of maintenance, to provide easy vehicle and personnel access
for maintenance purposes and are structurally sound.
950.06 Review. In accordance with Minn. Stat., Section 462.358, Subd. 3b., the City shall review
the storm water pollution control plan and approve or disapprove within sixty (60) days of
receiving the plan from the applicant.
950.07 Modification of Plan. An approved storm water pollution control plan may be modified
upon submission of a written application for modification to the City, and after written approval
by the City.
950.08 Financial Securities. In accordance with Minn. Stat., Section 462.358, Subd. 2a., the
City requires financial security in the amount of $300 per acre up to a maximum of $30,000
for the performance of the work described in the approved storm water pollution control
and any related remedial work. This security must be available prior to commencing the
project.
(F) Action Against the Financial Security. The City may act against the financial security
if any of the conditions listed below exist. The City shall use funds from this seCity
of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-33
curity to finance any corrective or remedial work undertaken by the City or a contractor
retained by the City and to reimburse the City for all direct cost incurred in the
process of remedial work including, but not limited to, staff time and attorney’s fees.
(1) The applicant ceases construction activities and/or filling and abandons the
work site prior to completion of the storm water pollution control plan.
(2) The applicant fails to conform to the storm water pollution control plan as approved
by the City, or to related supplementary instructions.
(3) The techniques utilized under the storm water pollution control plan fail within
one year of installation.
(4) The applicant fails to reimburse the City for corrective action taken under Section
9.
(5) Emergency action is taken under Section 9b.
(B) Returning the Financial Security Any unspent amount of the financial security deposited
with the City for faithful performance of the storm water pollution control
plan and any storm water and pollution control plan related remedial work must be
released not more than one full year after the completion of the installation of all such
measures and the establishment of final stabilization.
950.09 Failure of the Storm Water Pollution Control Plan.
(A) Notifications by the City The City shall notify the applicant when the Cityis going
to act against the financial securities. The initial contact will be to the party or parties
listed on the storm water pollution control plan as contacts. Except during an emergency
action, forty eight (48) hours after notification by the City, the City at its discretion
may begin corrective work. If after making a good faith effort to notify the
responsible party or parties, the City has been unable to establish contact, the City
may proceed with corrective work.
(B) Emergency Action If circumstances exist such that noncompliance with this ordinance
poses an immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare, as determined
by the City, the City may take emergency preventive action. The City shall also
take every reasonable action possible to contact and direct the applicant to take
any necessary action. Any cost to the City may be recovered from the applicant’s financial
security.
(C) Failure to Do Corrective Work When an applicant fails to conform to any provision
of Section 9 within the time stipulated, the City may take the following actions:
(1) Withhold the scheduling of inspections and/or the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy.
(2) Revoke any permit issued by the City to the applicant for the site in question or
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-34 Revised September 2012
any other of the applicant’s sites within the City’s jurisdiction.
(3) Direct the correction of the deficiency by City forces or by a separate contract.
(4) The applicant must reimburse all costs incurred by the City in correcting storm
water pollution control deficiencies. If payment is not made within thirty (30)
days after the City incurs costs, payment will be made from the applicant’s financial
securities as described in Section 8.
(5) If there is an insufficient financial amount, in the applicant’s financial securities
as described in Section 8, to cover the costs incurred by the City, then the
City may assess the remaining amount against the property.
950.10 Enforcement. The City shall be responsible for enforcing this ordinance. Any person,
firm, or corporation failing to comply with or violating any of these regulations, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine or imprisonment or both. All
land use and building permits will be suspended until the applicant has corrected the violation.
Each day that a separate violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
950.11 Right of Entry and Inspection. The applicant shall allow the City and their authorized
representatives, upon presentation of credentials to:
(A) Enter upon the permitted site for the purpose of obtaining information, examine records,
conducting investigations or surveys or for the purpose of correcting deficiencies
in storm water pollution control.
(B) Bring such equipment upon the permitted site as is necessary.
(C) Examine and copy any books, papers, records, or memoranda pertaining to activities
or records required to be kept under the terms and conditions of this permitted site.
(D) Inspect the storm water pollution control measures.
(E) Sample and monitor any items or activities pertaining to storm water pollution control
measures.
950.12 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate,
or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
950.13 Other Statues, Rules and Ordinances. The applicant shall comply with all federal and
state statutes and local ordinances including the current version of the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency’s, General Permit Authorization to Discharge Storm Water Associated
with Construction Activity under the NPDES/SDS permit program and the requirements of
a Watershed Management Organization, if applicable.
950.14 Severability. The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and if any provisions of
this ordinance, or application of any provisions of this ordinance to any circumstance,
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-35
are held invalid, the application of such provisions to other circumstances and the remainder
of this ordinance shall not be affected.
Chapter 960 – Storm Sewer Utility
960.01 Statutory Authority. Minnesota Statutes, Section 444.075 (the “Act”) authorizes cities to
impose just and equitable charges for the use and availability of storm sewer systems for
the collection and disposal of storm water. By this Chapter, the City elects to exercise such
authority.
960.02 Findings and Purpose.
(A) In the exercise of its governmental authority, and in order to promote the public
health, safety, convenience, and welfare, the City has constructed, operated, and
maintained a storm sewer system (the “facilities”). This chapter is adopted in the further
exercise of such authority.
(B) The facilities have been financed by various methods, including special assessments,
grants, and ad valorem taxes, which were appropriate methods used at the time. It is
now necessary and desirable to provide an alternative method of recovering the future
costs of establishment, operation, maintenance, depreciation, replacements, improvements,
enlargements, and necessary extension of the facilities by the imposition
of charges as provided in this chapter.
(C) It is necessary to establish a methodology that undertakes to make the changes in a
just and equitable manner. Taking into account the status of the completion of the facilities,
past methods of recovery, facilities costs, and other relevant factors, it is determined
to be just and equitable to establish charges on the basis of the expected
storm water runoff from the various parcels of land within the City. Assigning costs
and making charges based upon expected storm water runoff cannot be done with
mathematical precision, but can only be accomplished within reasonable and practical
limits based upon use.
960.03 System Established. A city storm sewer system is hereby established. The system consists
of all storm sewer conduits, manholes and catch basins, ditches, and ponds within the public
right-of-way, and storm sewer conduits, manholes and catch basins, ditches, and ponds
in public purpose easements as of June 1, 2008, and any additional storm sewer facilities
and appurtenances required by the City in the future.
960.04 Rates and Charges.
(A) Land Use Rate Calculation. Rates and charges to be imposed for the use and availability
of the facilities shall be determined by the use of a residential equivalent factor
(“REF”), which is defined as the ratio of the average volume of surface water runoff
from one acre of land subjected to a particular use, to the average volume of surface
water runoff from one acre of land subject to typical single family uses within the
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-36 Revised September 2012
City during a standard rainfall event. All developed single-family parcels shall be
considered to have an acreage of one-fourth (1/4) acre per lot. Calculations of storm
water utility rates for various land uses shall be based upon their REF. The REF values
for various land uses are as follows:
1. Land Use Category REF
Single Family Residential 1.0
Multi-Family Residential 1.5
Commercial 1.9
Industrial 2.0
Airport Hangars 2.0
Public and Semi-Public 1.2
Vacant, Developable Land 0.4
2. Land use categories include, but are not limited to the following:
(a) Single Family Residential – Residential areas within the City used or intended
for use as single and two-family homes located within a typical
single residential lot.
(b) Multi-Family Residential – Multi-family land use is defined as a parcel
designed or used for three or more dwelling units which is typically on a
lot larger than a typical single-family unit. This land use includes apartments,
town homes, and mobile home parks.
(c) Commercial – This land use consists of land designed or used for commercial,
retail, and office space as identified within the City’s land use
plan.
(d) Industrial – These areas are designed or used for industrial uses as outlined
in the City’s land use plan.
(e) Public and Semi-Public – These areas are designed or used for churches,
cemeteries, and schools as outlined in the City’s land use plan.
(f) Airport – The airport has been divided into two segments for the purposes
of this Ordinance. The airport consists of the runway segment, which
the City is responsible for owning and maintaining, and the hangar segment
which is a leased portion of the airport for use by individuals and
businesses.
(g) Vacant Developable Land – These are areas within the City as identified
on the land use map that are available for future development.
(B) Calculation of Charge. The charge to be billed to each billing unit shall be a just and
equitable share of the total cost of the facilities. Charges shall be apportioned similarly
to similar uses of property. From time to time the City Council shall by resolution
establish a class charge rate calculation table for all billing units. These charges shall
be listed in the City Code Appendix E.
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
Revised September 2012 9-37
(C) Other Land Uses. Land uses not listed in the class charge rate calculation table shall
be classified by the City Administrator, or designee, on assigning them to the class
most nearly like the listed uses from the standpoint of probable hydraulic response.
Appeal from the City Administrator or designee’s decision
may be made in writing to the City Council within fourteen (14) days of notice of the
decision.
(D) Adjustment of Charges. The City Council may from time to time by resolution adopt
policies providing for the adjustment of charges for parcels based upon data provided
by affected property owners demonstrating an actual storm water runoff volume substantially
different from the calculation being used for the class of parcel(s). An adjustment
may not be made retroactive. If the adjustment would affect a change in the
calculation for all or substantially all of the land uses in a particular classification, the
adjustment must be made by amending the class charge rate calculation table.
(E) Excluded Lands. A charge shall not be made against land which is:
1. outside the corporate limits of the City;
2. railroad right-of-way;
3. vacant and undevelopable;
4. City owned land, except that which is leased to persons and non-governmental
entities;
(F) Information. The owner, tenant, occupant, or person in charge of premises must supply
the City with such information as the City may reasonably request related to the
use, development , and area of the premises. If the information requested is not provided,
the charge for the premises will be estimated and billed in accordance with the
estimate, which will be based on information available to the City.
(G) Billing. The charges shall be included on the utility accounts of each property and are
payable in accordance with the provisions for billing and payment of water and sanitary
sewer bills. Billings for the charges shall begin with the first billing after June 1,
2008.
(H) Penalties: Certification to County Auditor. Penalties for late payment or nonpayment
of billings for charges shall be the same in those applicable for water and
sanitary sewer billings. The City may certify delinquent, unpaid charges to be certified
to the Mille Lacs and Sherburne County Auditors with taxes against the property
served for collection as other taxes and collections.
960.05 Revenues. Revenues received from charges shall be placed in a separate storm sewer utility
fund and used to pay normal and reasonable costs of operating and maintaining the facilities,
and any other use permitted by M.S. 444.075. Excess revenues may be used to finance
City of Princeton Title 9 Sewer and Water
9-38 Revised September 2012
improvements to and betterments of the facilities.
City of Princeton Title 10 Building/Housing
10-1
TITLE 10. BUILDING/HOUSING
Chapter 1000 Building Code
Chapter 1010 Demolition
Chapter 1020 Electrical Inspections
Chapter 1025 Plumbing Inspections
Chapter 1000 – Building Code
1000.01 Building Code. The Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes 16B.59 to 16B.75 is hereby adopted as the building code for the City of Princeton.
The code is hereby incorporated in this ordinance as if fully set out herein.
(A) The Minnesota State Building Code includes the following chapters of Minnesota
Rules:
1. 1300 Administration of the Minnesota State Building Code
2. 1301 Building Official Certification
3. 1302 State Building Code Construction Approvals
4. 1303 Minnesota Provisions
5. 1305 Adoption of the 2000 International Building Code
6. 1307 Elevators and Related Devices
7. 1309 Adoption of the 2000 International Residential Code
8. 1311 Adoption of the 2000 Guidelines for the Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings
9. 1315 Adoption of the 2000 National Electrical Code
10. 1325 Solar Energy Systems
11. 1330 Fallout Shelters
12. 1335 Floodproofing Regulations
13. 1341 Minnesota Accessibility Code
14. 1346 Adoption of the Minnesota State Mechanical Code
15. 1350 Manufactured Homes
16. 1360 Prefabricated Buildings
17. 1361 Industrialized/Modular Buildings
18. 1370 Storm Shelters (Manufactured Home Parks)
19. 4715 Minnesota Plumbing Code
20. 7670, 7672, 7674, 7676, and 7678 Minnesota Energy Code
(B) The City of Princeton may adopt by reference any or all of the following optional
chapters of Minnesota Rules: Chapter 1335, Floodproofing Regulations, parts
1335.0600 to 1335.1200.
1000.02 Application, Administration, and Enforcement.
(A) The application, administration, and enforcement of the code shall be in accordance
with Minnesota Rules Part 1300 and Minnesota State Building Code. The code shall
City of Princeton Title 10 Building/Housing
10-2
be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by Minnesota Statute 16B.62,
Subdivision 1, when so established by this ordinance.
(B) The code enforcement agency of the City of Princeton is called the Building Official.
(C) A Minnesota certified Building Official must be appointed by this jurisdiction to administer
the code (M.S. § 16B.65, as it may be amended from time to time).
1000.03 Permits and Fees.
(A) The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in Minnesota
Statute 16B.62, Subdivision 1.
(B) Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in accordance with the
fee schedule adopted by the city of Princeton. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be
collected on all permits issued for work governed by this code in accordance with
M.S. §16B.70, as it may be amended from time to time.
1000.04 Infrastructure Connection Certificate - Payment of Special Fee in Lieu of Assessment.
No building permit shall be issued, nor shall any permit to tap or connect with any municipal
infrastructure (sanitary sewer, water, street or storm water) system of the City either directly
or indirectly from any lot, tract, or parcel of land, unless the City shall have certified:
(A) That such lot or tract of land to be served by such infrastructure has been assessed for
the cost of construction of said infrastructure with which the connection is to be
made; or
(B) If no assessment has been levied for such construction cost, that proceedings for levying
such assessment have been or will be commenced in due course; or
(C) That the cost of construction for said infrastructure has been paid by the developer,
owner, or builder platting said lot or tract of land. This shall not include lots, parcels,
or tracts served by the infrastructure and which were not a part of the plat or tract developed;
or
(D) If no assessment has been levied and no assessment proceedings will be completed in
due course, and the developer, owner, or builder of the lot, tract, or parcel has not
paid the cost of improving said lot, tract, or parcel of land, that a sum equal to the
portion of the cost of constructing said infrastructure which would be assessable
against said lot or tract has been paid to the City of Princeton.
If no such certificate can be issued by the City, no building permit or permit to tap or connect
to said infrastructure shall be issued unless the applicant pays the appropriate fee in
lieu of assessment for each infrastructure improvement serving said lot, tract or parcel of
land. Said fee shall be equal to an amount representing the estimated construction cost or
value of said infrastructure which would have been assessed against said lot, tract, or parCity
of Princeton Title 10 Building/Housing
10-3
cel, to be served by such tapping or connection.
Said fee shall be set by resolution of the Council and shall be reviewed annually by the City
Engineer. Said fee shall be set on the basis as any assessment previously levied against
other property for the same or similar infrastructure.
The City Council may, by its resolution and upon receipt of a written request from and
signed by the land owner(s), provide that said fee, as provided by this Section, be transmitted
to the County Auditor to be extended on the proper tax lists of the County to be payable
in a number of annual installments as set by the City Council, and to provide further that all
assessments and interest collected by the County Treasurer therefrom shall be paid over to
the City in the same manner as other municipal taxes.
1000.99 Violations and Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation, or voluntary association which
violated this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided by §100.99.
Each violation, and each day that a violation is permitted to exist, shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 1010 – Demolition
1010.01 Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the destruction of buildings in the city
and ensure the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare, as well as the protection
of public property and facilities.
(A) This chapter shall apply to the demolition of any structure. The Building Official
shall have the authority to waive any requirement when warranted by the nature of
the demolition. Any requirement waived shall be done in writing to the applicant stating
the reason and based upon evidence presented by the applicant.
(B) Interior demotion and the replacement of windows, doors, shingles, and similar activities
shall be exempt from this chapter, but may require a building or other permit.
(C) The owner of the property is responsible to ensure that this chapter and other applicable
laws are followed in the demolition process.
1010.03 Application Process. Anyone wishing to demolish a building or other structure under this
chapter must make application at least 30 days prior to the desired start date and provide the
following information:
(A) Site sketch;
(B) Method of destruction;
(C) Anticipated amount of demolition material to be hauled off-site and method of removal,
including anticipated number of trucks required;
(D) Proposed truck routes to and from site;
(E) Proposed methods for mitigating any nuisance, such as dust, vibration, noise, and the
like;
City of Princeton Title 10 Building/Housing
10-4
(F) Proposed time schedule;
(G) Certificate of liability insurance.
1010.04 Application Fee. A fee set from time to time by ordinance of the City Council shall be
paid to the city. Initially the fee shall be based on the size of the structure to be demolished
as follows:
Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or less $150.00
More than 20,000 square feet $300.00
Time Extension $50.00
1010.05 Site Maintenance/Security.
(A) Openings. At no time during the demolition may the building be permitted to have
openings to the elements left uncovered and unsecured overnight. All holes, removed
windows, ceiling holes, perforations, and doorways shall be covered with plywood or
similar material at the end of each day of demolition.
(B) Storage of materials. All material taken out of or off the building is to be immediately
removed from the premises. Under no circumstances are building materials,
furnishings, or fixtures to be stored on the premises overnight except in locked storage
buildings or locked dumpsters with lids. Roll-off dumpsters shall not contain
any material that is municipal solid waste, subject to blowing off the site(such as paper
and dust) or is a health or odor hazard. All debris left on site overnight is to be
kept in locked dumpsters. The contractor shall not permit demolition debris, dust, or
rodents to leave the demolition work site. The contractor and property owner shall be
fully liable for any city expenses related to the removal of any of this material.
(C) Entry points. All entry points shall be at existing curb cuts. No equipment or material
may be loaded or unloaded on city property or public right-of-way, including
streets, boulevards, or sidewalks.
(D) Fencing.
(1) The job site is to be completely surrounded with fencing at all times. All excavations
left overnight are to be fenced with chain link metal fencing (snow
fencing is prohibited and shall not be considered as a substitute). Warning
signs are to be posted on the site at all times.
(2) Any above ground structure or part of a structure that is left in a standing position
without supporting beams, shoring, or scaffolds shall be fenced at a distance
adequate to protect the public from its fall. This distance shall be determined
by the City Building Inspector.
(E) Illumination. The job site will be illuminated at night whenever there are any below
grade excavations.
City of Princeton Title 10 Building/Housing
10-5
(F) Disconnection from utilities. The owner shall ensure that all utilities are appropriately
capped. Sewer and water shall be capped at the property line and inspected
by a city inspector before backfilling.
(G) Demolition debris. No demolition debris may be buried on the site. All excavations
must be immediately backfilled with clean granular fill.
(H) Time schedule. Structures shall be razed and completely removed within 120 days
after issuance of a permit. Site restoration, to include landscaping and planting, shall
be completed within nine months of issuance of a permit. In the event of unforeseen
circumstances, the applicant may apply to the City Council for an extension of these
time limits. The application must be submitted at least 21 days prior to a City Council
meeting. The application shall explain the reason for the extension and any extenuating
circumstances. The council, in its sole discretion, shall determine if an extension
is warranted and the length of any extension, if granted.
1010.06 Financial Security.
(A) Bonding. All demolition contractors must have a bond in an amount equal to the cost
of the demolition in place in favor of the city to cover all expenses related to the demolition.
This shall include any disruptions of city utilities, damage to city property,
and on-site and off-site clean up of any debris.
(B) Liability insurance. All demolition contractors must have at least $1,000,000.00 of
general liability insurance.
(C) Reimbursement to City. The contractor shall agree to pay to the city all expenses related
to the posting of city police officers on the site for any reason or any city expense
related to the mitigation of any hazard on or related to the site. The contractor
shall also reimburse the city for any damage caused to the city or public property by
any person on the demolition site, whether or not that person was an employee of the
contractor.
1010.99 Penalty. Any person, firm, corporation, or voluntary association which violated this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided by §100.99. Each violation, and
each day that a violation is permitted to exist, shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 1020 – Electrical Inspections
1020.01 Authority to inspect. The City of Princeton hereby provides for the inspection of all
electrical installations, pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 326B.36. subd. 6.
1020.02 Adopted by reference. The Minnesota Electrical Act, as adopted by the Commissioner of
Labor and Industry pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Chapter 326B, Sections 326B.31 to
326B.399. The Minnesota Electrical Act is hereby incorporated into this ordinance as if fully
set out herein. The Minnesota State Building Code incorporates by reference the National
City of Princeton Title 10 Building/Housing
10-6
Electrical Code pursuant to Minn. R. 1315.0020. All such codes incorporated herein by reference
constitute the electrical code of the City of Princeton.
1020.03 Compliance. All electrical installations shall comply with the requirements of the electrical
code of the City of Princeton and this ordinance.
1020.04 Permits and fees. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized
in Minnesota Statutes 326B.37. Any inspection or handling fees will be payable to
the City of Princeton
1020.05 Notice and appeal. All notices of violations and orders issued under this ordinance shall
be in conformance with Minn. Stat. §326B.36, subd. 4.
1020.06 Violations and penalties. A violation of the Minnesota Electrical Act is a misdemeanor.
(M.S. 326B.082, subd. 16).
1020.07 Enforcement and Suspension. Enforcement of this ordinance by the City shall be suspended
upon a finding by the City Administrator that neither the Minnesota Department of
Labor and Industry, nor any other State Agency, is able to provide inspection and permitting
of electrical installations as required by this ordinance, and enforcement of this ordinance
by the City shall be reinstated upon a finding by the City Administrator that the Minnesota
Department of Labor and Industry, or any other State Agency, is able to provide inspection
and permitting of electrical installations as required by this ordinance.
Chapter 1025 – Plumbing Inspections
1025.01 Authority to inspect. The City of Princeton hereby provides for plumbing permits, approval
of plumbing plans and specifications, and inspections of plumbing, pursuant to
Minn. Stat. § 326B.44.
1025.02 Adopted by reference. Minnesota Statutes Chapter 326B, Sections 326B.41 to 326B.49
and Minnesota Rules Chapter 4715 (“Plumbing Code”) are hereby incorporated into this
ordinance as if fully set out herein. All such codes incorporated herein by reference are
adopted pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 471.62 as the plumbing code of the City of Princeton
1025.03 Compliance. All plumbing systems, plans and specifications shall comply with the requirements
of the plumbing code of the City of Princeton and this ordinance.
1025.04 Insurance. Pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 326B.44, no person who engages in the business of
plumbing in the City of Princeton need post a bond or maintain public liability insurance as
a prerequisite for engaging in the business of plumbing, except the bond to the state and insurance
required under Minn. Stat. § 326B.46 and except any performance bond and insurance
required under a contract with the person for the performance of plumbing work for
the City.
City of Princeton Title 10 Building/Housing
10-7
1025.05 Permits and fees. Any inspection or permit fees will be payable to the City of Princeton
1025.06 Violations and penalties. A violation of the plumbing code of the City of Princeton is a
misdemeanor and will be reported to the state department of labor and industry. (M.S.
326B.082, subd. 16).
1025.07 Enforcement and Suspension. Enforcement of this ordinance by the City shall be suspended
upon a finding by the City Administrator that neither the Minnesota Department of
Labor and Industry, nor any other State Agency, is able to provide plan and specification
review, permitting, and inspection of plumbing installations as required by this ordinance,
and enforcement of this ordinance by the City shall be reinstated upon a finding by the City
Administrator that the Minnesota Department of Labor and Industry, or any other State
Agency, is able to provide plan and specification review, permitting, and inspection of
plumbing installations as required by this ordinance.
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 1
APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES
I. Electric
Ordinance No. 114
AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING THE SALE OF THE LIGHTING PLANT OF THE VILLAGE
OF PRINCETON, MINNESOTA, TO THE ELK RIVER POWER & LIGHT COMPANY AND
FIXING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SUCH SALE, INCLUDING A LEASE OF A
PART OF ITS PROPERTY.
Be it ordained by the Village Council of the Village of Princeton, Minnesota, as follows:
Section 1. That the Village of Princeton sell and it does hereby sell to the Elk River Power & Light
Company the municipal electric lighting plant now owned and operated by the Village of Princeton,
consisting in principal of two direct connected generator units, feeders and bus bar connections
attached thereto, switch board panels and appurtenances, boilers, power feed pumps, water heater,
and all other appliances and appurtenances connected therewith, for furnishing steam for the two
engine generator units referred to above, together with all tools now owned and used or to be used in
connection therewith; also the complete electric distribution system, including all poles, cross arms,
hardware, insulators, conductors, wires, anchorages, street lighting fixtures, lamps, lightning
arresters, and all other appliances, owned by the Village of Princeton, all service connections, and
any and all fixtures, appliances and appurtenances now connected with or used in the manufacture
and distribution of electrical energy, and all tools and supplies now in use or on hand, including the
free and unobstructed use of that part of the power plant building of the Village of Princeton that is
now used for production and distribution of electrical energy, including the coal sheds connected
with said power plant and the grounds over which the coal sheds and power plant may be reached,
for and during the life of the franchise to be granted by the Village of Princeton for a period of
twenty-five years to maintain and operate electric plant and furnish electrical energy to any and all
pars of the Village of Princeton, all of said property to be sold and leased to the Elk River Power &
Light Company for the sum of Twelve Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($12,500) and the further
sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) per month for during the full twenty-five year term of said franchise,
commencing March 11th, 1919, and upon the execution and delivery of a deed of conveyance from
the Village of Princeton to the Elk River Power & Light Company.
Section 2. And the President and Recorder of the Village of Princeton be and they are hereby
authorized and directed to execute and deliver to the Elk River Power & Light Company a good and
sufficient deed of conveyance and lease of all said property in accordance with Section 1 hereof,
upon receipt of said sum of Twelve Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($12,500); all the said property
to be thereupon delivered to the Elk River Power & Light Company in as good condition as the same
is now in, ordinary wear and tear excepted.
Section 3. This ordinance shall be in force from and after its passage and publication, and after its
approval thereof by the electors of the Village of Princeton at an election to be held in accordance
with Chapter 172 of the Laws of Minnesota for the year 1917.
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 2
Section 4. That such election shall be conducted and the votes cast thereat shall be canvassed and
the result thereof certified in like manner as for the election of Village Officers.
Section 5. That this ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its passage
publication.
Passed by the Village Council March 18, 1919.
Attest:
H. M. Avery
Village Recorder President
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 3
Ordinance 113
AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING THE SALE OF THE LIGHTING PLANT OF THE VILLAGE
OF PRINCETON, MINNESOTA, TO THE ELK RIVER POWER & LIGHT COMPANY AND
FIXING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SUCH SALE, INCLUDING A LEASE OF A
PART OF ITS PROPERTY.
Be it ordained by the Village Council of the Village of Princeton, Minnesota, as follows:
Section 1. That the Village of Princeton sell and it does hereby sell to the Elk River Power & Light
Company the municipal electric lighting plant now owned and operated by the Village of Princeton,
consisting in principal of two direct connected generator units, feeders and bus bar connections
attached thereto, switch board panels and appurtenances, boilers, power feed pumps, water heater,
and all other appliances and appurtenances connected therewith, for furnishing steam for the two
engine generator units referred to above, together with all tools now owned and used or to be used in
connection therewith; also the complete electric distribution system, including all poles, cross arms,
hardware, insulators, conductors, wires, anchorages, street lighting fixtures, lamps, lightning
arresters, and all other appliances, owned by the Village of Princeton, all service connections, and
any and all fixtures, appliances and appurtenances now connected with or used in the manufacture
and distribution of electrical energy, and all tools and supplies now in use or on hand, including the
free and unobstructed use of that part of the power plant building of the Village of Princeton that is
now used for production and distribution of electrical energy, including the coal sheds connected
with said power plant and the grounds over which the coal sheds and power plant may be reached,
for and during the life of the franchise to be granted by the Village of Princeton for a period of
twenty-five years to maintain and operate electric plant and furnish electrical energy to any and all
pars of the Village of Princeton, all of said property to be sold and leased to the Elk River Power &
Light Company for the sum of Twelve Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($12,500) and the further
sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) per month for during the full twenty-five year term of said franchise,
commencing March 11th, 1919, and upon the execution and delivery of a deed of conveyance from
the Village of Princeton to the Elk River Power & Light Company.
Section 2. And the President and Recorder of the Village of Princeton be and they are hereby
authorized and directed to execute and deliver to the Elk River Power & Light Company a good a
and sufficient deed of conveyance and lease of all said property in accordance with Section 1 hereof,
upon receipt of said sum of Twelve Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($12,500); all the said property
to be thereupon delivered to the Elk River Power & Light Company in as good condition as the same
is now in, ordinary wear and tear excepted.
Section 3. This ordinance shall be in force from and after its passage and publication, and after its
approval thereof by the electors of the Village of Princeton at an election to be held in accordance
with Chapter 172 of the Laws of Minnesota for the year 1917.
Section 4. That such election shall be conducted and the votes cast thereat shall be canvassed and
the result thereof certified in like manner as for the election of Village Officers.
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 4
Section 5. That this ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its passage
publication.
Passed by the Village Council February 24th, 1919.
Approved February 24, 1919.
Attest:
H. M. Avery H. A. Humphrey
Village Recorder President of the Village Council,
Village of Princeton, County of
Mille Lacs, State of Minnesota
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 5
Ordinance No. 112
AN ORDINANCE ORDERING AN ELECTION BY THE VOTERS OF the VILLAGE OF
PRINCETON, MINNESOTA TO DETERMINE WHETHER THE VILLAGE OF PRINCETON
SHALL AUTHORIZE THE SALE OF ITS LIGHTING PLANT AND A LEASE OF A PART OF
ITS PROPERTY AND DIRECTING THE GIVING OF A NOTICE OF SUCH ELECTION.
Be it ordained by the Village Council of the Village of Princeton, Minnesota as follows:
Section 1. That it be and it is hereby ordered that an election by the legal voters of the Village of
Princeton, Minnesota, to be held on the 11th day of March, 1919, at the regular annual election to be
held on that date for the purpose of approving the sale of the electric lighting plant of the Village of
Princeton, and the leasing of a part of its property to the Elk River Power & Light Company, upon
the terms and conditions stated in an ordinance passed by the Village Council of the Village of
Princeton on the day of February 1919 and approved the same day, and for the purpose of
approving and confirming said ordinance, a copy of which ordinance is set out in full in section 2 of
this ordinance.
Section 2. That notice of said election in the following form be posted and published as required by
law, Viz; Notice of Election Notice is hereby given that an election of
the legal voters of the Village of Princeton has been ordered to be held in the Village of Princeton on
the 11th day of March, 1919, for the purpose of approving the sale of its electric lighting plant and a
lease of a part of its property, on the terms and conditions stated in an ordinance, copy of which is
hereinafter set out and for the purpose of ratifying and confirming said ordinance which was passed
by the Village Council of the Village of Princeton on the day of February 1919 and approved the
same day of which ordinance the following is a true copy:
Be it ordained by the Village Council of the Village of Princeton, Minnesota, as follows:
Section 1. That the Village of Princeton sell and it does hereby sell to the Elk River Power & Light
Company the municipal electric lighting plant now owned and operated by the Village of Princeton,
consisting in principal of two direct connected generator units, feeders and bus bar connections
attached thereto, switch board panels and appurtenances, boilers, power feed pumps, water heater,
and all other appliances and appurtenances connected therewith, for furnishing steam for the two
engine generator units referred to above, together with all tools now owned and used or to be used in
connection therewith; also the complete electric distribution system, including all poles, cross arms,
hardware, insulators, conductors, wires, anchorages, street lighting fixtures, lamps, lightning
arresters, and all other appliances, owned by the Village of Princeton, all service connections, and
any and all fixtures, appliances and appurtenances now connected with or used in the manufacture
and distribution of electrical energy, and all tools and supplies now in use or on hand, including the
free and unobstructed use of that part of the power plant building of the Village of Princeton that is
now used for production and distribution of electrical energy, including the coal sheds connected
with said power plant and the grounds over which the coal sheds and power plant may be reached,
for and during the life of the franchise to be granted by the Village of Princeton for a period of
twenty-five years to maintain and operate electric plant and furnish electrical energy to any and all
pars of the Village of Princeton, all of said property to be sold and leased to the Elk River Power &
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 6
Light Company for the sum of Twelve Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($12,500) and the further
sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) per month for during the full twenty-five year term of said franchise,
commencing March 11th, 1919, and upon the execution and delivery of a deed of conveyance from
the Village of Princeton to the Elk River Power & Light Company.
Section 2. And the President and Recorder of the Village of Princeton be and they are hereby
authorized and directed to execute and deliver to the Elk River Power & Light Company a good a
and sufficient deed of conveyance and lease of all said property in accordance with Section 1 hereof,
upon receipt of said sum of Twelve Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($12,500); all the said property
to be thereupon delivered to the Elk River Power & Light Company in as good condition as the same
is now in, ordinary wear and tear excepted.
Section 3. This ordinance shall be in force from and after its passage and publication, and after its
approval thereof by the electors of the Village of Princeton at an election to be held in accordance
with Chapter 172 of the Laws of Minnesota for the year 1917.
Section 4. That such election shall be conducted and the votes cast thereat shall be canvassed and
the result thereof certified in like manner as for the election of Village Officers.
Section 5. That this ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its passage and
publication.
Passed by the Village Council February 24, 1919
Approved: February 24, 1919
Attest:
H. M. Avery H. A. Humphrey
Village Recorder President of the Village Council,
Village of Princeton, County of Mille Lacs,
State of Minnesota
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 7
Ordinance No. 111
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 105 PASSED BY THE VILLAGE OF
PRINCETON ENTITLED "AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO THE ELK RIVER POWER &
LIGHT COMPANY OF ELK RIVER, MINNESOTA, A CORPORATION , ITS SUCCESSORS
AND ASSIGNS, THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND AUTHORITY TO ERECT, CONSTRUCT,
INSTALL, AND MAINTAIN AN ELECTRIC LIGHTING, HEATING AND POWER PLANT
AND TO OPERATE AND MAINTAIN THE SAME WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF
THE VILLAGE OF PRINCETON, MINNESOTA, MILLE LACS COUNTY, AND TO ERECT,
CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, AND MAINTAIN POLES, WIRES, CONDUITS, TUNNELS, AND
OTHER FIXTURES IN, UPON, OVER, ACROSS OR UNDER THE STREETS, ALLEYS,
BRIDGES AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES OF SAID VILLAGE, AND TO FURNISH ELECTRIC
LIGHT, HEAT AND POWER TO THE SAID VILLAGE AND THE HABITANTS THEREOF" BY
STRIKING OUT OF SECTION 6 OF SAID ORDINANCE THE FOLLOWING WORDS VIZ; "OR
SUCH AS ARE ENACTED FROM AND AFTER THE DATE SAID GRANTEE SHALL TAKE
POSSESSION OF THE MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC LIGHT PLANT."
The Village Council of the Village of Princeton do ordain:
Section 1. That ordinance number 105 passed by the Village Council of the Village of Princeton,
entitled "as in the title of this ordinance set out, be and the same is amended by striking out of section
6 of said ordinance the following words, Viz: "or such as are enacted form and after the date said
grantee shall take possession of the municipal electric light plant."
Section 2. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed by the Village Council of the Village of Princeton, Minnesota, the 24th day of Feb., 1919
Approved, Feb., 24th, 1919.
Attest:
H. M. Avery H. A. Humphrey
Village Recorder President of the Village Council,
of the Village of Princeton, Mille Lacs County,
State of Minnesota
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 8
Ordinance No. 108
AN ORDINANCE ORDERING AN ELECTION BY THE VOTERS OF THE VILLAGE OF
PRINCETON, MINNESOTA, TO DETERMINE WHETHER THE VILLAGE OF PRINCETON
SHALL AUTHORIZE THE SALE OF ITS LIGHTING PLANT AND LEASE OF PART OF ITS
PROPERTY, AND DIRECTING THE GIVING OF NOTICE OF SUCH ELECTION.
Be it ordained by the Village Council of the Village of Princeton, Minnesota as follows:
Section 1. That it be and it is hereby ordered that an election by the legal voters of the Village of
Princeton, Minnesota, be held on the 20th day of August, 1918, for the purpose of approving an
ordinance for the sale to the Elk River Power & Light Company of the lighting plant of the Village of
Princeton and the leasing of some of its property, passed by the Village Council of Princeton on the
7th day of August, 1918, and approved the same day, a copy of which ordinance appears hereinafter.
Section 2. That notice of said election in the following form be posted and published as required by
law, viz:
"Notice is hereby given that a special election of the legal voters of the Village of Princeton has been
ordered to be held in the Village of Princeton on the 20th day of August, 1918, for the purpose of
approving an ordinance passed by the Village Council of the Village of Princeton, Minnesota on the
7th day of August, 1918, and approved on the same day, of which ordinance the following is a true
copy:
AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING THE SALE OF THE LIGHTING PLANT OF THE VILLAGE
OF PRINCETON, MINNESOTA, TO ELK RIVER POWER & LIGHT COMPANY AND FIXING
THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SUCH SALE, INCLUDING LEASE OF A PART OF ITS
PROPERTY.
Be it ordained by the Village Council of the Village of Princeton, Minnesota, as follows:
Section 1. That the Village of Princeton sell and it does hereby sell to the Elk River Power & Light
Company the municipal electric lighting plant now owned and operated by the Village of Princeton,
consisting in principal of two direct connected generator units, feeders and bus bar connections
attached thereto, switch board panels and appurtenances, boilers, power feed pumps, water heater,
and all other appliances and appurtenances connected therewith, for furnishing steam for the two
engine generator units referred to above, together with all tools now owned and used or to be used in
connection therewith; also the complete electric distribution system, including all poles, cross arms,
hardware, insulators, conductors, wires, anchorages, street lighting fixtures, lamps, lightning
arresters, and all other appliances, owned by the Village of Princeton, all service connections, and
any and all fixtures, appliances and appurtenances now connected with or used in the manufacture
and distribution of electrical energy, and all tools and supplies now in use or on hand, including the
free and unobstructed use of that part of the power plant building of the Village of Princeton that is
now used for production and distribution of electrical energy, including the coal sheds connected
with said power plant and the grounds over which the coal sheds and power plant may be reached,
for and during the life of the franchise to be granted by the Village of Princeton for a period of
twenty-five years to maintain and operate electric plant and furnish electrical energy to any and all
pars of the Village of Princeton, all of said property to be sold and leased to the Elk River Power &
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 9
Light Company for the sum of Twelve Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($12,500) and the further
sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) per month for during the full twenty-five year term of said franchise,
commencing March 11th, 1919, and upon the execution and delivery of a deed of conveyance from
the Village of Princeton to the Elk River Power & Light Company.
Section 2. And the President and Recorder of the Village of Princeton be and they are hereby
authorized and directed to execute and deliver to the Elk River Power & Light Company a good a
and sufficient deed of conveyance and lease of all said property in accordance with Section 1 hereof,
upon receipt of said sum of Twelve Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($12,500); all the said property
to be thereupon delivered to the Elk River Power & Light Company in as good condition as the same
is now in, ordinary wear and tear excepted.
Section 3. This ordinance shall be in force from and after its passage and publication, and after its
approval thereof by the electors of the Village of Princeton at an election to be held in accordance
with Chapter 172 of the Laws of Minnesota for the year 1917.
Section 4. That such election shall be conducted and the votes cast thereat shall be canvassed and
the result thereof certified in like manner as for the election of Village Officers.
Section 5. That this ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its passage
publication.
Passed by the Village Council August 7th, 1918. Approved August 7th, 1918.
Attest:
H. M. Avery H. A. Humphrey
Village Recorder President of the Village Council,
Village of Princeton, County of Mille Lacs,
State of Minnesota
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 10
Ordinance No. 107
AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING THE SALE OF THE LIGHTING PLANT OF THE VILLAGE
OF PRINCETON, MINNESOTA, TO ELK RIVER POWER & LIGHT COMPANY AND FIXING
THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SUCH SALE, INCLUDING LEASE OF A PART OF ITS
PROPERTY.
Be it ordained by the Village Council of the Village of Princeton, Minnesota, as follows:
Section 1. That the Village of Princeton sell and it does hereby sell to the Elk River Power & Light
Company the municipal electric lighting plant now owned and operated by the Village of Princeton,
consisting in principal of two direct connected generator units, feeders and bus bar connections
attached thereto, switch board panels and appurtenances, boilers, power feed pumps, water heater,
and all other appliances and appurtenances connected therewith, for furnishing steam for the two
engine generator units referred to above, together with all tools now owned and used or to be used in
connection therewith; also the complete electric distribution system, including all poles, cross arms,
hardware, insulators, conductors, wires, anchorages, street lighting fixtures, lamps, lightning
arresters, and all other appliances, owned by the Village of Princeton, all service connections, and
any and all fixtures, appliances and appurtenances now connected with or used in the manufacture
and distribution of electrical energy, and all tools and supplies now in use or on hand, including the
free and unobstructed use of that part of the power plant building of the Village of Princeton that is
now used for production and distribution of electrical energy, including the coal sheds connected
with said power plant and the grounds over which the coal sheds and power plant may be reached,
for and during the life of the franchise to be granted by the Village of Princeton for a period of
twenty-five years to maintain and operate electric plant and furnish electrical energy to any and all
pars of the Village of Princeton, all of said property to be sold and leased to the Elk River Power &
Light Company for the sum of Twelve Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($12,500) and the further
sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) per month for during the full twenty-five year term of said franchise,
commencing March 11th, 1919, and upon the execution and delivery of a deed of conveyance from
the Village of Princeton to the Elk River Power & Light Company.
Section 2. And the President and Recorder of the Village of Princeton be and they are hereby
authorized and directed to execute and deliver to the Elk River Power & Light Company a good a
and sufficient deed of conveyance and lease of all said property in accordance with Section 1 hereof,
upon receipt of said sum of Twelve Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($12,500); all the said property
to be thereupon delivered to the Elk River Power & Light Company in as good condition as the same
is now in, ordinary wear and tear excepted.
Section 3. This ordinance shall be in force from and after its passage and publication, and after the
approval thereof by the electors of the Village of Princeton at an election to be held in accordance
with Chapter 172 of the Laws of Minnesota for the year 1917.
Passed by the Village Council August 7th, 1918
Approved August 7th, 1918
Attest:
H. M. Avery H. A. Humphrey
Village Recorder President of the Village Council,
of the Village of Princeton, Mille Lacs county, State of Minnesota
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 11
Ordinance No. 106
ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING THE EXECUTION AND DELIVERY OF A CONTRACT
BETWEEN THE VILLAGE OF PRINCETON AND ELK RIVER POWER AND LIGHT
COMPANY, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS FOR ELECTRIC CURRENT FOR LIGHTING
THE STREETS IN THE VILLAGE OF PRINCETON AND FOR POWER PURPOSES.
Be it ordained by the Village Council of the village of Princeton as follows:
Section 1. That the Village of Princeton make and enter into contract with the Elk River Power and
Light Company of which the following shall be a copy:
This agreement made and entered into this _____ day of _____A.D. 1918, by and between the
Village of Princeton, a municipal corporation organized, created and existing under the laws of the
State of Minnesota, acting by and through its duly authorized officers, party of the first part
(hereinafter called "Village") and the Elk River Power and Light Company of Elk River, Minnesota,
a corporation duly organized, created and existing under laws of the State of Minnesota, with its
principal offices in the village of Elk River, Minnesota, as party of the second part, (hereinafter
called the "Power Company"). Witnesseth:
1. That said Power Company, its successors and assigns, hereby agrees to furnish to the Village of
Princeton all electric current necessary to light the streets, alleys, public grounds and places of said
Village and to furnish all electric current and energy to the Village, which the Village, may desire,
and need for power purposes to operate its pumping station as now existing or as may hereafter be
maintained and operated and to furnish all such other electric energy and current as the said Village
may desire for other power purposes for and during the terms of this contract; and the said Village of
Princeton agrees to pay for such electric current, energy and power at and on the terms as hereinafter
specified.
2. In consideration of the furnishing of such electric current and energy by the said Power Company
the following rates shall apply to all lighting of streets, alleys, and public grounds for a period of
fifteen years and the Village agrees to pay for the same at the following rate, to-wit:
$1.50 per month for each 60 candle power Series Type "C" Mazda Lamp.
$1.75 per month for each 80 candle power Series Type "C" Mazda Lamp.
$2.00 per month for " 100 candle power Series Type "C" Mazda Lamp.
$4.00 per month for " 250 candle power Series Type "C" Mazda Lamp.
$6.00 per month for " 400 candle power Series Type "C" Mazda Lamp.
Minimum charge of $125.00 per month shall be made for all street lighting, and the above rates to
cover street lighting including maintenance; the said Power Company hereby agrees for and in
consideration of the above rates as above specified to render and furnish all night service; all night
light shall be construed to mean that all streets, squares and public ground lights shall be lighted each
night during the time indicated by the government table as compiled covering the section of the
United States in which said Village of Princeton is located, which schedule or table gives the hour
when all light shall be lighted in the evening and when the same shall be extinguished the following
morning, provided, however, that on a stormy night or upon nights when the weather conditions are
such that it becomes dark and lights are necessary prematurely before such hour as provided in said
table, the Power Company herein agrees to and will furnish light and illuminate the streets under and
by virtue of this contract.
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 12
3. The following rates shall apply and be charged and paid for all electric current furnished and used
for city pumping or other city power purposes, to-wit: $.03 per K.W. hour, the same to be measured
by watthour meter with no minimum charge.
4. All bills for such street lighting service and for all power as used by the said Village for pumping
and other power purposes shall be rendered monthly and be subject to a discount of ten per cent for
cash which will be allowed on each bill if paid on or before the 10th day of the month next following
after the month in which such service is rendered. Provided however, that if the Power Company
fails to present any bills for such service on or before the 10th day of the month after such service is
given, the discount will be allowed the said Village as above said, if paid on or before ten days after
the presentation of same, provided, however, that the minimum charge of $125.00 on street lighting
shall not be subject to any discount.
5. It is agreed that the Power Company shall, upon written request of the Village, install and
maintain such additional street lights as and where the Village Council may from time to time direct,
provided not less that two additional lamps shall be installed for 1,000 feet of wire to be strung,
Whenever such additional or new lights shall be ordered they shall be promptly installed and
thereafter the Village shall from the time said new lights shall furnish illumination, pay for the
electric energy furnished to operate the same at the rates and subject to the terms as hereinbefore
specified for street lighting. The Village shall have the right to require the location of any lamp or
light is now installed to be once changed to other designated point or place on the same street, and
when changed the light shall be promptly installed and thereafter maintained in the manner as
hereinbefore specified for new or additional lights and the cost of such change shall be paid by the
Power company. The Village shall have the right at any and all times to also change the location of
any new or additional lamp or light as ordered placed, but, such change shall be made at the cost and
expense of said Village and the bill for same to be rendered only for the actual cost of such removal
or change and in the manner as herein specified for bills for street lighting.
6. The Power Company hereby agrees that all lights installed under this contract shall at all times be
kept in good working order at its, the Power Company's expense, and all night service shall be
maintained as hereinbefore specified.
7. The Power Company shall have and it is hereby granted the privilege or right to enter upon the
streets and alleys and public grounds of the Village for the purpose of constructing, installing,
repairing, changing, maintaining and operating its poles, wires, fixtures, and equipment in order to
carry out the terms of this agreement. The right herein granted shall extend and include the right to
change or make over the present electric lighting and power system in said village which is an
alternating system and upon the expiration of this contract the Power Company shall have the right
and privilege of removing all poles, wires, lights and equipment and apparatus that shall be used in
the performance of this contract, but it shall, however, make such removal in a careful, prudent and
diligent manner, so as to do no damage or cause no injury to the property of the said Village or of
any inhabitants thereof, and to do the same in as reasonable and prudent a manner as possible and
will properly refill all holes and depressions caused or made by such removal, and leave the streets,
alleys and public grounds and surface thereof in as good a safe condition and in as good a state of
repair as can be after such removal.
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 13
8. In the carrying out of the terms of this agreement and in the constructing, erecting, changing,
installing, placing, maintaining and operating of its electric heating, lighting and power plant and
system and in erecting poles, appliances, wires cables, and fixtures necessary, the Power Company
hereby covenants that the same shall be done in a diligent and prudent manner so as to cause as little
inconvenience as practicable to the public and that the same will not interfere with any sewer, water
main, pipe or hydrant on the streets or in the alleys of said Village; and that in case any excavation is
made that the same shall remain open no longer than absolutely necessary and that the Power
Company, shall properly protect the same when open with proper guards and signals and shall so fill
and repair the same as to leave the streets, alleys, bridges, public grounds and places in so far as
possible in as good a condition as before such excavation were made, and provided, further, the
Power Company, its successors or assigns, shall be responsible for any and all damage or injury to
said Village or to any person caused by any negligence on the part of said Power Company, its
agents, servants, officers or employees, resulting either from the construction, operation,
maintenance, etc., of said system of electric lighting, heating, and power service and shall indemnify
said Village for any recovery against it or loss suffered by it by reason of any such negligence.
9. In case and in event, except as hereinafter provided, if any one or more lights are not operated for
any reason or cause for a period longer than one night after a written notice has been given, by the
Village Clerk, to the manager in charge of the Power Company's plant, or to any duly authorized
agent or servant, except as hereinafter specified, then there may at the option of the village council be
deducted from the compensation herein specified, a sum equal to twice the amount of compensation
herein provided to be paid for the period that such lights or light are not furnished, maintained or
operated and at the rate herein specified, said sum or sums to be as compensation and liquidated
damage for such failure to perform on the part of said Power Company. In case the Power
Company's electric system shall be injured or destroyed by fire, cyclone or other casualty, or by act of
Providence, public enemy or causes beyond the control of the Power Company rendering its, or part
of it, permanently or temporarily inoperative during the life of this agreement, the Power Company,
its successors or assigns, shall have a reasonable time in which to repair or reconstruct said power
system and plant without rendering this agreement void or voidable, but the Power Company agrees
to keep and maintain the power plant at Princeton, which it is buying from the said Village as an
auxiliary plant for the purpose of furnishing electric energy under the pursuant to this contract, in all
cases of emergency caused by injury or otherwise to its other sources of power, and that said means
of protection or one equally efficient and practicable shall and will be maintained by the Power
Company for such purposes during the life of this agreement. In case the Power Company shall not
proceed with due diligence to operate its electric plant or system a re-establish service as herein
provided, after receiving a written notice as herein provided, and shall fail to re-establish such
service within a reasonable time, said Village is empowered to take charge of the electric light and
power plant and system mentioned and maintained in said Village, and all lines, equipment and
paraphernalia as belonging to and used by said Power Company, and operate the same and produce
and transmit such power and energy as may be necessary to supply the said village and the
inhabitants thereof, under the provisions of this contract.
In case the Power Company, it successors and assigns, shall not resume service as herein
provided within a reasonable time, after said Village shall have taken charge of and started operating
said plant as herein provided, this contract shall at the option of the said Village be void and the said
plant, lines and system belonging to the Power Company as located in said Village shall be held as
security for the payment of any and all cost of operating and expense connected therewith or
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 14
damages and compensation as herein provided for and such other damages as shall be sustained by
the said Village by reason of the failure of said Power Company to carry out and perform the terms
of this contract.
10. The Power Company hereby pledges the electric light and power plant and distribution
system, which it shall purchase from the Village of Princeton, or as the same may be hereinafter
reconstructed, repaired or changed, or added to as security for the faithful and diligent performance
of all conditions and obligations herein contained and for the payment of all damages which the
Village may suffer by virtue of any default by the said Power Company in the performance of any or
all the conditions and agreement on its part herein contained, or for any damage which may result by
virtue of any negligence on the part of the said Power Company, its servants, employees, officers,
successors or assigns, or which may results by virtue of default of any contract or contracts which the
said Power Company may execute with the said Village of Princeton.
11. The terms, conditions, provisions and agreement of Ordinance No. 105 in and for said
Village of Princeton, entitled "An ordinance granting to the Elk River Power and Light Co. of Elk
River, Minnesota a corporation, its successors and assigns, the right, privilege and authority to erect,
construct, install and maintain and electric lighting, heating and power plant and to operate and
maintain the said within the corporate limits of the Village of Princeton, Minnesota, Mille Lacs
county, and to erect, construct, install, and maintain poles, wires, conduits, tunnels and other fixtures
in, upon, over, across or under the streets, alleys, bridges and public places of said Village, and to
furnish electric light, heat and power to said Village and the inhabitants thereof, " is hereby referred
to and hereby made a part hereof.
12. This agreement shall take affect and be in force from and after its passage and publication
and ratification of the sale of the Municipal lighting and power plant now owned by the said Village,
which is to be purchased by said Power Company, by the legal voters of said Village of Princeton at
an election to be held therein for that purpose and shall continue and be in force until the expiration
of fifteen years thereafter.
Section 2. The terms, conditions and agreements in this contract contained, shall inure to the
benefit and bind the successors and assigns of all parties hereto.
Section 3. The President of the Village Council and the Village Clerk are hereby authorized
and instructed to execute and deliver said contract set out in section 1 hereof on behalf of the Village
of Princeton.
Section 4. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication and the ratification of the sale of the municipal light and power plant to the said Power
Company by the legal voters of the Village of Princeton.
The foregoing ordinance was duly passed and adopted at a regular meeting of the Village
Council of the Village of Princeton, Mille Lacs county, Minnesota, and approved on the 7th day of
August, 1918.
Attest:
H. M. Avery H. A. Humphrey
Village Recorder President of Village Council.
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 15
II. Gas
ORDINANCE NO. 362
FRANCHISE FOR NATURAL GAS
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING UNTO NORTH CENTRAL PUBLIC SERVICE CO.,
DIVISION OF DONOVAN COMPANIES INC., OF ST. PAUL, MINNESOTA, AN IOWA
CORPORATION, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, THE FRANCHISE AND RIGHT FOR A
PERIOD OF TWENTY-FIVE (25) YEARS TO ERECT, CONSTRUCT, RECONSTRUCT,
MAINTAIN, AND OPERATE A GAS DISTRIBUTING SYSTEM FOR THE DISTRIBUTION OF
GAS IN THE CITY OF PRINCETON, MINNESOTA, CONSISTING OF ALL SUCH
EQUIPMENT, MACHINERY, PIPES, FIXTURES, TANKS, AND OTHER APPURTENANCES
AS MAY BE NECESSARY OR USEFUL FOR SUCH DISTRIBUTING SYSTEM, AND TO USE
AND OCCUPY THE STREETS, AVENUES, ALLEYS, BRIDGES, AND OTHER PUBLIC
PLACES OF SAID CITY WITH GAS MAINS, PIPES, PIPELINE CONDUITS AND OTHER
NECESSARY OR USEFUL APPLIANCES OR EQUIPMENT FOR THE SALE AND/OR
DISTRIBUTION OF SUCH GAS IN AND TO SAID CITY AND TO THE INHABITANTS
THEREOF, AND OTHERS, AND TO SELL, TRANSMIT AND DISTRIBUTE SUCH GAS TO
SUCH CITY AND ITS INHABITANTS, OR OTHERS, WITHIN OR WITHOUT THE
CORPORATE LIMITS OF SAID CITY FOR LIGHT, HEAT, POWER, FUEL, COOKING AND
FOR ALL OTHER PURPOSES, AND PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE
GRANT AND THE PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION OF SAME, AND REPEALING ALL
ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT THERE-WITH.
WHEREAS, North Central Public Service Co., Division of Donovan Companies, Inc., of St.
Paul, Minnesota, has requested a Franchise for the distribution of gas in the City of Princeton,
Minnesota, and
WHEREAS, it is deemed to be to the best interest of the City of Princeton, Minnesota, that
North Central Public Service Co., Division of Donovan Companies, Inc., St. Paul, Minnesota, be
granted a Franchise therefor.
(unreadable)..... , be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Princeton,
Minnesota:
SECTION 1
That the City of Princeton Minnesota, hereby grants unto North Central Public Service Co.,
Division of Donovan Companies, Inc., of St. Paul, Minnesota an Iowa corporation, its successors and
assigns, a non-exclusive Right and Franchise for a period of twenty-five (25) years from and after the
date of the passage, approval and publication of this Ordinance, to erect, construct, reconstruct,
maintain and operate within said City a gas distributing system, together with all appurtenances,
pipes, machinery, tanks and appliances necessary or useful thereto, for the distribution of gas for the
purpose of selling, distributing and supplying gas to said City and the inhabitants thereof, and others,
together with the Right and Franchise to use and occupy the streets, avenues, alleys, bridges and
other public places of said City, as now laid out and hereafter extended with its gas mains, pipes,
pipelines, distributing lines, conduits and other appliances and appurtenances necessary or useful for
the purpose of maintaining and operating such gas distributing system within said City, and the Right
and Franchise of selling, distributing and supplying said City and inhabitants thereof, and others,
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 16
within and without the corporate limits of said City, with such gas for light, heat, fuel, power,
cooking and other purposes, subject to the terms and conditions of this Ordinance, as herein set forth,
and repealing all ordinances in conflict therewith.
SECTION II
Grantee shall construct, maintain and operate or otherwise provide a modern and adequate
gas distributing system for the furnishing, sale and/or distribution of gas in said City, and said system
shall have adequate capacity to furnish the reasonable requirements of said City and its inhabitants
with gas, .... (rest of page is unreadable)
SECTION III
In order to affect the rights granted hereunder, the Grantee is authorized to make all necessary
excavations in the streets, avenue, alleys and other lanes and public places of said City, but the same
shall be done with the least possible interference with or inconvenience to the public, individuals, or
public property; and the Grantee shall, in all cases, restore all streets, alleys and public places, and all
pavements and excavations to their original condition; and, in laying mains and pipes, the Grantee
shall conform to all reasonable regulations prescribed by the City to prevent injury to the pavement,
streets, avenues, alleys, and public places, and Grantee shall not unnecessarily interfere with, injure
or change any pavement, water pipes, drains or sewers of said City, either public or private without
written consent of the owner thereof.
SECTION IV
The grants herein contained are upon the express condition that the Grantee shall be liable for
all damages caused by the negligence or mismanagement of Grantee, its agents or employees, in the
construction and maintenance of said gas distributing system, and it shall protect said City from any
and liability therefrom.
SECTION V
Grantee agrees to furnish and supply to the City and its inhabitants an adequate supply of gas
as long as available under such pressure and conditions as may be reasonably required under such
rules and regulations as may be established by Grantee, and the Minnesota Public Utilities
Commission or other such regulatory body as may hereinafter be established under the laws of the
State of Minnesota and given jurisdiction thereof.
SECTION VI
The rates to be charged by the Grantee for gas or gas service hereunder, and the standard of
service, shall be such as may be fixed from time to time by the Grantee and the Minnesota Public
Utilities Commission, or such other rate making body as may hereinafter be established under the
laws of the State of Minnesota and given jurisdiction thereof.
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 17
SECTION VII
That all the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to the successors or assigns of the
Grantee with the same force and effect as they do the Grantee itself.
SECTION VIII
That the Grantee, in addition to saving the City harmless from any and all claims which may
be made against the City by reason of, or on account of, the construction, maintenance, or operation
of the plant, distributing systems, and other construction erected and maintained under and by virtue
of this Franchise, shall defend any suit brought against the City on account thereof at its sole cost and
expense, and should any judgement be rendered against the City as a result of said suit or suits, the
Grantee hereby agrees to pay said judgement, and the record of the judgement against said City in
such suit shall be conclusive evidence to entitle said City to recover the amount thereof from said
Grantee.
SECTION IX
That if the Grantee fails to perform any of the conditions, requirements, duties, or obligations
herein provided to be performed by said Grantee, the City ...(??)... cause to be served upon the
Grantee a written notice in the ...(rest of page is unreadable).
SECTION X
That all ordinances, or parts of ordinances, insofar as they are in direct conflict herewith, are
hereby repealed.
SECTION XI
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in full force immediately upon its passage and
approval by the City Council and its publication as provided by law; provided, that the Grantee,
within thirty (30) days from the date of said approval authorizing said Franchise, shall file with the
City Clerk its written acceptance thereof.
SECTION XII
Whenever the term "Grantee" is used herein, it shall be taken to mean and include North
Central Public Service Co., Division of Donovan Companies, Inc., of St. Paul, Minnesota, and its
successors and assigns.
PASSED, ADOPTED AND APPROVED by the City Council of the City of Princeton,
Minnesota on the 25th day of July, 1985.
Todd A. Rust
Mayor
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 18
III. Telephone
ORDINANCES, RULES, REGULATIONS, AND BY-LAWS
of the Village of Princeton, Mille Lacs County, Minn.
Ordinance No. 66
An Ordinance granting unto Northeastern Telephone Company, its successors and assigns,
permission to erect poles, string wires, operate and maintain its lines of telephones upon, along and
under the streets, alleys, highways and public grounds of the present and future corporate limits of
the Village of Princeton in Mille Lacs County Minnesota, and to maintain and operate a telephone
exchange therein.
The Village Council of the Village of Princeton do ordain as follows:
Sec. 1: That the Northeastern Telephone Company, its successors and assigns, be and is hereby
granted the right, privilege and authority to construct, operate and maintain lines of telephone upon,
along and under the streets, alleys, highways and public grounds of the present and future corporate
limits of the Village of Princeton, County of Mille Lacs, State of Minnesota, upon the following
terms and conditions:
Sec. 2: All poles shall be erected under the supervision of the Committee on Streets, or the Street
Commissioner of said Village and all streets or sidewalks that may be disturbed or damaged in the
construction, maintaining or repairing of said lines of telephone shall be promptly replaced and
repaired by said Northeastern Telephone Company at its cost and expense.
Sec. 3: The said Northeastern Telephone Company shall be subject to all ordinances in force, or that
may be hereafter passed relative to the use of the public streets and highways of said Village.
Sec. 4: The said Northeastern Telephone Company, its successors and assigns, shall have the right to
maintain and operate within the present and future corporate limits of said Village, a local telephone
exchange, for the purpose of conducting a local telephone business for the rent of telephones and the
collection of telephone tolls in connection with or separate from its long distance telephone lines and
otherwise, and to do any and all things usual and necessary to carry on a general telephone business
in said Village.
Sec. 5: In consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted, said Northeastern Telephone
Company, its successors and assigns, shall provide free of cost to said Village one two pin cross
arms to be attached to its telephone poles erected under the provisions of this ordinance for the police
and fire alarm telegraph system of said Village, when the same shall be required by the Village.
Sec. 6: Nothing in this ordinance contained shall be construed to grant to said Northeastern
Telephone Company as exclusive right, and the said Village Council of said Village hereby reserves
the right to grant a like right to any other Company for like purposes.
City of Princeton Appendix A Franchises
Appendix A - 19
Sec. 7: This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication.
Passed this 11th day of September 1899.
J. H. Baley
President of Village
Council, Village of Princeton, Minn.
Attest:
J. L. Hartman
Recorder
City of Princeton Appendix E Fee Schedule
Appendix E - 1
Appendix E Fee Schedule
The Council of the City of Princeton hereby ordains that the following fee schedule is established:
ADMINISTRATION
Date of Set by
Item Last Change Ordinance Fee
Appeal Fee Ch. 169.999 Adm Citation 09-09 $50
Appeal Fee – others (to City Council) 02-14 #705 $100
Copies - each page 01-92 .25
Garage Sale Signs 07-09 #633 $25
Large Format Maps (Plotter) 02-04 #537 $20
Notary Fee 01-81 $1
Payment Late Fee (90 days overdue) 12-18 #777 $30.00
Personnel Manual 01-97 $10
Return Check Fee 04-02 $30
Special Assessment Searches 01-05 $20
Vacant Property Registration 01-10 #641 $25
AIRPORT
Hanger Land Lease – 5 year 2-14 #705 $.08 per square foot*
Hanger Land Lease – 10 year 2-14 #705 $.10 per square foot*
*in the event the computed square footage for a commercial lease is less than $250 per year,
$250 will be established as the minimum annual rental
Tie Down area usage more than 10 days 12-19 #786 $16 per week
CEMETERY
Crypt Charge 08-01 $100.00
Graves: Adult - City Resident 05-10 #652 $500
Non-Resident 05-10 #652 $750
Cremains 08-01 $150
Babies (1/2 Adult) - City Resident 08-01 $200
Non-Resident 08-01 $250
Marker Locating 12-15 #728 $25
Marker Settings:
Stone Relocation 12-18 #777 $600
City of Princeton Appendix E Fee Schedule
App endix E - 2
CEMETERY continued
Date of Set by
Item Last Change Ordinance Fee
Single head/foot marker (1’ x 2’ stone) 12-18 #777 $350
Double head/foot marker (1’ x 4’ stone) 12-18 #777 $350
Monument slab Single (1’ x 2’) 12-18 #777 $300
Monument slab double (1’ x 4’) 12-18 #777 $325
Monument slab other size 12-18 #777 call for price
Opening & Closing: Adult 12-18 #777 $600
Cremains 12-18 #777 $250
Babies 08-01 $175
Children (casket size under 36”) 2-14 #705 $300
Disinter/Reinter 08-01 Double rate
Full Burial Weekend/Overtime
Labor Charge (up to 3 hrs.) 2-14 #705 +$205
Full Burial Weekend/Overtime
Labor Charge (over 3 hrs.) 2-14 #705 +$55/hr
Over 30 minutes from scheduled time 2-14 #705 + $55
Cremains Weekend/Overtime
Labor Charge (up to 2 hrs) 2-14 #705 +$205
Cremains Weekend/Overtime
Labor Charge (over 2 hrs) 2-14 #705 +$55/hr
Weekend Add’l PW Labor 2-14 #705 +$55/hr
Winter Burials (Full) 12-18 #777 $1,200
Winter Burials (cremation) 12-18 #777 $600
FACILITY FEES
Civic Center
Monday – Thursday- Standard Fee $150
Monday – Thursday – City Resident* or Civic Organization** $100
Friday - Sunday – Standard Fee $300
Friday - Sunday – City Resident* or Civic Organization** $250
* Applicant/renter must provide a current utility bill to correspond with valid MN Driver’s License
confirming that the applicant/renter resides within the corporate limits of the City of Princeton to
qualify for the City Resident discounted rate. The resident renter MUST be present at all times of
the event. The required damage deposit is still required.
** Civic Organizations – Please see Current Civic Center Rental Agreement for a list.
Civic Organizations holding a non-fund raising event on a Monday through Thursday may rent the
building for $25 (plus the standard deposit)
City of Princeton Appendix E Fee Schedule
Appendix E - 3
FACILITY FEES continued
Date of Set by
Item Last Change Ordinance Fee
Deposit $200
Event Cancellations
Fees will be refunded under the following formula:
• 90% if cancellation more than 60 days prior to event
• 50% if cancellation 31 to 60 days prior to event
• 25% if cancellation 15-30 days prior to event
100% of the deposits and fees will be forfeited if cancellation of the event is made 0 to 14 days
prior to the event.
Library 01-06 584 $15/hr.
Mark Park Shelter Rental Fees 01-10 697 $50/day
Mark Park Softball Field Use
Non-Youth Leagues 12-18 760 $150/season per team
Youth Teams 12-18 760
Princeton School district child $6/person/season
Non Princeton School District Child $12/person/season
Tournaments 12-18 760
Princeton Based Host Team $25/Team
Non Princeton Based Host Team $35/team
Key Deposit/Damage Deposit 12-11 677 $100
Riverside Park Campground
Without electric up to 10 days 04-11 663 $20/night
Without electric > 10 days 04-11 663 $25/night
With electric up to 10 days 04-11 663 $30/night
With electric > 10 days 04-11 663 $40/night
Splash Park 01-10 641 $4/person/day
Splash Park Group Rates $65 for 1-45, $120 for 46-80, $150 for 81+
LICENSES / SPECIAL EVENTS
Date of Set by
Item Last Change Ordinance Fee
Adult Establishment Fees:
Annual License Fee 10-10 #654 $10,000/year
Initial Investigation Fee 10-10 #654 $5,000
Annual License Late Fee 08-16 #754 25% of annual fee
Circus / Carnival / Entertainment 12-14 #714 $100
Dog - Spayed/Neutered (2 yr. license) 01-88 #388 $5
City of Princeton Appendix E Fee Schedule
App endix E - 4
LICENSES / SPECIAL EVENTS - continued
Date of Set by
Item Last Change Ordinance Fee
Unaltered 01-88 #388 $15
Fireworks - Sale 01-08 #613 $50
Garbage Haulers 01-92 #422 $125
Golf Carts 04-02 #402 $25
Liquor Licenses: (Annual)
Caterer’s Permit 09-11 #673 $25
Intoxicating Sunday 01-88 #386 $200
Investigation Fee:
On-Sale Intoxicating Min. $50 within state;
On-Sale Wine All costs outside state.
On-Sale 3.2% Malt
Off-Sale 3.2% Malt All costs on annual basis.
Temp. On-Sale 3.2% Malt "
Special Club
"
Microbrewery as Home Occupation in R1 & R2 05-16 #735 $150
Off-Sale 3.2% Malt Liquor 01-88 #386 $100
On-Sale Intoxicating 01-88 #386 $2,500
On-Sale Wine 01-88 #386 $300
On-Sale 3.2% Malt Liquor 01-88 #386 $200
On-Sale Temporary Intoxicating Liquor 01-88 #386 $300/day or
$25/day if caterer
is licensed
Special Club: Under 200 members 01-88 #386 $300
201-500 members 01-88 #386 $500
501-1,000 members 01-88 #386 $650
1,000-2,000 members 01-88 #386 $800
2,001-4,000 members 01-88 #386 $1,000
4,001-6,000 members 01-88 #386 $2,000
Over 6,000 members 01-88 #386 $3,000
Temporary 3.2% Malt Liquor 01-88 #386 $25/day; and
$15/day if on fairgrounds
property
Non-resident (mobile unit) 01-92 #412 $10/day
Pawn Shop Fees
Annual License Fee 04-10 #647 $500/year
Billable Transaction Fee 04-10 #647 $300/mo.
Pet Store (Annual) 12-14 #714 $100/ year
City of Princeton Appendix E Fee Schedule
Appendix E - 5
LICENSES / SPECIAL EVENTS - continued
Date of Set by
Item Last Change Ordinance Fee
Recycling Facility
Resident (fixed structure/facility) 01-92 #412 $10/yr.
Special Event permit 12-19 #786 $25
Taxi Cabs 01-10 #641 $60/year/vehicle
Tobacco & Electronic Cigarettes (Annual) 02-14 #705 $100
Vendor Licenses:
Peddler/Hawker/Solicitor** 06-12 #686 $250 (annual)
$30 (5 consecutive days)
$50 (5 days of sales in any 3 month period)
Transient Merchant (annual)** 06-12 #686 $250 (annual)
$30 (5 consecutive days)
$50 (5 days of sales in any 3 month period)
Vendors selling food 01-85 #686 $250 (annual)
$30 (5 consecutive days)
$50 (5 days of sales in any 3 month period)
Farmers Sales – (does not include the sale of animals or grains) #562 No charge
Wireless Facility (Small) 04-19 #782 $175.00/year
($150 rental fee, + $25.00 electric)
BUILDING DEPARTMENT amended 12-22-16, ord 746
Date of Set by
Item Last Change Ordinance Fee
Air Conditioners - Residential 12-16 #746 $50.00**
Air to Air 01-05 #566 $50.00**
Building/Moving 01-90 City costs plus $25
Building Permits 01-99 #475
(Fees as provided for in Chapter 1 of the
1997 Uniform Building Code, MN Rules
Parts 1305.0106 and 1305.0107, and
MN Statute 16B.70)
Commercial Permits 12-16 #746 based on value
Contractor License Check Fee 01-92 $5
Demolition of Building 04-02
20,000 sq. ft. or less $150
More than 20,000 sq. ft. $300
Time extension $50
Fireplace 01-05 #566 $50.00**
Furnace - Residential 12-16 #746 $50.00**
City of Princeton Appendix E Fee Schedule
App endix E - 6
BUILDING INSPECTIONS - continued
Date of Set by
Item Last Change Ordinance Fee
Lawn Irrigation 12-14 #714 $50.00**
Manufactured Home 01-05/12 #566/679 $100.00**
Manufactured Home Foundation 01-05/12 #566 Permit/plan review surcharge
value based
Permit Extensions 01-05 #566 ½ permit fee
Plumbing Permit (Per Fixture) 01-97 $5
Plumbing Residential 01-05 #566 Base $50 plus $10
per fixture over 5**
Pools – Above Ground 12-14 #714 $50.00**
Pools – In Ground 12-14 #714 based on value
Re-inspection fee 01-05 #566 $50.00
Reroof Residential 02-14 #705 $60.00**
Residing Residential 02-14 #705 $60.00**
Septic (single family dwelling)* 01-05 #566 $100.00**
*(only for properties which do not have access to City Sewer)
Water Heater 01-05 #566 $50.00**
Windows – Commercial 01-05 permit by value and surcharge
Windows – Residential 01-05 #566 $50.00**
Work started without permit 01-05 #566 double permit fee
* - Unknown, but prior to 1988 ** $1.00 State surcharge fee
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Daycare/Foster Care Inspection 12-11 677 $50
Chimney Fire w/ Extension into the house 12-16 746 $500
Chimney Fire w/ NO extension into the house 12-16 746 $250
False Alarms 12-18 760
Commercial / Industrial 2 per year free, $150 each thereafter
Residential 2 per year free, $75 each thereafter
Firefighters/EMTs 01-10 641 $11/hr per FF
Fire Reports 01-03 $15
Grass Fire 01-10 641 $250
Illegal Burning 12-16 746 $250
Knox Box Surface Mount 12-18 760 $325
Knox Box Flush Mount 01-10 641 $350
Loads of Water $150 per load
(i.e. watering turkeys, filling swimming pools, skating rink flooding)
City of Princeton Appendix E Fee Schedule
Appendix E - 7
FIRE DEPARTMENT - continued
Date of Set by
Item Last Change Ordinance Fee
Responses to motor vehicle accidents 12-11 #677 $300/1st hr.
With extraction 12-15 #728 $400
(or other emergencies involving a motor vehicle within city limits) $100/ ea. addtl. hr.
Structure Burns (requested) $500
*Structural Training Burns: Permit fees, inspection fees, removal of asbestos and cleanup are the
responsibility of the property owner.
Structure Fire 01-10 641 $500
Supplies Foam – Class A 12-14 714 $20/gal
Supplies Foam – Class B AFFF AR 12-14 714 $30/gal
Traffic Control 12-18 760 $250 Hour
Vehicle Fire 01-10 641 $250
*Base Charge: For fire runs involving a minimum of time, equipment, and firefighter hours, the City
reserves the option of charging a base fee of $300 to $500.
Minimum Standards/Charge For Engine Types
Type 1 Type 2 Type 3 Type 4 Type 5 Type 6 Type 7
Components
Pump Capacity (GPM) 1000 500 120 70 50 50 20
Tank Capacity (Gal) 400 400 500 750 500 200 125
Hose, 2 ½” (feet) 1200 1000 - - - - -
Hose 1 ½" (feet) 400 500 1000 300 300 200
Hose, 1" (feet) 200 300 800 300 300 200
Ladder (feet) 20 20 - - - - -
Heavy Stream (GPM) 500 - - - - - -
Personnel (min. #) 4 3 3 3 3 2 2
Charge Per Hour
(minimum 1 hour)
$300 $200 $150 $125 $110 $100 $75
Fuel furnished by Fire Department. Low end of rates are the base rate. Higher than base rates
should be justified by newer apparatus with more than base capabilities, such as Class A foam
proportioning systems, CAF systems, etc.
Minimum Standards/Charge For Water Tender Types
Type 1 Type 2 Type 3 Type 4 Type 5 Type 6 Type 7
Components
Pump Cap. (GPM) 300 200 200 -
Tank Cap. (galloons) 5,000 2,500 1,000 1,000
Personnel (min. #) 2 2 2 2
City of Princeton Appendix E Fee Schedule
App endix E - 8
Charge Per Hour
(minimum 1 hour)
$200 $175 $150 $125
The equipment the PFRD currently has on hand is classified as follows:
Unit Type of Rig Engine Billing Type
#L-1 Pumper/Aerial Engine – Type 1
#1 Pumper Engine – Type 1
#2 Pumper Engine – Type 1
#4 Tanker Water Tender – Type 2
#9 Tanker Water Tender – Type 2
#3 Grass Rig/Rescue Engine – Type 5
#5 Pumper/Rescue Engine – Type 1
#6 Grass Rig Engine – Type 5
#7 Grass Rig Rescue Engine – Type 5
#8 Pumper/Rescue Engine – Type 1
#10 Grass Rig Engine – Type 5
LIQUOR DEPARTMENT
Date of Set by
Item Last Change Ordinance Fee
Keg Deposit - 8 gal. 12-04 $50.00
Tapper Deposit 12-04 $75.00
PLANNING/ZONING DEPARTMENT amended 3-22-12 #682
Date of Set by
Item Last Change Ordinance Fee
Billboards 02-14 #705 $150.00
City Maps – Large 01-83 $2.00
Small .50
Other documents based on size
Comprehensive Plan Book 09-11 #673 $20.00
Conditional Use Permit 09-11 #673 $250
$50/additional recorded Document
Escrow 02-14 #705
(may be waived or additional escrow may be requested, subject to Zoning Administrators review)
Site Plan Review $500.00
Conditional Use Permit, Interim Use Permit, Vacation, Variance, Rezoning, $1000.00
Ordinance Amendment, or Subdivision / Plat $2000.00
Excavation Unknown* $250
Fence Permit (6” and under) 01-93/98 $25**
City of Princeton Appendix E Fee Schedule
Appendix E - 9
PLANNING/ZONING DEPARTMENT - continued
Date of Set by
Item Last Change Ordinance Fee
Fencing (over 6’) 01-05 #566 $50.00**
Interim Use Permit $250
Lot Split 01-06 #584 $250
Park Dedication Fee (land only) 05-11 #664
R-1 8% of Land Area+
R-2 10% of Land Area+
R-3 12% of Land Area+
Commercial/Industrial Zone 5% of Land Area+
+Exclusive of natural wetlands and any existing ROWs
Park Dedication Fee 05-11 #664
(based on Fair Market Value – in lieu of land dedication)
R-1 8% of Unplatted Land Value=
R-2 10% of Unplatted Land Value=
R-3 12% of Unplatted Land Value=
Commercial/Industrial Zone 5% of Unplatted Land Value=
=Includes total land area
Plan Check Fee 03-12 #682 65% of Permit Fee
(maximum)
Princeton Area Topographical Data 09-07 #606 $25/acre
Refunds 01-05 City retains plan check fee
Retain Walls over 4’ 01-05 #566 $50.00**
Rezoning 01-06 #584 $275
Signs - Wall signs 02-14 #705 $50.00**
Signs – Freestanding Signs 02-07 #598 $100.00**
Signs – Replacement (wall or freestanding) 12-14 #$714 $25.00**
Signs – Temporary Signs 12-11 #677 $20.00**
(Excluding non-profit organizations)
Temporary & portable ground signs (commemorating a special event, business anniversary,
grand opening, & other promotions), excluding signs regulated under Chap VII.3, Signs Permitted
Without a Building Permit.
Site Inspection 01-05 $65.00 per hr. (drive time to be included)
Subdivision Ordinance Book 04-02 $20.00
Subdivision Plats: Preliminary 01-06 #584 $250 ? 10 lots
+ $15 each addtl. lot to maximum of $1,000
Final 04-02 $200
Vacation 01-06 #584 $250
Variance 09-11 #673 $250
$50/additional recorded document
Zoning Ordinance Book 04-02 $20.00
City of Princeton Appendix E Fee Schedule
App endix E - 10
* - Unknown, but prior to 1988
** $1.00 State surcharge fee
SEWER
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (CBOD5) 02-12 #680 $0.95 per pound
Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN) 02-12 #680 $0.45 per pound
Total Phosphorus (TP) 02-12 #680 $19.38 per pound
Total Suspended Solids (TSS) 02-12 #680 $ 1.97 per pound
Foreign Sludge processing 3¢ per gallon
SEWER AND WATER ACCESS FEES
Standard fee 08-11 #684 $10.50/1,000/gal.
Sewer Availability Charge (SAC) 08-17 #754
1” Service Line $2,100
1½” Service Line $3,150
2” Service Line $4,200
4” Service Line $8,400
6” Service Line $12,600
8” Service Line $16,800
10” Service Line $21,000
12” Service Line $25,200
Water Availability Charge (WAC) 08-17 #754
1” Service Line $2,000
1½” Service Line $3,000
2” Service Line $4,000
4” Service Line $8,000
6” Service Line $12,000
8” Service Line $16,000
10” Service Line $20,000
12” Service Line $24,000
SEWER AND WATER TRUNK FEES
Sewer Trunk Fee 01-08 #566 $5,105 per acre**
Water Trunk Fee 01-08 #595 $3,187 per acre**
STORMWATER UTILITY
Stormwater Utility Fee 01-09 #625
Residential Fee $1.89 per month
Commercial Fee $13.60/month
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Police Reports 01-06 584 Per State Statute
Photo Processing 01-06 584 Per State Statute
City of Princeton Appendix E Fee Schedule
Appendix E - 11
POLICE DEPARTMENT - continued
Date of Set by
Item Last Change Ordinance Fee
Special Events - Reserve Officers 01-09 625 $25/hr.
Special Events – Police Officer 12-14 #714 $52/hr
Accident Reports 01-06 584 Per State Statute
Fingerprinting 04-04 539 $5
Court Ordered Breath Tests 01-07 594 $20/test
Digital Camera Disk 01-06 584 Per State Statute
Copy of Videos 01-03 Per State Statute
Parking Tickets 04-02 $30
Not paid within 14 days 04-02 $60
Handicap Parking 01-06 584 $200
Not paid within 14 days 01-03 $300
Animal Impoundment Fee 01-03 $100
Storage: (per day)
Vehicles (including motorcycles & ATVS) 01-90 $10
Bicycles 01-90 $.50
False Alarms – 01-03 3 per year free, $25 ea. thereafter
Training Room Rental 12-14 $100
* - Unknown, but prior to 1988
POLICE - ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
Date of Set by
Item Last Change Ordinance Fee
Abandoned Vehicles 10-03 #318 $50.00
Alcohol in City Park 10-03 #306 25.00
Animal Complaint 10-03 # 391 25.00
Bike/Skateboard/Rollerblade on Sidewalk 10-03 #515 25.00
Burning 10-03 #518 25.00
Curfew 10-03 #474 25.00
Disturbing the Peace 10-03 MS 609/#262, 428 50.00
Exhibition Driving 10-03 #319 50.00
Failure to Drive w/Due Care 10-03 MS 169 50.00
Failure to shovel public sidewalk 10-03 #377 25.00
Failure to yield to pedestrian 01-06 MS 169/584 $100.00
City of Princeton Appendix E Fee Schedule
App endix E - 12
Grass and Rank Vegetation 10-03 #262 25.00
Illegal Fireworks 10-03 MS 624 25.00
Junk Vehicles 10-03 #437 25.00
Loitering 10-03 #430 25.00
Motor Vehicles on Public Land 10-03 #435 50.00
Parking Violation – Handicapped 01-06 MS 169/584 200.00
Parking Violations (except handicapped) 10-03 #528 30.00
Public Nuisance 10-03 MS 169/#262 50.00
Rummage Sale Violations 06-04 #551 25/day
Shoplifting 10-03 MS 609 25.00
Snowmobiles/ATV 12-05 580 50.00
Tobacco - Sale of tobacco products to a person under age 18:
By a business -
First offense 01-06 #582 75.00
Second offense within 24 months 01-06 #582 200.00
Third offense within 24 months 01-05 #582 250.00*
(* plus cigarette license suspended for no less than seven days)
By an individual 01-06 #582 50.00
Unlawful purchase, possession and/or use of tobacco products
by a person under age 18 01-06 #582 30.00
Transient Merchants 10-03 #434 25.00
Trespassing in City Park 10-03 #335 25.00
Zoning Violation - various 10-03 #438 25.00
PUBLIC WORKS
Date of Set by
Item Last Change Ordinance Fee
Barricades 01-83 $1/day
Blacktop 01-10 641 $4.75/sq. ft.
Blade (with operator) 12-18 777 $150/hr.***
Chain saws (with operator) 12-18 777 $50.50/hr.***
Compressor (with operator) 02-14 705 $58/hr
Digging Deposit 03-11 666 $2000
Dump truck/Sander (with operator) ($75 min.) 12-18 777 $128/hr***
Dump trucks (with operator) 12-18 777 $94/hr.***
Dump trucks with plows (with operator) 12-18 777 $128/hr.***
Electric Jackhammer 12-18 777 $30/hr.
City of Princeton Appendix E Fee Schedule
Appendix E - 13
PUBLIC WORKS - continued
Date of Set by
Item Last Change Ordinance Fee
Flashers 01-83 $1/day
Gas Auger (with operator) 12-18 777 $43.50/hr.***
Generator 12-19 786 $275/day (8 hrs)
Labor 12-18 777 $41/hr.***
Lawn Mowers (with operator)(30 min. min.) 12-18 777 $54.50/hr.***
Loader (with operator) 12-18 777 $145/hr.***
Overtime Labor 12-18 777 ***Add $17.50
to applicable rates
Paint Sprayer (with operator) 12-18 777 $48.50/hr.***
(paint - actual cost + 10%)
Pickup Trucks 12-18 777 $1.00/mi.
Rubber Tire Roller (with operator) 12-18 777 $85/hr.***
Quad-Axle Dump truck (with operator) 12-18 777 $105/hr
Mixed Winter Sand (limit 1 yd/trip) 12-18 777 $58/yd.
Class 5 12-18 777 $18/yd.
Sewer Rodder (with operator) 12-18 777 $75/hr.***
Sewer Jetter/Vacuum (with operator) 12-18 777 $225/hr.***
Sewer Camera (2 men) 12-18 777 $120/hr.***
Signs & Posts Unknown* Actual Cost + 10%
Skid Steer (with operator) 12-18 777 $88/hr***
Small Sweeper (with operator) 12-18 777 $88/hr***
Street Sweeper (with operator) 12-18 777 $110/hr.***
Steel Roller (with operator) 12-18 777 $53/hr.***
Submersible Pump 12-18 777 $75/day
Tractor (with operator) 12-18 777 $78/hr
Tractor/Backhoe 12-18 777 $94/hr.***
Bidirectional Tractor/Snow thrower (w/ operator) 12-18 777 $170/hr.***
Bidirectional Tractor/mowers (w/ operator) 12-18 777 $170/hr.***
Tractor with mower (with operator) 12-18 777 $83/hr.***
Traffic Cones (2) 01-83 $1/day
* - Unknown, but prior to 1988
** + $1.00 State surcharge fee
*** - add Overtime labor to applicable hourly rates if operator reaches Overtime status

Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 06-07-2017 Princeton, Minnesota
i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter Page
I Introduction ...................................................................................................... I - 1
1. Short Title ................................................................................................ I - 1
2. Intent and Purpose .................................................................................. I - 1
II Definitions ....................................................................................................... II - 1
III General Provisions ........................................................................................ III - 1
1. Application of this Ordinance ................................................................ III - 1
2. Separability ........................................................................................... III - 1
3. Nonconforming Uses ............................................................................. III - 2
4. Nonconforming Structures ………………………………………………….III - 3
5. Nonconforming Lots of Record……………………………………………..III - 3
6. Accessory Buildings and Uses .............................................................. III - 4
IV Administration and Enforcement ................................................................. IV - 1
1. Violations and Penalties ........................................................................ IV - 2
2. Variances .............................................................................................. IV - 2
3. Conditional Use Permit ......................................................................... IV - 3
4. Rezoning Procedure ............................................................................. IV - 5
5. Board of Adjustments ............................................................................ IV - 6
V Zoning Districts ............................................................................................... V - 1
1. Zoning Map ....................................................................................... V(1) - 2
2. A-1 Agricultural .................................................................................. V(2) - 1
3. A-2 Agricultural .................................................................................. V(3) - 1
4. R-1 Residential .................................................................................. V(4) - 1
5. R-2 Residential .................................................................................. V(5) - 1
6. R-3 Multi-Family Residential ............................................................. V(6) - 1
7. RM-1 Residential Manufactured Housing .......................................... V(7) - 1
8. B-1 Central Business ........................................................................ V(8) - 1
9. B-2 General Business ....................................................................... V(9) - 1
10. B-3 Highway Commercial ................................................................ V(10) - 1
11. Essential Services Overlay District .................................................. V(11) - 1
12. HC-1 Health Care District ................................................................ V(12) - 1
13. MN-1 Industrial ................................................................................ V(13) - 1
Table of Contents
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 06-07-2017 Princeton, Minnesota
ii
14. MN-2 Industrial ................................................................................ V(14) - 1
15. C-1 Conservation ............................................................................ V(15) - 1
16. D-1 Airport ....................................................................................... V(16) - 1
17. F-1 Floodplain ................................................................................. V(17) - 1
18. WS-1 Wild & Scenic Rum River Protection Area ............................ V(18) - 1
19. AT – Antenna Tower Overlay District .............................................. V(19) - 1
20. MOR Medical Office Residential District……………………………….V(20) – 1
VI Performance Standards ................................................................................ VI - 1
1. Intent ..................................................................................................... VI - 1
2. Standards .............................................................................................. VI - 1
A. Noise .............................................................................................. VI - 1
B. Smoke and Particulate Matter ........................................................ VI - 1
C. Toxic or Noxious Matter .................................................................. VI - 2
D. Odors .............................................................................................. VI - 2
E. Glare or Heat .................................................................................. VI - 2
F. Refuse and Other Waste Material .................................................. VI - 2
G. Height Limitations ........................................................................... VI - 2
H. Building Relocation ......................................................................... VI - 3
I. Fences ............................................................................................ VI - 3
J. Home Occupations ......................................................................... VI - 5
K. Kennels ………………………………………………………………….VI - 6
L. Land Reclamation .......................................................................... VI - 7
M. Landscaping ................................................................................... VI - 7
N. Lot Provisions ................................................................................ VI -13
O. Mining ........................................................................................... VI - 13
P. Off-Street Loading and Unloading ................................................ VI - 13
Q. Off-Street Parking Space …………………………………………… VI - 14
Q-1 Space Layout, Standards, Construction, and Maintenance….......VI - 14
Q-2 Design Standards ......................................................................... VI - 15
Q-3 Number of Minimum Parking Spaces Per Unit of Measure………VI - 17
R. Sidewalks ..................................................................................... VI - 21
S. Swimming Pools ........................................................................... VI - 21
T. Traffic Visibility ............................................................................. VI - 23
U. Utility Easement............................................................................ VI - 24
V. Water Supply, Storm and Sanitary Sewage Disposal .................. VI - 24
W. Adult Uses .................................................................................... VI - 25
X. Yards and Open Space ................................................................ VI - 27
Y. General Development Standards Plan ....................................... . VI - 28
Z. Planned Unit Development .......................................................... VI - 29
AA. Temporary Dwellings (Motorhomes, etc.) ..................................... VI - 30
BB. Chickens……………………………………………………………….VI - 30
Table of Contents
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 06-07-2017 Princeton, Minnesota
iii
VII Signs .............................................................................................................. VII - 1
1. Intent………………………………………………………………………….VII - 1
2. Definitions ............................................................................................ VII - 1
3. Signs Permitted without a Building Permit ........................................... VII - 5
4. Signs Permitted with a Building Permit ................................................ VII - 8
5. Signs Permitted with a Temporary Sign Permit………………………… VII- 9
6. Home Occupation Signs.…………………………………….……………..VII-11
7. Signs Requiring Planning Commission Approval………………………..VII-11
8. Existing Signs ....................................................................................... VII-17
9. Nonconforming Signs ..................................................................... … VII- 18
10. Removal of Signs ............................................................................... VII - 18
11. Enforcement ....................................................................................... VII - 19
VIII Floodplain Management .............................................................................. VIII - 1
1. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, and Purpose ...................... VIII - 1
2. Title ..................................................................................................... VIII - 2
3. General Provisions .............................................................................. VIII - 2
4. Establishment of Zoning Districts ........................................................ VIII - 6
5. Floodway District (FW) ........................................................................ VIII - 7
6. Flood Fringe District (FF) ……………………………………………………VIII - 11
7. General Flood Plain District ………………………………………………VIII-15
8. Subdivisions ....................................................................................... VIII- 16
9. Public Utilities, Rail Roads, Roads, and Bridges ............................... VIII - 17
10. Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Parks, and
Placement of Recreational Vehicles ................................................. VIII - 18
11. Administration ................................................................................... VIII - 20
A. Zoning Administrator .................................................................. VIII - 20
B. Permit Requirements .................................................................. VIII - 20
C. Conditional Uses ........................................................................ VIII - 22
D. Variances ................................................................................... VIII - 25
12. Nonconforming Uses ......................................................................... VIII - 27
13. Penalties for Violation ....................................................................... VIII - 28
14. Amendments ..................................................................................... VIII - 30
IX Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area ............................................... IX - 1
1. Policy and Authorization ........................................................................ IX - 1
2. Title ....................................................................................................... IX - 1
3. Purpose ................................................................................................. IX - 1
4. General Provisions ................................................................................ IX - 2
5. Land Use District Provisions ................................................................. IX - 5
A. Designation of Districts ................................................................... IX - 5
B. Permitted and Conditional Uses ..................................................... IX - 5
6. Zoning Dimensions ............................................................................... IX - 7
Table of Contents
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 06-07-2017 Princeton, Minnesota
iv
7. Sanitary Provisions ............................................................................... IX - 8
8. Landscape Alterations ........................................................................... IX - 9
9. Subdivisions ........................................................................................ IX - 12
10. Administration ..................................................................................... IX - 13
X Housing Standards ......................................................................................... X - 1
1. Purpose .................................................................................................. X - 1
2. Definitions .............................................................................................. X - 1
3. General Provisions ................................................................................. X - 3
4. Administration and Enforcement……………………………………………X- 6
XI Solar Energy………………………………………………………………………….XI-1
1. Purpose………………………………………………………………………..XI-1
2. Definitions……………………………………………………………………..XI-1
3. Requirements and Standards……………………………………………….XI-2
XII Adoption of Ordinance…………………………………………………………..XII – 1
Amendments………………………………………………………………..XII - 2
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, Minnesota I - 1
Chapter I
INTRODUCTION
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Princeton Zoning Ordinance.
The intent of this ordinance is to divide the City of Princeton into districts and to establish
regulation in each district for the purpose of: promoting the public health, safety, morals,
and general welfare; regulating the location, height, bulk, number of stories, size of
buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot which may be occupied, the size of
yards and other open spaces, the density and distribution of population, the uses of
buildings and structures for trade, industry, residence, recreation, public activities, or other
purposes, the uses of land for trade, industry, residences, recreation, agriculture, water
supply, and flood control, or other purposes; and establishing standards and procedures
regulating such uses and natural resources.
It is the policy of the City of Princeton that the enforcement, amendment, and
administration of this Ordinance be accomplished with due consideration of the
recommendations contained in the City of Princeton's Comprehensive Plan and the
Subdivision Regulations and Developer's Guide Ordinance (Subdivision Ordinance), as
developed and amended from time to time by the Planning Commission and the City
Council of Princeton. The Council recognizes the Comprehensive Plan as a guideline to
regulate land use and development in accordance with the policies and purpose herein set
forth.
1. Short Title
2. Intent and Purpose
Chapter I – Introduction
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, Minnesota I - 2
It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, deed restrictions, or land use controls. Where this ordinance imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail. In case of conflict between a
provision of Minnesota Statutes or Rules or provisions of existing local ordinances, the
more protective provision shall apply.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be
minimum requirements, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any powers or
rights granted by Minnesota Statutes.
This zoning ordinance is intended to be exclusive in nature. In other words, the uses,
provisions and standards that are listed herein are deemed as being the complete
delineation of the allowed uses, provisions and standards. Any use, provision or standard
not specifically listed or noted as permitted herein is deemed unacceptable and is not
allowed unless reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission.
The provisions of this ordinance shall be severable, and the invalidity of any paragraph,
subparagraph, or subdivision thereof shall not make void any other paragraph,
subparagraph, subdivision, or any other part. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall
adjudge invalid any provision of this ordinance or the application of this ordinance to a
particular property, building, or other structure, such judgment shall not affect any other
provision of this ordinance or any other property, building, or structure not specifically
included in said judgment.
The word "shall" is mandatory, not permissive. All distances unless otherwise specified
shall be measured horizontally.
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 1
Chapter II
Definitions
For the purpose of this ordinance, terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them; and certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted
as follows:
Administrator
The administrator of the Princeton Zoning Office or its authorized agent or representative.
Agriculture
The use of land for agricultural purposes including: farming; dairying; pasturage; horticulture;
floriculture; viticulture; animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory
uses for packing, creating and storing the produce, provided that the operation of
any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the principal agricultural activities.
Agricultural Structure
Any structure existing or erected and used principally for agricultural purposes, with the
exception of dwelling units.
Airport
Any area of land designed and set aside for the landing and take-off of aircraft, including
all necessary facilities for the housing and maintenance of aircraft.
Alleys
Any dedicated public way providing a secondary means of access to land or structures
thereon.
Chapter II - Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 2
Accessory Structure
A subordinate building or a portion of the main building, the use of which is incidental to
that of the main building or to the use of the premises.
Accessory Use
A use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and (except in
the case of accessory off-street parking spaces or loading) located in the same parcel
as the principal use to which it is related.
Adult Uses
Adult uses include adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture
theaters, adult massage parlors, adult steam room/bathhouse/sauna facilities, adult
companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs,
adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling
studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body painting studios, and other premises, enterprises,
establishments, businesses, or places open to some or all members of the public, at
or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction, or description
of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” which are capable of being
seen by members of the public. Activities classified as obscene as defined by Minnesota
Statute 5617.241 are not included.
A. Specified Anatomical Areas:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top
of the areola; and
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
B. Specified Sexual Activities:
1. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse,
oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals,
flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of
excretory functions in the context of sexual relationship, and any of the following
sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy,
coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia,
piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty.
2. Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or
tumescence.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 3
3. Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation.
4. Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female
breast.
5. Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments,
or in sexually revealing costumes; and who are engaged in activities
involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding, or other physical
restraint of any such persons.
6. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually-oriented contact with an
animal by a human being.
7. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal, or anal irrigation.
Adult Uses / Accessory
The offering of goods and/or services which are classified as adult uses on a limited
scale and which are incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services offered
by the establishment. Examples of such items include adult magazines, adult movies,
adult novelties, and the like.
Adult Use / Principal
The offering of goods and/or services which are classified as adult uses as a primary or
sole activity of a business or establishment and include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Adult Use Body Painting Studio - An establishment or business which provides
the service of applying paint or other substances, whether transparent or nontransparent,
to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially
nude in terms of “specified anatomical areas.”
B. Adult Use Bookstore - A building or portion of a building used for the barter,
rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio
tape, videotape, or motion picture film if such building or portion of a building is
not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of the public excluding
any minor by reason of age, or if a substantial or significant portion of
such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
C. Adult Use Cabaret - A building or portion of a building used for providing dancing
or other live entertainment, if such building or portion of a building excludes minors
by virtue of age, or if such dancing or other live entertainment is distinChapter
II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 4
guished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction,
or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
D. Adult Use Companionship Establishment - A companionship establishment
which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging
in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion between an employee of the
establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
E. Adult Use Conversation/Rap Parlor - A conversation/rap parlor which excludes
minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in or listening
to conversation, talk, or discussion, if such service is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
F. Adult Use Health/Sport Club - A health/sport club which excludes minors by
reason of age, or if such club is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
G. Adult Use Hotel/Motel - Adult hotel/motel means a hotel or motel from which minors
are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented
which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing,
or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
H. Adult Use Massage Parlor/Health Club - A massage parlor or health club which
restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of massage, if
such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
I. Adult Use Mini-Motion Picture Theater - A building or portion of a building with
a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material if such
building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue
of age, or if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons
therein.
J. Adult Use Modeling Studio - An establishment whose major business is the provision
to customers of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing
sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage
in “specified sexual activities” or display “specified anatomical area” while being
observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or
otherwise depicted by such customers.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 5
K. Adult Use Motion Picture Arcade - Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
L. Adult Use Motion Picture Theater - A building or portion of a building with a capacity
of fifty 50) or more persons used for presenting material if such building or
portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if
such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons therein.
M. Adult Use Novelty Business - A business which has, as a principal activity, the
sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed for
sexual stimulation.
N. Adult Sauna - A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides
a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation,
or reducing; utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing, or reducing
agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
O. Adult Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility - A building or portion of a building used
for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure,
bathing, relaxation, or reducing; utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing,
or reducing agent, if such building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason
of age or if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.”
Alteration
Any change, addition, or modification in construction or type of occupancy, or in the
structural members of a building, such as foundations, walls, or partitions, columns,
beams, or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered"
or "reconstructed."
Animal, Domestic
Animals kept as pets, such as fish, dogs, cats, household birds, homing pigeons, and
similar animals.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 6
Animal, Non-domestic
Animals which are kept outside the home for purposes of food or pleasure, such as livestock
(cattle, hogs, sheep, goats, chickens), bees, birds (such as falcons, and wild and
scrub pigeons), and similar animals.
Antenna
Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting electromagnetic
waves, including but not limited to directional antennas, such as panels, microwave
dishes, and satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas.
Auto Repair
A place where the following services may be carried out: general auto repair; engine rebuilding;
rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body,
frame, or fender straightening and repair; and overall painting and undercoating of automobiles.
The sale of engine fuels may or may not also be carried on.
Auto Service Station
A place where gasoline or any other automobile engine fuel (stored only in underground
tanks), kerosene, motor oil and lubricants, or grease (for operation of motor vehicles)
are retailed directly to the public on the premises; including the sale of minor accessories
and the servicing or minor repair of automobiles, and may include the sale of convenience
food goods and necessity items. This does not include business side lines
such as trailer rental or discount stores. These would not be included as ordinary service
station activities unless specifically permitted by a conditional use permit.
Awning
A temporary hood or cover which projects from the wall of a building, and of a type
which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of a supporting building.
Auxiliary Canopy
A roof-like structure projecting over, including but not limited to, gasoline pump islands,
drive through banking or any canopy with a drive through lane. An auxiliary canopy provides
weather protection for more than the building entrance or windows. Auxiliary canopies
may be attached or detached from the principal building. For sign purposes auxiliary
canopies shall be considered a separate structure.
Bars
Establishments serving "on-sale" liquor with or without food.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 7
Basement
That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that the
vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance
from the average grade to the ceiling and the vertical distance from the average grade
to the floor is more than four feet for more than 50% of the perimeter.
Bed and Breakfast
A residential building occupied more or less as a temporary accommodation for individuals
who are lodged, with or without meals, in rooms occupied singly or for remuneration,
with or without dining facilities, and including not more than five guest sleeping
rooms intended to proved such accommodations.
Brewer (Added 04-29-2016; Ord. 733)
A person who manufactures malt liquor for sale.
Brewpub (Added 04-29-2016; Ord. 733)
A state licensed brewer under Minnesota Statutes Section 304A and all other applicable
laws of the State of Minnesota with a restaurant use operated on the same premises as
the brewery. To sell their own malt liquor, a brewpub is required to obtain an intoxicating
on-sale liquor license and may obtain an on-sale Sunday liquor license if they want
to be open on Sundays. Along with meeting the requirements of the State of Minnesota
the entity must also meet the Federal requirements of the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and
Trade Bureau.
Board of Adjustment
The Princeton Board of Adjustment as appointed by the Princeton City Council.
Boarding and Rooming House
A business establishment which provides sleeping and living quarters (but not individual
cooking facilities) in an immovable structure on a weekly or monthly commercial basis.
A rooming house shall not include congregate dining facilities.
Brooding (Added 10-11-2012; Ord. 691)
The period of chicken growth when supplemental heat must be provided, due to the
birds inability to generate enough body heat.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 8
Building
Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof or other covering, and designed
or used for the shelter or enclosure of any person, animal or property of any kind
including tents, awnings or vehicle situated on private property and used for purposes of
a building. It is not the intention of the ordinance to include any of the following structures:
1)temporary storage sheds or tents or awnings intended for resale or used for
display or promotional purposes and having no permanent footings, slab or other foundation;
2) dog houses of less than 25 square feet and designed for one animal and having
no permanent footings, run or slab or other foundations; 3) tents or other awnings
used only for recreational purposes; and 4) storage sheds, wood sheds or awnings having
an overall floor or surface area of less than 25 square feet and having no permanent
footings or slab or other foundation.
Buildable Area
The area of a lot contained within the front, side, and rear setbacks.
Building Height
The vertical distance from the established average finished grade at the building line to
the highest point of a structure, excluding chimneys, antennas, or other similar projections.
Building Setback Line
A line formed by the face of the building; for the purpose of this ordinance, a minimum
building line is the same as a yard setback line.
Business
Any establishment, occupation, employment, or enterprise where merchandise is manufactured,
exhibited or sold, or which occupies time, attention, labor and materials, or
where services are offered for compensation.
Canopy
A projection or extension of a building or structure erected in such a manner as to provide
a shelter or cover over the approach to any entrance to a store, building, or place
of assembly.
Carport
An accessory roof-like structure, either attached to or detached from an allowable primary
building, enclosed on not more than two sides, designed to provide cover for offstreet
vehicle parking.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 9
Car Wash
A lot on which motor vehicles are washed or waxed either by the patrons, or by others,
using machinery specially designed for that purpose.
Chicken
A Domesticated bird that serves as a source of eggs or meat.
Child Care Centers
A use where care for a child in a residence outside the child's home is provided for gain
or otherwise on a regular basis for any part of a 24-hour day. Child Care Centers are
permitted home occupations within Princeton, with an approved Conditional Use Permit,
subject to all the licensing requirements defined by the State of Minnesota, Chapter
9502 of the Minnesota Department of Human Services.
Child Care Centers shall include the following child/adult ratios and age distribution restrictions
(the licensed capacity must include all children of any caregiver when the children
are present in the residence):
A. Family Day Care:
Licensed
Capacity
Adults
Total Children
Under School Age
Total Infants and Toddlers
10
1
6
A combined total of no more than 3 shall
be infants & toddlers, no more than 2 shall
be infants.
B. Specialized Infant and Toddler Family Day Care
Licensed
Capacity
Adults
Total Children
Under School Age
Total Infants and Toddlers
5
1
3
No more than 3 infants.
6
1
4
No more than 2 infants.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 10
C. Group Family Day Care:
Licensed
Capacity
Adults
Total Children
Under School Age
Total Infants and Toddlers
10
1
8
A combined total of no more than 3 shall
be infants & toddlers, no more than 2 shall
be infants.
12
1
10
A combined total of no more than 2 shall
be infants & toddlers, no more than 1 shall
be an infant.
14
2
10
A combined total of no more than 4 shall
be infants & toddlers, no more than 3 shall
be infants.
A helper may be used in place of a second adult caregiver when there is no more
than 1 infant.
D. Specialized Infant and Toddler Group Family Day Care:
Licensed
Capacity
Adults
Total Children
Under School Age
Total Infants and Toddlers
9
2
7
Of the total children, no more than 4
shall be infants.
Both caregivers shall be adults.
Exclusion from child care licensure are the following:
1. Day care provided by a relative to only related children; or
2. Day care provided to children from a single, unrelated family for any length of
time; or
3. Day care provided for a cumulative total of less than 30 days in any 12-
month period.
Church
A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where people regularly assemble
for religious worship and which building, together with its accessory buildings
and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public
worship.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 11
Church, Transitional/Interim
A temporary place of worship (for a period not to exceed five (5) years) consisting of a
building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where people regularly assemble
for religious worship and which building, together with the accessory buildings and
uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.
City Council - Council
The City Council of the City of Princeton, Minnesota.
Clinic
An establishment where human patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for
examination and/or treatment by a group of physicians, dentists, or similar professionals.
Clinic - Veterinary
An establishment where animals are admitted for treatment by a veterinarian and may
be boarded overnight.
Club or Lodge
A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues,
with a use of premises being restricted to members and their guests. It shall be permissible
to serve food and meals on such premises, provided adequate dining space and
kitchen facilities are available. Serving of alcoholic beverages to members and their
guests shall be allowed provided such serving is in compliance with the applicable federal,
state, and municipal laws.
Commercial Wireless Telecommunications Services
Licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services, including cellular, personal
communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized
mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services.
Comprehensive Plan
The compilation of goals, policy statements, standards, programs, and maps for guiding
the physical, social and economic development, both public and private, of the city and
its environs, as prepared and maintained by the City Planning Commission. The plan
includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such
plan or its parts.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 12
Conditional Use
A use of land which is permitted only when allowed by the City of Princeton after a public
hearing, if certain conditions are met which eliminate or minimize the incompatibility
with other permitted uses of the district.
Convenience Stores
An establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, beverages, and frozen
desserts in a ready-to-eat state in disposable or edible containers for consumption on or
off the premises, groceries, and gasoline. Auto repair is not permitted.
Convention Facility
A building which primary use is for large gatherings of people to meet, debate, sell, party,
eat, or other activities.
Coop
The structure for the keeping or housing of chickens permitted by the ordinance
Day Care Facility
A facility designed or operated to provide care to individuals, without the provision of
overnight sleeping accommodations.
Deck
A horizontal unenclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats, trellises or
other features attached or functionally related to a principal use or site and at any point
extending more than six inches above ground. All decks are considered a part of the
principal structures and shall, therefore, meet all structure setback provisions (see
Yards and Open Space Section VI).
Density Per Gross Acre
The quotient of the total number of dwelling units divided by the total area of the site (including
roads and open space).
Density, Residential
A density established within individual residential land use categories on the official
Land Use Plan of the community.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 13
Drainage Plan
The plan of the subdivision showing the direction of surface water runoff and the removal
or containment of surface water or groundwater by drains, grading, runoff controls,
or other means.
Drive-Thru Facility
An establishment which by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures
encourages or permits customers to receive services or obtain goods while remaining
in their motor vehicles.
Dwelling Unit
One room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping
establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly, or
longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which
may be in the same structure, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
Dwelling, Single-Family
A building designed exclusively for one dwelling unit.
Dwelling, Two-Family (Double Bungalow, Duplex)
A building containing two dwelling units.
Dwelling, Townhouse (also see Townhouse and Twinhome definitions)
A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own
front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit
is separated from any other unit by one or more common fire resistant walls from the
basement through to the roof.
Dwelling, Condominium
Real estate that contains the dwelling unit and common elements, and the common elements
must be owned by the dwelling unit owners.
Dwelling, Multiple-Family (Apartments)
A building containing three or more dwelling units, excluding hotels, motels, and boarding
houses.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 14
Easement
A grant by a property owner for specified use of land by a corporation, the public or
specified persons.
Emergency Service Provider
A public or quasi-public entity providing hospital, ambulance, police, fire, rescue, or other
emergency services as a first responder. (Rev. 09-27-07, Ord. #605)
Emergency Service Provider, Living Quarters
Part of a building designed or used as a dwelling unit to be occupied by first responders
employed by an Emergency Service Provider. (Rev. 09-27-07, Ord. #605)
Environmental Assessment Worksheet (EAW)
A brief document, in worksheet format, that helps local governments determine if a proposed
action is a major action with a potential for significant environmental effects, but
also to consider alternatives and to institute methods for reducing environmental effects.
Erected
The word erected includes built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or
any physical operations on the premises which are required for the building or structure.
Excavation, fill, drainage, and the like shall be considered a part of erection.
Excavation
Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care.
Family
One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, including foster children,
and up to two boarders, or a group of not more than five persons (excluding servants)
some or all of whom are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together and
maintaining a common household.
Farm
A tract of land used for the carrying on of any agricultural activity or the raising of livestock
or small animals.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 15
Fence
A permanent or a temporary partition, structure, wall, hedge, plantings, or gate erected
for the purpose of screening or decorative property control.
Floor Area (Gross)
The sum of the horizontal areas of each floor of a building, measured from the exterior
faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings.
Garage
A fully enclosed building designed or used for the storage of motor vehicles, not including
buildings in which fuel is sold or in which repair or other services are performed.
Gas Station
A place where motor vehicle fuels are sold at retail.
Golf Courses
An open area that shall be comprised of at least nine regulation holes at a minimum of
par three. Miniature golf courses are not included within this use.
Grade
The elevation or level of the ground at a certain point.
Group Family Home
Any community residential facility, foster home, family care facility, or other similar home
for developmentally disabled persons.
Home Occupation (revised 04-28-16; Ord. 733)
Any occupation or profession, regulated within this ordinance, which is carried out for
gain by a resident and conducted as a secondary use in the resident's dwelling unit or in
an accessory building as long as it does not utilize more than 25% of the total floor area
of the dwelling or no more than 625 square feet of accessory building. (See Chapter VI -
Performance Standards, J. Home Occupations)
Insulated Concrete Form (Rev. 07-14-16; Ord. 738)
Also known as stay in place concrete forming systems. Insulating concrete form or insulated
concrete form (ICF) is a system of formwork for reinforced concrete usually
made with a rigid thermal insulation that stays in place as a permanent interior and exteChapter
II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 16
rior substrate for walls, floors, and roofs. The forms are interlocking modular units that
are dry-stacked (without) mortar) and filled with concrete. The units lock together
somewhat like Lego bricks and create a form for the structural walls or floors of a building.
ICF construction has become commonplace for both low rise commercial and high
performance residential construction as more stringent energy efficiency and natural
disaster resistant building codes are adopted. ICFs may be used with frost protected
shallow foundations (FPSF).
Interim Use (Rev. 03-08-2007)
A temporary use of property until a particular date, until the occurrence of a particular
event or until zoning regulations no longer permit it. INTERIM USES are permitted in all
zones of the city according to the provisions hereof.
Intersection Sight Distance Triangle
The visibility requirements for intersections shall not impede vision between a height of
three (3) feet and ten (10) feet within thirty (30) feet from the intersecting curb lines, or
within twenty (20) feet from the intersecting property lines if there is no curb.
Junkyards
An open area where waste and used or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged,
stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled; including, but not limited to,
scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber, tires, lumber products, bottles, products
resulting from wrecking or salvage of automobiles or other vehicles, and outdoor
storage of two or more unregistered vehicles. Such uses shall not include sanitary landfill,
organic waste, or material.
Kennel
Any property, except veterinary clinics and doggie daycares, where more than three
dogs or three cats over the age of eight months are owned, boarded, bred, trained, or
offered for sale.
Landfill
A land depository, excavation, or area operated in a controlled manner by a person for
the dumping of debris or inert material; or a disposal site operated by means of compacting
and covering solid waste at least once each day with an approved material. This
term is intended to include both debris landfills and sanitary landfills. (Rev. 06-26-08, Ord.
#618)
Landscaping
Plantings such as trees, grass, and shrubs.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 17
Licensed Group Home, Foster Home, Group Home, Half-Way House, and Day
Care Facilities
Full or part-time supervised living facilities for the mentally retarded, mentally ill, chemically
dependent, physically handicapped, or elderly. Under Minnesota Statutes, Section
245.812, Subdivision 3, a licensed day care facility serving 12 or fewer persons shall be
considered a permitted single-family residential use of property with an conditional use
permit for the purposes of zoning. Subdivision 4 of the same section indicates that a licensed
day care facility serving from 13 through 16 persons shall be considered a permitted
multi-family residential use of property for purposes of zoning with an conditional
use permit.
Lot
A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds, registered land survey, auditors
plat, or other accepted means and separated from other parcels or portions by said description
for the purpose of sale, lease or separation.
Lot Area
The area of land within the boundaries of a lot.
Lot, Corner
A lot situated at the junction of and fronting on two or more streets.
Lot, Coverage
The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings, including accessory buildings.
Lot, Depth
The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot, Interior
A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot Lines
The lines bounding a lot as defined herein:
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 18
A. Front Lot Line
For an interior lot, the line separating said lot from the street right-of-way. For a
corner lot, the line separating said lot from either street right-of-way. For a through
lot, the line separating said lot from both street right-of-ways.
B. Rear Lot Line
The lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the
rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than 10
feet long lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot.
C. Side Lot Line
Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a
lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line.
D. Street Side Lot Line
A side yard adjacent a street right-of-way on a corner lot.
Lot of Record
Any lot which is one (1) unit of a recorded plat designated by auditors plat, subdivision
plat, or other accepted means and separated from other parcels of portions of said description
for the purpose of sale, lease or separation thereof that has been recorded in
the office of the County Recorder prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
Lot Width
Lot width shall be taken at building set back line.
Manufactured Home "Mobile Home"
A structure transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight
(8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected
on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure
which meets all the requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily
files a certification required by the Secretary of HUD and complies with the standards
established under Minnesota Statutes Chapter 327. Similar provision, M.S. chapter
327.32, subd. 6.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 19
Manufacturing
Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or
substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts, the manufacturing
of products, and the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, or
resins.
Metal Roofing
Metal roofing shall be non-glare and non-reflective factory finished materials.
Metal Siding
Metal siding shall be non-glare, non-reflective factory finished materials.
Microbrewery (Added 04-28-2016; Ord. 733)
A facility that is licensed under Minnesota Statutes Section 304A or other applicable
laws of the State of Minnesota may brew no more than 20,000 barrels of its own brands
of malt liquor annually. Along with meeting the requirements of the State of Minnesota
the entity must also meet the Federal requirements of the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and
Trade Bureau.
Micro Distillery (Added 04-28-2016; Ord. 733)
A distillery producing premium, distilled spirits in total quantity not to exceed 40,000-
proof gallons in a calendar year as regulated by Minnesota Statutes. Along with meeting
the requirements of the State of Minnesota the entity must also meet the Federal
requirements of the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau.
Mixed Occupancy Building
Where two or more types of occupancies are combined in the same building.
Mixed Waste Reclamation Facility
A facility for the removal and/or reclamation of recyclable materials from solid waste. A
Mixed Waste Reclamation Facility shall not be deemed to include a recycling center.
(Rev. 06-26-08, Ord. #618)
Mobile Home Parks
Any premises on which two or more mobile homes, or any premises used or held out for
the purpose of supplying to the public a parking space for two or more of such mobile
homes. Sales lots on which automobiles or unoccupied mobile homes, new or used, are
parked for purposes of inspection or sale are not included in this definition. For purposes
of this Ordinance, mobile home parks shall be considered a RM-1, Residential Manufactured
Housing District.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 20
Motel/Hotel
A building or group of buildings used primarily for the temporary residence of motorists
or travelers.
Multiple Dwelling
A structure designed or used for residential occupancy by more than one family, with or
without separate kitchen or dining facilities, including apartment houses, boarding and
rooming houses, boarding hotels, hospital or nursing homes.
Nonconforming Use
Any use of land established before the effective date of this ordinance which does not
conform to the use restrictions of a particular zoning district. This should not be confused
with substandard dimensions of a conforming use.
Nursery
A place for propagation, cultivation, growth, sale, and storage of plants, flowers, vines,
fruits, vegetables, and similar agricultural products, including materials integral to proper
nursery operation from seed or stock and products purchased elsewhere and transplanted
into pots or soil.
Nursing Home
A nursing home as defined by Minnesota Statute, Chapter 144A.01, subdivision 5, is a
facility or that part of a facility which provides nursing care to five or more persons. This
does not include a facility or that part of a facility which is a hospital, a hospital with approved
swing beds as defined in Section 144.562, clinic, doctor’s office, diagnostic or
treatment center, or a residential program licensed pursuant to Section 245A.01 to
254A.16 or 252.28. In addition, the Minnesota Department of Health Rules Chapter
4655.0100, subchapter 8 defines nursing homes as a licensed facility or unit used to
provide care for aged or infirmed persons who require nursing care and related services
including bedside care, administration of medications, irrigations and catheterizations,
applications of dressings or bandages, rehabilitative nursing techniques, and other
treatments prescribed by a physician which require technical knowledge, skill, and
judgment as possessed by a registered nurse. Furthermore, the dietary, social, spiritual,
educational, and recreational needs of these patients shall be fulfilled. The director of
the nursing service shall be a registered nurse employed 40 hours per week during the
day shift. A registered nurse or licensed practical nurse shall be employed so that onsite
nursing coverage is provided eight hours per day, seven days per week during the
day shift. Provisions shall also be made for a registered nurse to be on call during all
hours when a registered nurse is not on duty.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 21
Office
Commercial or professional activities that take place in a building or portion of a building,
but where goods are not purchased, sold, or repaired. These include banks, general
offices, governmental offices, insurance, real estate, travel agency, and similar uses.
Off-Site Advertising Sign
A sign that is located on a lot, tract or parcel of land that is a lot, tract or parcel other
than the one on which the goods or services being advertised are sold.
On-site Advertising Sign
A sign, free standing, attached, or painted, located on the property where the goods or
services being advertised are available.
Off-Street Parking Lot
A facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles for
maneuvering, so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than
three vehicles.
Open Space
Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated,
designed, or reserved by a developer or governmental unit for public or private use.
Open Space, Common
A parcel or parcels of land or areas of water or a combination of land and water within a
development which is designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of residents of
the development. Common open space includes all land in excess of the individual
building lots and land accepted for public dedication.
Outside Display Area
An area in a commercial district set aside for the display of materials and/or products for
sale or lease.
Parking Lot Surface, Durable and Dustless (Ord. 611; Revised 01-10-08)
The use of one of the following surface materials for temporary parking lots for up to
one year:
A. Uniformly graded ¾” crushed – six inches (6”) in depth; or
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 22
B. Recycled bituminous or concrete – six inches (6”) in depth; or
C. Class five aggregate – six inches (6”) in depth – with seal coat applied as follows:
All aggregate base class five parking lots and/or driveways shall be seal coated
with a CRS-2 asphalt emulsion at a rate of 0.35 gallons per square yard with an
FA-2 aggregate chip or pea rock applied at a rate to prevent tracking. Other seal
coat designs may be used with the approval of the City Engineer.
Parking Lot Surface, Hard (Ord. 611 Revised 01-10-08)
The permanent use of one of the following materials for parking lots:
A. Hot mix asphalt pavement; or
B. Portland cement/concrete pavement; or
C. Concrete paver bricks.
Parking Space
An area of definite length and width designed for parking of motor vehicles. Said area
shall be exclusive of drives, aisles, or entrances giving access thereto and shall be fully
accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles.
Party Wall
A common wall which divides two independent structures.
Permitted Uses
A term used in zoning ordinances that refers to a list of uses that are specifically permitted
in a zoning district.
Planned Unit Development
"PUD" - (Townhouse, Condominium and other PUDs) means a type of development
which may incorporate a variety of land used planned and developed as a unit. The
planned unit development is distinguished from the traditional subdivision process of
development in that zoning standards, such as density, setbacks, height limits, and minimum
lot sizes may be altered by negotiation and agreement between the developer,
the municipality and any agencies whose jurisdiction would be affected.
(Rev. 07-08-04, Ord. #555)
Planning Commission
The Planning Commission of the City of Princeton, Minnesota.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 23
Pole Type Construction (Rev. 07-14-16; Ord. 738)
Also known as post frame, customized steel building, wood frame, pole buildings, etc. It
uses large poles or posts buried in the ground or on a foundation to provide the vertical
structural support and girts to provide horizontal support.
Practical Difficulties (Added 09-08-2011; Ord. 672)
As used in connection with a variance under this ordinance, means that (1) the property
owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by the zoning
ordinance; (2) the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property
not created by the landowner; and (3) the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality. Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties.
Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to direct
sunlight for solar energy systems.
Principal Building
A building in which is conducted the principal use of the zoned lot upon which it is situated.
Principal Use
The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses.
A “principal use” may be either permitted or conditional.
Proof Gallons (Added 04-28-2016; Ord. 733)
A proof gallon is one liquid gallon of spirits that is 50% alcohol at 60 degrees F. Distilled
Spirits bottled at 80 proof (40% alcohol) would be 0.8 proof gallons per gallon of liquid.
Public/Quasi-Public Facilities
Uses such as schools, churches, and government buildings and facilities, including
parks, playgrounds, trails, and other recreational areas.
Public Utility
A corporation, municipal department, board, or commission duly authorized to furnish
and furnishing under federal, state, or municipal regulations to the public gas, steam,
electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation, or water.
Recreation Facility
A recreation facility is an indoor (enclosed) or outdoor (open) building or area in which
people engage in active physical conditioning, recreation, or sports activities.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 24
Recreation Vehicle
Any device having wheels and capable of supporting overnight sleeping accommodations
and designed for uses in addition to normal travel.
Recycling Center
A facility for the collection of non-putrescible recyclable materials which have been separated
at their source (source-separated) prior to shipment to others who will use those
materials to manufacture new products. A Recycling Center shall be deemed to exclude
a Landfill, Junkyard, Auto Repair, and Mixed Waste Recycling Center as defined by the
City Zoning Ordinance. (Rev. 06-26-08, Ord. #618)
Restaurant (Rev. 03-10-16; Ord. 731)
An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor or manager,
where meals are regularly prepared on the premises, where full waitress/waiter table
service is provided, where a customer orders food from printed menus, and where the
main food course is served and consumed while seated at a single location. To be a
restaurant as defined by this section, an establishment shall have a license from the
state as required by Minnesota Statutes, Section 157.16, as it may be amended from
time to time, and meet the definition of either a “small establishment,” “medium establishment,”
or “large establishment” as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 157.16,
subd. 3d, as it may be amended from time to time. An establishment which serves prepackaged
food that receives heat treatment and is served in the package or frozen pizza
that is heated and served shall not be considered to be restaurant for purposes of
this Ordinance unless it meets the definitions of a “small establishment,” “medium establishment,”
or “large establishment.”
Retail/Service Establishment
Stores and shops selling personal services or goods over a counter. These include antiques;
art and school supplies; auto accessories, bakeries; barber shop; beauty salons;
bicycles; books and stationary; candy; cameras and photographic supplies; carpets and
rugs; catering establishment; china and glassware; Christmas tree sales; clothing;
drugs; dry goods; dry cleaning and laundry; electrical and household appliances, sales
and repair; florist; food; furniture; furrier shops; garden supplies (year-round only); gifts;
hardware; hats; hobby shops; hotels; medical and dental offices; laundromats; leather
goods and luggage; locksmith shops; music shops; instruments, records, tape cassettes;
office supply equipment; paint and wallpaper; photography studios; restaurants;
shoes; sporting goods; tailoring; theater (non-open-air); tobacco; toys; variety stores;
video stores; and other similar type uses.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 25
Right-of-Way
The land covered by a public road or other land dedicated for public use or for certain
private use such as land over which a power line passes.
Roof Line
The uppermost line of the roof of a building, or in the case of an extended facade, the
uppermost height of said facade.
Setback
The minimum horizontal distance between a structure and the ordinary high water level
bluffline, road and highway right-of-way, alley, and/or lot line or property line.
Shooting Range (Indoor) – (Amended 7-25-13, Ord 698)
A facility designated or operated primarily for the use of firearms or archery.
Shopping Center
An integrated grouping of retail/service establishments under single ownership.
Solar Energy (Amended 6-7-17, Ord. 752)
See Chapter XI for the definitions.
Strip Centers/Strip Malls
A commercial building composed of two or more commercial retail shops or services
each having its own entrance to the outside and/or from a common interior space or
mall and sharing a common parking lot under a single ownership. This includes strip
mall, strip center, shopping center, shopping mall, and similar uses or developments.
Story
That part of a building included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the
next floor, or if there is not floor above, then the ceiling next above. A basement shall
not be counted as a story.
Structure
A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy, or ornamentation
whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or water.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 26
Structure, Alterations
Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns,
beams, or girders, or any change in the dimension of configuration of the roof or exterior
walls.
Structures, Nonconforming
Any use within the land use district existing prior to the date of enactment of this ordinance
which is permitted within the applicable land use district but does not meet the
minimum lot area, length of water frontage, structure setbacks, or other dimensional
standards of this ordinance.
Subdivision
Improved or unimproved land or lands which are divided for the purpose of ready sale
or lease, or divided successively within a five year period for the purpose of sale or
lease, into three or more lots or parcels of less than five acres each, contiguous in area
and which are under common ownership or control.
Swimming Pool
Any enclosure, above or below grade, having a water surface area exceeding 100
square feet and a water depth greater than 18 inches at any point.
Tap Room (Added 04-28-2016; Ord. 733)
A state licensed brewer under Minnesota Statutes Section 304A or other applicable
laws of the State of Minnesota permitting the on-sale consumption of malt liquor produced
by the brewer for consumption on the premises of a brewery or an abutting property
in common ownership of the brewer, which may include the sales of malt liquor
produced and packaged at the brewery for off premises consumption as allowed by
Minnesota Statutes. Along with meeting the requirements of the State of Minnesota the
entity must also meet the Federal requirements of the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and
Trade Bureau.
Theater
A place having the primary intent of presenting live plays, concerts, cinema, or other
visual entertainment to the public.
Tower
Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof taller than 15
feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for
the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above
grade.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 27
Townhouse
A single-family dwelling unit occupying its own lot, but attached to one or more other
units by a common wall or walls. The term “end”, when used in connection with a townhouse,
refers to the unit which has only one abutting wall with another unit. The term
“interior”, when used in connection with a townhouse, refers to a unit located and abutting
two other units.
Twinhome
Two single-family dwelling units each occupying its own lot, but attached to one another
or abutting one another at the lot line.
Urban Services
Urban services are services necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such
utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety, or welfare.
Variance (Rev. 09-08-2011; Ord.672)
Any modification or variation of official controls where it is determined that by reason of
unique circumstances not created by the owner, there are practical difficulties in complying
with the zoning ordinance. (See practical difficulties)
Wetlands
An area where water stands near, at, or above the soil surface during a significant portion
of most years, saturating the soil and supporting a predominantly aquatic form of
vegetation, and which may have the following characteristics:
A. Vegetation belonging to the marsh, bog, fen, sedge meadow, shrubland, southern
lowland forest, and northern lowland forest communities as described by the U. S.
Fish and Wildlife Services.
B. Mineral soils with grey horizons or organic soils (peat and muck).
C. Soil which is waterlogged or covered with water at least three (3) months of the
year.
Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
A separate chapter of this ordinance intended for the controlling of riverland development
to protect and preserve the outstanding scenic, recreational, historic, and scientific
values of the Rum River.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 28
Yard
The area between any lot line and the setback required there from.
A. Yards, Front
A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and extending
from the front lot line to the front of the principal building or any projections thereof.
The front Yard shall be facing a public street. In the case of corner lots where
two or more sides of a lot front on a street, the property owner shall determine
which side shall be the front for the purpose of establishing setback requirements.
B. Yard, Rear
A yard extending across the rear of a lot, measured between the side lot lines,
and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear
of the principal building including any projections. On interior lots the rear yard
shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. In the case
of through lots and corner lots, there will be no rear yards, but only front
and side yards.
C. Yard, Side
An open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the
front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the
nearest point of the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building.
D. Yard, Street Side
An open space between a main building and street right-of-way line on a corner
lot, extending from the front yard to the rear (side yard).
Zero Lot Line
The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the building's
sides rest directly on a lot line.
Zoning District
An area within the limits of the zoning jurisdiction for which the regulations and requirements
governing use, lot, and bulk of structures and premises are uniform.
Chapter II – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota II - 29
Zoning District Map
A map showing the boundaries of the zoning districts and designated as the "Zoning
Map."
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-04 III - 1 Princeton, Minnesota
Chapter III
General Provisions
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
morals, and welfare.
B. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this ordinance are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law,
ordinance, statute, resolution, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are
more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail.
C. Except as in this ordinance specifically provided, no structure shall be erected,
converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or altered, and no structure or land shall be
used for any purpose or in any manner which is not in conformity with this ordinance.
D. When land is annexed to the City of Princeton, said land shall be zoned A-1 Agricultural.
The annexed area shall remain A-1 Agricultural until proper zoning is determined
and adopted.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the several provisions of
this ordinance are separable. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any
provision of this ordinance to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions
of this ordinance not specifically included in said judgment.
1. Application of this Ordinance
2. Separability
Chapter III – General Provisions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-04 III - 2 Princeton, Minnesota
The Zoning Ordinance establishes separate and distinct districts, each of which is appropriate
for certain specified uses and conditions. It is the purpose of this section to
provide for the regulation of existing structures and uses that do not conform to the requirements,
circumstances, and conditions under which the nonconforming structure or
use may be continued. A nonconformity that is determined by the City to be detrimental
to the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan may be acquired by the City by
purchase at fair market value. It is the intent of this section that all nonconforming uses
shall eventually be eliminated or made to comply with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
A. Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this ordinance may
be continued at the size and in the same manner of operation existing upon such
date except as hereinafter specified.
B. Nothing in this ordinance, except Chapter III, Sec. 4., shall prevent the placing of a
structure in safe condition when said structure is declared unsafe by the City (rectifying
to safe condition).
C. When any lawful nonconforming use of any structure or land in any district has
been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to any nonconforming
use.
D. Residential structures shall be considered non-conforming uses in the commercial
districts. If a residential structure in the B-1 or B-2 district is destroyed by over 50%
due to fire or natural causes, the dwelling may be reconstructed in the same footprint
as the original structure but may not be expanded in size.
E. Whenever a lawful, nonconforming use of a building or structure or land is discontinued
for a period of 12 months, any future use of said building or structure or
land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
F. Normal maintenance of a building or other structure contained or related to a lawful
nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and
incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
G. Alterations may be made to a structure or building containing lawful nonconforming
residential units when they will improve the livability thereof, provided they will
not increase the number of dwelling units.
H. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination,
removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status
of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection is defined as dam-
3. Nonconforming Uses
Chapter III – General Provisions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-04 III - 3 Princeton, Minnesota
age to an extent of more than 50 percent of the replacement cost at the time of
destruction.
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance by reason of restrictions
on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements
concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in any way even if
the proposed expansion, change or alteration does not specifically increase the
nonconforming dimension(s).
B. Whenever a lawful nonconforming structure or use has been damaged by fire or
peril to the extent of fifty (50) percent or more of its fair market value as estimated
by the City Council and a building permit has been applied for within one hundred
eighty (180) days of when the property is damaged, the Council may impose reasonable
conditions upon a building permit in order to mitigate any newly created
impact on adjacent property. If no building permit is applied for within one hundred
eighty (180) days, any future use of the structure or land shall be in full conformity
with the provisions of this title.
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and
customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, notwithstanding limitations imposed
by other provisions of this Ordinance. Such lot must be in separate ownership
and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision
shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or
both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements
other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform
to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained through action of the Planning Commission.
If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous
frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this
Ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot
width and the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes
of this Ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner
4. Nonconforming Structures (Rev. 11-18-2010; Ord. 658)
5. Nonconforming Lots of Record
Chapter III – General Provisions
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-04 III - 4 Princeton, Minnesota
which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this
Ordinance, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width
or area below the requirements stated in this Ordinance unless the lot split is approved
by the City Council and public hearing is held by the Planning Commission.
A. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time
of construction of the principal building to which it is an accessory.
B. Accessory buildings shall not be erected or located within any front yard.
C. No accessory building or detached garage per single-family home shall occupy
more than a total of 25 percent of a rear yard, or exceed 800 square feet of total
floor area. Garages which exceed the aforementioned maximum may be allowed
with a Conditional Use Permit.
D. A permit is required for all swimming pools and tennis courts. Swimming pools
shall be fenced and not located within front yards.
E. Antennas and towers may be approved as a conditional use, subject to the standards
in Chapter IV.
F. All accessory buildings attached to the principal building on a lot, shall be made
structurally a part thereof and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of
this Ordinance applicable to the principal building.
G. In business and industrial districts, accessory buildings such as buildings for parking
attendants, gate houses and transformer buildings, may be located in the front
or side yards.
H. Storage longer than thirty (30) days of automobiles and other motor vehicles is
permitted in the front and side yards in all Districts except Residential.
I. Uses for employee benefits such as: day care facilities, cafeteria, training facilities,
recreation facilities, etc.
J. No accessory building, accessory structure, or garage shall at any time be used as
living quarters, temporarily or permanently.
6. Accessory Buildings and Uses (Rev. 01-26-12; Ord. 678)
Zoning Ordinance
Revised 03-14 IV - 1 Princeton, Minnesota
Chapter IV
Administration
and Enforcement
The Zoning Administrator, appointed by the City Council, shall enforce the provisions of
this ordinance and any amendment thereto and shall have the power to certify zoning
compliance and to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out the
duties in the enforcement of this ordinance. The Zoning Administrator shall:
a. Enforce and administer the provisions of this Ordinance;
b. Receive applications for conditional use permits and forward, along with recommendations,
to the Planning Commission;
c. Receive applications for variance requests and forward, along with recommendations,
to the Planning Commission;
d. Receive applications for zoning amendments and forward, along with recommendations,
to the Planning Commission;
e. Maintain all records relating to the application for and deliberations relating to the
issuance or denial of permits;
f. Develop and maintain a public information bureau relating to local development
issues;
g. Maintain the Official Zoning Map
Any person, firm, corporation, or voluntary association which violates or refuses to com-
1. Violations and Penalties
Chapter IV – Administration and Enforcement
Zoning Ordinance
Revised 03-14 IV - 2 Princeton, Minnesota
ply with any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, except
those violations specifically subject to administrative fines under this ordinance. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Requests may be made for variances from the literal provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
in instances when the applicant for the variance establishes that there are practical difficulties
in complying with the Zoning Ordinance. The Planning Commission may impose
appropriate conditions in conformity with this ordinance if those conditions are directly
related to and bear a rough proportionality to the impact created by the variance. When
such conditions are made part of the terms under which the variance is granted, violation
of the conditions is a violation of this ordinance.
A. Procedure
1. Application for Permit
An applicant desiring a variance shall fill out and submit to the Princeton Zoning
Administrator an Application for Consideration of Variance Request form,
copies of which are available from the Zoning Administrator. The appropriate
fee shall be paid in order for the application to receive consideration by the
Planning Commission.
2. Public Hearing
The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing within 45
days of receipt of each completed application for a Variance after notice of
the hearing has been published in the official newspaper at least 10 days before
said hearing. The Planning Commission shall also cause a notice to be
mailed to each of the owners of property located within 350 feet of the
boundary lines of the property upon which such use has been requested.
The Planning Commission decision will serve as the final ruling and the decision
will be reported to the City Council for information only.
3. Appeal
An appeal of any administrative decision made in the enforcement of this Ordinance
shall made by completing and submitting an Application for Appeal,
which is available from the Zoning Administrator, to the Zoning Administrator
within thirty (30) days of the public hearing. Such appeal shall be heard by
the Board of Adjustments within sixty (60) days of the date that such appeal
is submitted to the Zoning Administrator.
2. Variances (Rev. 09-08-11; Ord. 672)
Chapter IV – Administration and Enforcement
Zoning Ordinance
Revised 03-14 IV - 3 Princeton, Minnesota
B. Standards
A variance shall not be granted by the Planning Commission unless it conforms to
the following standards:
1. Is the variance in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the zoning
ordinance?
2. Is the variance consistent with the Comprehensive Plan?
3. Does the property owner propose to use the property in a reasonable manner
not permitted by the zoning ordinance?
4. Are there circumstances unique to this property not created by the landowner?
5. Will the issuance of the variance maintain the essential character of the
locality?
6. Does the alleged practical difficulty involve more than economic considerations?
A. Procedure amended 3-8-12 #682
1. Application for Permit
An applicant desiring a Conditional Use Permit shall fill out and submit to the
Princeton Zoning Administrator an Application for Conditional Use form, copies
of which are available from the Zoning Administrator. The appropriate fee
shall be paid in order for the application to receive consideration by the Planning
Commission.
2. Public Hearing
The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on each application
for a Conditional Use Permit after notice of the hearing has been
published in the official newspaper at least 10 days before said hearing. The
Planning Commission shall also cause a notice to be mailed to each of the
owners of property located within 350 feet of the boundary lines of the property
upon which such use has been requested. The Planning Commission
decision will serve as the final ruling and the decision will be reported to the
3. Conditional Use Permit (Rev. 03-08-12; Ord. 681)
Chapter IV – Administration and Enforcement
Zoning Ordinance
Revised 03-14 IV - 4 Princeton, Minnesota
City Council for information only. If a determination for denial is made, findings
of fact shall be provided.
3. Appeal
Upon denial by the Planning Commission, the applicant shall have thirty (30)
days to file an appeal with the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be
heard by the Board of Adjustments within sixty (60) days of the date that
such appeal is submitted to the Zoning Administrator.
B. Standards
The Planning Commission shall grant a Conditional Use Permit and shall order the
issuance of such permit only if it finds that such use at the proposed location complies
with the following standards:
1. The proposed use does not violate the health, safety or general welfare of
Princeton residents.
2. The proposed use has been reviewed and approved by the City Engineer in
regards to erosion, runoff, water pollution, and sedimentation.
3. Adequate parking and loading is provided in compliance with the Ordinance.
4. Possible traffic generation and access problems have been addressed.
5. The proposed use can be accommodated with existing public services and
will not overburden the city’s service capacity.
6. The proposed use conforms to the City’s Comprehensive Plan and is compatible
with present and future land uses of the area.
C. Conditions
In approving any Conditional Use Permit, the Planning Commission may impose
conditions which it considers necessary to meet the standards of this ordinance
and to protect the best interests of the surrounding area or the City as a whole.
Failure by the applicant or property owner to comply with the conditions of approval
shall result in the revocation proceedings according to subsection E.
These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular
reference to vehicle and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow
and control, and access in case of fire or other catastrophe;
Chapter IV – Administration and Enforcement
Zoning Ordinance
Revised 03-14 IV - 5 Princeton, Minnesota
2. Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention
to the items in Subd. 1 and the economic, noise, glare, or odor effects of the
conditional use on nearby property;
3. Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the items in Subd. 1
and Subd. 2 above;
4. Utilities, with reference to location, availability, and compatibility;
5. Diking, fencing, screening, landscaping, or other facilities to protect adjacent
or nearby property;
6. Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic
safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties in the
district;
7. Required yards and other open space;
8. General compatibility with present and future land uses of the area; and
9. Hours of operation.
D. Expiration
The applicant or property owner shall make a complete application for all permits necessary
for operation of the conditional use permit within 12 months of the conditional use
permit approval, and the project shall be substantially complete within 24 months of issuance
of the first such permit. The Planning Commission has the authority to grant extensions
where reasonably necessary.
Failure by the applicant or property owner to initiate construction as stated above shall result
in the revocation proceedings according to subsection E.
E. Revocation
1. Appropriate notice and public hearing process, according to subsection A.2, shall
take place prior to the revocation of a conditional use permit.
2. Revocation of a conditional use permit shall be based upon factual evidence and
include findings of fact.
No change shall be made in the boundary line of the districts or in the use, height, or
area regulation of any district or change of requirements except after a public hearing
4. Rezoning Procedure
Chapter IV – Administration and Enforcement
Zoning Ordinance
Revised 03-14 IV - 6 Princeton, Minnesota
and upon the two-thirds vote of the City Council. Such change shall be made only as
follows:
A. By Initiative of the City Council or City Planning Commission
The City Council or City Planning Commission may, of its own initiative, change
boundaries of a district or a use, height, or area regulation of any district after a
public hearing and upon two-thirds vote of the Council. Notice of such hearing
shall be given in the same manner as specified in Section B below.
B. Request by a Property Owner
1. The Zoning Administrator shall, upon receiving a request for rezoning from
the property owner or owners affected, refer such request to the City Planning
Commission. Such request shall be accompanied by a fee listed in a
current fee schedule.
2. The City Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on any
request for rezoning after notice of such hearing has been published in the
official newspaper at least ten days before the hearing and shall also cause a
similar notice to be mailed at least ten days before the day of the hearing to
each owner of affected property and property situated wholly or partly within
350 feet of the property to which the rezoning relates. Any request for rezoning
shall be accompanied by a site plan and/or other descriptive material
clearly indicating how the property will be utilized. Failure to give mailed notice
to individual property owners, or defects in the notice, shall not invalidate
the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with this ordinance
has been made. The Planning Commission shall notify the City Council of its
recommendations within 15 days of a public hearing.
C. Planning Commission Recommendation
A Planning Commission recommendation shall be sought by the City Council prior
to any final City Council action regarding a rezoning request.
The Council shall, upon receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission,
place such request on the agenda of its regular meeting and decide the issue
within 30 days. Notification to the applicant shall be made of the Council's action.
(amended 3-27-14, ord 704)
A. Board Created
5. Board of Adjustments
Chapter IV – Administration and Enforcement
Zoning Ordinance
Revised 03-14 IV - 7 Princeton, Minnesota
The City Council shall act as Board of Adjustments or may by resolution appoint a
Board of Adjustments. Staff services for the Board shall be furnished by the Zoning
Administrator.
B. Powers and Duties of the Board
The Board of Adjustments shall have the power and duty of hearing and deciding
appeals in the following cases:
1. Appeals
An Appeal may be taken where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Planning Commission,
the Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, or other City Staff Member
in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision Regulations.
C. Procedures
1. Filing for Appeal
Appeals may be made by any affected person by filing a notice of appeal
with the City Clerk within 15 days after the decision from which the appeal is
taken. Notice of Appeal must be filed on forms provided by the City, including
all information requested and payment of the filing fee.
2. Decision by Board
Upon filing for an appeal from a Notice of Appeal the City Administrator administrative
order or determination, the Board shall set a date for hearing
thereon which shall be no later than forty-five (45) days from the date of filing,
and the Board shall hear the applicant and such persons as wish to be
heard, either in person or by agent or attorney. Notice of any such hearing
shall be mailed not less than 10 days before the date of hearing to the person
who filed the appeal, and in the case of an appeal involving a request for
variance, rezoning, conditional use permit or plat, to each owner of property
situation wholly or partly within 350 feet of the Applicant’s property. Failure to
give mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall
not invalidate the proceedings provided a bona fide attempt to comply with
this ordinance has been made. Within 15 days after the hearing, the Board
shall make its order deciding the Appeal and serve a copy of such order upon
the Appellant by mail.
3. Form of Action Taken and Record Thereof
The Board shall provide a record of its proceedings which shall include a
tape recording of the proceedings, the minutes of its meeting, its findings of
Chapter IV – Administration and Enforcement
Zoning Ordinance
Revised 03-14 IV - 8 Princeton, Minnesota
fact, and the action taken on the Appeal, including its final order. The Board’s
final order shall be served on the Appellant by U.S. Mail
4. Further Appeal from the Board’s decision shall be filed in the appropriate
Court and served on the City Clerk within 33 days of the Clerk’s mailing of
the Board’s final order to the Appellant. In the event of further Appeal, Appellant
shall provide to the Court and the Board, a copy of the transcript of the
Board’s Appeal Proceeding taken from the Board’s tape recording by a certified
Minnesota Court Reporter. The Board’s final order remains in effect unless
stayed by the Court.
Chapter IV – Administration and Enforcement
Zoning Ordinance
Revised 03-14 IV - 9 Princeton, Minnesota
An interim use permit as defined in Chapter II may be issued using the following procedure:
A. Procedure
1. Request for interim uses, as provided within this chapter, shall be filed with
the Zoning Administrator on an official application form.
2. The Planning Commission shall prepare a findings of fact after holding a public
hearing in the manner provided in M.S. § 462.357, as it may be amended
from time to time. If, in the opinion of the city, the interim use requested is
appropriate for the property in question, the Planning Commission shall prepare
findings of fact supporting issuance of the permit.
3. The appropriateness of any interim use for a specific property shall be determined
by the resolution of the City Council, adopted by at least a simple majority,
after their review of all evidence presented including the findings of fact
prepared by the Planning Commission.
B. Findings of Fact
When reviewing an application for an interim use, the city shall base its judgment
on the following factors and any other factors it may deem appropriate for the specific
property. The interim use may be granted if:
1. The proposed use is an interim use listed in the district in which the application
is being made;
2. The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified with certainty
and continued;
3. The interim use does not result in adverse effects on the public health, safety
and welfare nor does it create additional pollution potential for ground and
surface waters;
4. Permission of the use will not impose additional costs on the public if it is
necessary for the public to take the property in the future.
C. Conditions of Approval
The user agrees to any and all conditions that the city deems appropriate for permission
of the use. The conditions may include but are not limited to:
6. INTERIM USES (Rev. 11-18-10; Ord. 658)
Chapter IV – Administration and Enforcement
Zoning Ordinance
Revised 03-14 IV - 10 Princeton, Minnesota
1. A performance bond for the entire period of the interim use sufficient to cover
any future costs the city may incur to enforce the provisions of the interim
use permit;
2. Hours of operation, parking restrictions, lighting restrictions, screening, landscaping,
fencing, signing restrictions, noise restrictions and the like.
D. Review of Permit
Failure of the city to specifically note conditions or restrictions does not waive the
city’s ability to enforce existing codes or hold a subsequent hearing and delete or
impose additional conditions upon the property at any time. The Planning Commission
shall review the interim use permit after eleven months have expired and
recommend to the Council whether the use approved under the interim use permit
shall be continued. If continued, the permit is subject to all other restrictions, subsequent
revisions and provisions listed herein.
E. Longevity, Termination and Expiration
1. Any interim use may be terminated by a change in this chapter or violations
of any of the conditions imposed after the original or subsequent hearings
held by the city.
2. Any interim use permit issued by the city automatically expires upon the termination
date noted in the permit or upon change of the ownership of the
property, whichever comes first.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-08 Princeton, Minnesota V (2) A-1 - 1
2. A-1 Agricultural
A. Intent
The intent of the A-1 Agricultural District is to preserve the rural character of the
district until such time as the land use is determined.
B. Permitted Uses
In the A-1 Agricultural District, no building or land shall be used and no building
shall be erected, converted, or structurally altered unless otherwise provided
herein, except for one or more of the following uses:
• Airports, cemeteries, and public uses;
• Farm access buildings and related structures;
• Game farms;
• Golf courses;
• One family detached dwelling units;
• Raising of non-domestic livestock or dairying not to exceed five animals;
• Raising poultry or bees;
• Nursery and greenhouses;
• Accessory structures to principal building.
C. Conditional Uses/Interim Uses
The following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use
permit:
• Permanent stands for the sale of agricultural products produced on the
premises.
• Recycling Center (Revised 06-26-08, Ord. #618)
The following uses are permitted by the issuance of an interim use permit as
outlined in Section IV, subsection 6:
• Raising of more than five (5) non-domestic livestock animals
D. General Requirements
All structures hereinafter erected shall conform to the following:
• Not more than one residential structure shall be permitted per a 40-acre tract of
land;
• Not more than one residential structure shall be permitted per platted lot of
record as of the date of this ordinance or date of annexation;
• Exterior metal siding and/or exterior metal roofing shall be permitted;
• Pole-type construction shall be permitted.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 V (2) A-1 - 2 Princeton, Minnesota
E. Front Yard Setback
Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than 50 feet.
F. Rear Yard Setback
Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than 30 feet.
G. Side Yard Setback
Each lot shall have side yards of not less than 30 feet.
H. Lot Size
N/A
I. Lot Width
N/A
J. Maximum Height
N/A
K. Recycling Center Standards (Revised 06-26-08, Ord. #618)
• The Recycling Center shall be screened from adjacent use by the use of an
opaque fence a minimum of 6 feet and not exceeding 10 feet in height.
• All necessary State and Federal permits shall be maintained on file with the
City.
• The City shall inspect the site no less than annually for compliance with the
conditions of approval.
• Signage shall be limited to 32 square feet of total signage visible from any
public road.
• The Recycling Center shall at all times be in compliance with Minnesota
Statutes Section 609.675 (doors of refrigerators or other containers to be
removed or made inaccessible to children.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, Minnesota V (3) A-2 - 1
3. A-2 Agricultural
A. Intent
The intent of the A-2 Agricultural District is to preserve uses related to farming and agricultural
production, as well as commercial and semi-commercial activities of the Mille
Lacs County Fair.
B. Permitted Uses
• Animal shows;
• Craft shows;
• Carnivals;
• Public uses;
• One family detached dwelling (1/40 acres);
• Agricultural-related accessory buildings;
• Raising of crops;
• Indoor storage of vehicles, boats, etc.;
• Camping for 7 or fewer days;
• Special events, such as tractor pulls, demolition derby, concerts, etc., in conjunction
with the Mille Lacs County Fair
• Special events not in conjunction with the Mille Lacs County Fair with approval
by the City Council.
C. Conditional Uses
The following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit:
• Automobile racing;
• Camping for periods of more than 7 days;
• Raising of non-domestic animals;
• Public buildings and facilities.
The following uses are permitted by the issuance of an interim use permit as outlined
in Section IV, subsection 6:
* Raising of more than five (5) non-domestic livestock animals
D. General Conditions
All structures hereinafter erected shall conform to the following:
• Pole-type construction is permitted;
• No use may constitute a nuisance as determined by the City Council;
• No animal or agricultural waste or byproduct is allowed which produces an
odor beyond the boundary of the property.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, Minnesota V (3) A-2 - 2
E. Setbacks
Each building shall have a minimum setback from the property line of:
Front 50 feet
Rear 50 feet
Side 50 feet
`
Yard Requirements For A-2 District
One Family Other Buildings
A. Lot area minimum square feet 40 Acres ---
B. Lot width minimum feet --- ---
C. Maximum lot coverage See note1 See note1
D. Front yard minimum setback 50 feet 50 feet
E. Side yard minimum setback 50 feet 50 feet
F. Rear yard minimum setback 50 feet 50 feet
G. Maximum height 35 feet 35 feet
1 No more than 50 percent of the area of the parcel, or adjoining parcels if under single ownership,
may be covered more than 50 percent with impervious service, including buildings, parking
lots, roadways and drives, sidewalks, or other permanent impervious surfaces.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev.01-12-2017 Princeton, Minnesota
V (4) R-1 - 1
4. R-1 Residential
A. Statement of Intent
The R-1 Residential District is designed to be the most restrictive of the resident
districts. The intent is to provide for an environment of predominantly low density
one-family detached dwellings along with other residentially-related facilities which
serve the residents in the district. The average gross density for this district is 3 units
per acre or less.
B. Permitted Uses
In the R-1 Residential District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall
be erected, converted, or structurally altered unless otherwise provide herein, except
for one or more of the following, as well as similar uses:
* Single detached dwelling units;
* A state licensed residential facility or a housing with services establishment
registered under chapter 144D serving six or fewer persons;
* A licensed day care facility serving 12 or fewer persons;
* A group family day care facility licensed under Minnesota Rules, to serve 14
or fewer children;
* Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the site for a period
of time not in excess of such construction;
* Private swimming pool, tennis court, or other site necessary to conduct a home
sporting event;
* Accessory buildings related to the above principal use, but not exceeding 800
square feet;
* Parks & open space.
C. Conditional Uses
The following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit:
* Accessory buildings which exceed 800 square feet;
* Boarding, bed and breakfast, and lodging houses;
* Churches and places of public worship;
* Golf courses;
* Home occupations;
* Schools and educational buildings;
* Public buildings and facilities.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev.01-12-2017 Princeton, Minnesota
V (4) R-1 - 2
D. Interim Uses
The following uses are permitted by the issuance of an interim use permit as outlined
in Section IV, subsection 6:
* Commercial Licensed Daycare Facility serving 12 or more persons
* Housing and keeping of chickens, in accordance with section VI.2.AA (Rev.10-
11-2012; Ord. 691)
E. Yard Requirements For R-1 District (Amended Ord. #745)
One Family
Accessory
Buildings3
Other
Buildings 4
A. Lot area minimum square feet 12,500 sq. ft.
B. Lot width minimum feet 80 feet1
C. Maximum lot coverage 30% 0
D. Front yard minimum setback 30 feet2 ---
E. Side yard minimum setback 10 feet 5 feet
F. Street side yard minimum setback 20 feet 20 feet
G. Rear yard minimum/alley setback 30 feet 5 feet *15 feet
H. Maximum height 30 feet 15 feet
1 Lot width shall be taken at building setback line.
2 If, at the time of an application affecting the front yard setback, 50% or more of the then existing
dwellings having frontages on the same side street or road for three (3) blocks have an average front
yard setback different from that specified herein, then all buildings thereafter erected, altered, or
moved may conform to that average front yard depth as a minimum.
3 No accessory structures shall be allowed prior to the construction of the principal structure. No more
than one principal building may be located on one lot in a residential district.
4 See Conditional Use conditions Chapter 4.
*Attached garages that are built at the rear of the property.
F. Other Applicable Regulations amended 5-10-12 #683
1. All principal buildings for residential property shall have a permanent wood,
concrete, or masonry foundation which complies with the State Building Code
as adopted by the City of Princeton.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev.01-12-2017 Princeton, Minnesota
V (4) R-1 - 3
2. All siding and roofing used in residential construction shall consist of building
materials in common use in residential construction, but may also include
building materials which the Planning Commission finds to be similar in form,
function, and esthetics to building materials in common use in residential construction
(Rev. 05-10-2012; Ord. 683).
3. Pole-type construction shall not be permitted.
4. For a single-family dwelling, the minimum finished ground level main floor area
of the various kinds of dwellings shall be as follows:
a. one story with basement – 1000 square feet
one story without basement – 1100 square feet.
b. multi-story (bi-level) dwelling – 850 square feet.
5. All structures shall have at least a 24-foot width for 50% of the floor area. Width
measurements shall not take into account overhangs or other projections beyond
the principal exterior walls.
6. All structures will be required to connect to City water and sewer if available.
7. No accessory structures shall be allowed prior to the construction of the principal
structure.
8. It shall be required for all new single-family dwellings that there be an enclosed
garage for at least two cars, constructed of a minimum of three hundred ninetysix
(396) square feet (18’ x 22’). Total unattached garage space shall not exceed
800 square feet of gross area. The architectural style, color, and facing
material of a garage shall be compatible with the principal building.
9. Manufactured housing not meeting these requirements will be allowed in manufactured
home parks.
10. It shall be required that all front yards and side yards to the rear of the dwelling
and garage of a new single-family dwelling be sodded or seeded over a minimum
of four (4) inches of topsoil and that the work be completed at the time of
request for the certificate of occupancy.
11. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev.01-12-2017 Princeton, Minnesota
V (4) R-1 - 4
12. Before a certificate of occupancy will be issued, the following landscaping must
be completed: sodding in front and side yard and sodding or seeding in rear
yard; where seeding, integrated erosion control shall be used, e.g. bound
straw, decomposable mat. If because of weather conditions sodding and/or
seeding is unadvisable, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued
subject to the Contractor submitting a performance deposit to assure compliance
by no later than July 1st of the following year.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev.03-23-2017
V (5) R-2 -1 Princeton, Minnesota
5. R-2 Residential
A. Statement of Intent
The intent of the R-2 Residential District is to preserve the older historic areas of the
city, which was platted into small modest sized lots with a less restrictive zoning
district permitting a higher density but retaining the historic residential character of
the district. The average density for this district is 4 to 8 units per acre.
B. Permitted Uses
In the R-2 Residential District, no building or land shall be used or divided and no
building shall be erected, unless otherwise provided herein, except for one or more
of the following as well as similar uses:
* Any use permitted in R-1 District;
* Two-family dwellings;
* Conversion of single-family structures to a two-family unit when each unit contains
800 square feet of floor area or more;
* Twinhome;
* Accessory buildings not exceeding 800 square feet related to the above principal
use.
C. Conditional Uses
The following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit:
* Townhouse (up to 4 units);
* Condominiums (up to 4 units);
* Accessory buildings which exceed 800 square feet and heights exceeding 15
feet;
* Boarding, bed and breakfast, and lodging houses;
* Churches and places of public worship;
* Golf courses;
* Home occupations;
* Nursing homes;
* Public buildings and facilities;
* Schools and educational buildings;
* Commercial Licensed Daycare Facility serving 12 or more persons
D. Interim Uses (Rev. 10-11-2012; Ord. 691)
The following uses are permitted by the issuance of an Interim Use Permit:
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev.03-23-2017
V (5) R-2 -2 Princeton, Minnesota
* Housing and keeping of chickens, in accordance with section VI.2.AA
(Rev. 10-11-2012; Ord. 691)
* Uses as determined by the City Council.
E. Yard Requirements for R-2 District (Amended 01-12-17; Ord. 745, Amended 3-23-17; Ord. 747)
One
Family
Two-
Family
Dwelling
Twin
Home 9
Townhouse 9
Accessory
Use 6,7
Other
Building
10
A. Lot area minimum
square feet
9,800 12,500 6,000
Interior lots – 3,000
End lots – 6,000
B. Lot width minimum
feet 1
66
80
40
End lots (street
side) – 50 ft
End lots (nonstreet
side) – 40 ft
Interior lots – 25 ft
C. Maximum lot
coverage
40% 30% 30% 35%
D. Front yard minimum
setback (living area) 2
25
30 20 30
NA
E. Front yard minimum
setback (front porch) 3
20
F. Side yard minimum
setback (living area)
10
10 10 7 10 5 7
G. Side yard minimum
setback (garage) 4
5
H. Street side yard
minimum setback
20 20 20 20 20
I. Rear yard minimum
setback 5
30
30 30 30 5 15
J. Rear yard minimum
alley setback 11
5
10
K. Maximum height 30 30 30 30 24
1. Lot width shall be taken at building setback line,
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev.03-23-2017
V (5) R-2 -3 Princeton, Minnesota
2. If at the time of an application affecting the front yard setback, 50% or more of the
then existing dwellings having frontages on the same side of the street or road for
three (3) blocks have an average front yard setback different from that specified
herein, then all buildings thereafter erected, altered, or moved may conform to that
average front yard depth as a minimum.
3. Front yard setback may be reduced to twenty feet (20’) if the setback reduction
is for an attached living area or porch to the principal structure, not including the
garage, which does not exceed a total of one hundred twenty (120) feet of above
grade finished livable space. The exterior materials of the new living area or porch
shall be consistent or complementary in color, texture and quality with those visible
at the front of the dwelling. The roof of the new living area or porch is properly proportioned
to and integrated with the roof of the dwelling.
4. The side yard setback may be reduced to five feet (5’) if the setback reduction is
for the attached garage structure.
5. The rear yard setback may be reduced to twenty feet (20’) if the setback reduction
is for an attached living area to the principal structure (unless this reduction
would encroach on an existing utility easement), not including the garage, that
does not exceed a total of three hundred (300) square feet of above grade finished
livable space. In addition, there shall be a minimum of forty feet (40’) measured at
the closet point, between the attached living area and the neighboring principal.
6. No accessory structures shall be allowed prior to the construction of the principal
structure. No more than one principal building may be located on one lot in a Residential
district.
7. An accessory building, which is structurally attached to a principal building, shall
be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of this ordinance applicable to the
principal building. Any accessory building with sewer and water extensions shall be
by conditional use permit.
8. Accessory buildings for townhouses or twinhomes may be constructed up to the
interior lot line.
9. Where townhouses/twinhomes abut, no setback is required at the abutment.
10. See Conditional Use conditions chapter 4.
11. When the garage door opens into the lot the setback shall be 5 feet; when the
garage door opens into the alley the setback shall be 10’.
*Attached garages built at the rear of the property
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev.03-23-2017
V (5) R-2 -4 Princeton, Minnesota
12. Lot width could be subject to variance by Planning Commission when there are
conditions that prevent meeting the lot width requirement such as existing
structures preservation of a natural feature or to avoid a natural feature that may
cause problems in the future (steep slopes, wetlands, water courses).
F. Other Applicable Regulations amended 5-10-12 #683
1. All principal buildings for residential property shall have a permanent wood,
concrete, or masonry foundation which complies with the State Building Code
as adopted by the City of Princeton.
2. All siding and roofing used in residential construction shall consist of building
materials in common use in residential construction, but may also include
building materials which the Planning Commission finds to be similar in form,
function, and esthetics to building materials in common use in residential construction.
3. Pole-type construction shall not be permitted.
4. For a single-family dwelling, the minimum finished ground level main floor area
of the various kinds of dwellings shall be as follows:
a. one story with basement – 1000 square feet
one story without basement – 1100 square feet.
b. multi-story (bi-level) dwellings – 850 square feet.
5. For a two-family dwelling, the minimum finished floor area for one and twobedroom
units shall be 800 square feet per unit. Each additional bedroom beyond
two shall require an additional minimum of 120 square feet of finished
floor area.
6. All structures shall have at least a 24-foot width for 50% of the floor area. Width
measurements shall not take into account overhangs or other projections beyond
the principal exterior walls.
7. All structures will be required to connect to City water and sewer if available.
8. No accessory structures shall be allowed prior to the construction of the principal
structure.
9. It shall be required for all new one and two-family dwellings that for each unit
there be an enclosed garage for at least two cars, constructed of a minimum
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev.03-23-2017
V (5) R-2 -5 Princeton, Minnesota
of three hundred ninety-six (396) square feet (18’ x 22’). Total unattached garage
space shall not exceed 800 square feet of gross area. The architectural
style, color, and facing material of a garage shall be compatible with the principal
building.
10. Manufactured housing not meeting these requirements will be allowed in manufactured
home parks.
11. It shall be required that all front yards and side yards to the rear of the dwelling
and garage of a new single-family dwelling be sodded over a minimum of four
(4) inches of topsoil and that the work be completed at the time of request for
the certificate of occupancy.
12. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
13. Before a certificate of occupancy will be issued, the following landscaping must
be completed: sodding in front and side yard and sodding or seeding in rear
yard; where seeding, integrated erosion control shall be used, e.g. bound
straw, decomposable mat. If because of weather conditions sodding and/or
seeding is unadvisable, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued
subject to the Contractor submitting a performance deposit to assure compliance
by no later than July 1st of the following year.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
____________________________________________________________________________
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16
Princeton, Minnesota
V (6) R-3 - 1
6. R-3 Multi-Family Residential
A. Statement of Intent
The intent of the R-3 Multi-Family District is to create a district for the construction
and occupancy of multi-family type dwellings. The average density for this district is
7 to 16 units per acre.
B. Permitted Uses
In the R-3 Multi-Family District, no building or land shall be used and no building
shall be erected, converted, or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided
herein, except for one or more of the following, as well as similar uses:
* Any use permitted in R-2 District;
* Single family dwelling unit;
* Two family dwelling unit;
* Condominiums;
* Multi-family structures;
* Townhouses;
* Group homes or foster homes serving mentally retarded or physically handicapped
persons and licensed day care facilities not exceeding 16 persons;
* Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the site for a
period of time not in excess of such construction;
* Decorative landscape features including, but not limited to, pools, arbors,
hedges, walls, shrubs, and trees;
* Private garage and carport or parking space;
* Private swimming pool, tennis court, or other site necessary to conduct a
home sporting event;
* Accessory buildings not exceeding 1000 square feet related to the above
principal use;
* Parks & open spaces.
C. Conditional Uses/Interim Uses
The following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit:
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
____________________________________________________________________________
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16
Princeton, Minnesota
V (6) R-3 - 2
* A state licensed residential facility serving from 7 through 16 persons or a licensed
day care facility serving from 13 through 16 persons shall be considered
a permitted multifamily residential use of property for purposes of zoning.
* Accessory buildings which exceed 1000 square feet per dwelling unit;
* Churches and places of public worship;
* Golf courses;
* Home occupations; (Micro brewing is not an allowed use); (Rev. 07-14-16; Ord. 737).
* Nursing homes;
* Public buildings and facilities;
* Recreation facilities;
* Schools and educational buildings;
* Multi-family residential structures exceeding 30 feet in height as measured to the
eaves. In no case shall a multi-family residential structure exceed three stories
in height (Rev. 07-12-07; Ord. 604).
The following uses are permitted by the issuance of an interim use permit as outlined
in Section IV, subsection 6:
* Commercial Licensed Daycare Facility serving 12 or more persons
* Commercially Licensed Greenhouses adjacent to a collector road, subject to
the minimum performance standards outlines in Subsection E (Rev. 12-13-07;
Ord. 609).
* Housing and keeping of chickens, in accordance with section VI.2.AA (Rev. 10-
11-2012; Ord. 691)
D. Yard Requirements for R-3 District9, 10, 11
One-family
Accessory
Building
3,4,5
Twinhome
Duplex
a. Lot area minimum sq. ft. 12,500 sq. ft. 6,000 13,000
b. Lot width minimum ft. 80 feet 50 feet/
40 feet7
80 feet
c. Maximum lot coverage1 30% 35% 35%
d. Front yard minimum 30 feet 2 NA 30 feet 30 feet
e. Side yard minimum 10 feet 5 feet 10 feet 6 10 feet
f. Street side yard minimum 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
____________________________________________________________________________
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16
Princeton, Minnesota
V (6) R-3 - 3
g. Rear yard minimum 30 feet 5 feet 30 feet 30 feet
h. Maximum height 30 feet 15 feet 30 feet 30 feet
Townhouses Multi-family Other
Buildings
a. Lot area minimum sq. ft. End lots - 5,000 sq. ft.
Interior Lots - 2,500 sq. ft.
8
b. Lot width minimum ft. End lots (non-street side) - 40
End lots (street side) - 50 ft.
Interior lots - 25 ft.
100 feet
c. Maximum lot coverage1 40% 60%
d. Front yard minimum 30 feet 30 feet
e. Side yard minimum 10 feet 15 feet
f. Street side yard minimum 20 feet 20 feet
g. Rear yard minimum 20 feet 30 feet
h. Maximum height 30 feet Maximum 3
stories; height
exceeding 30
feet by CUP
only
(Rev. 07-12-
07; Ord. 604)
1. Lot width shall be taken at building setback line.
2. If at the time of an application affecting the front yard setback, 50% or more of the
then existing dwellings having frontages on the same side of street or road for three
(3) blocks have an average front yard setback different from that specified herein, then
all buildings thereafter erected, altered, or moved shall conform to that average front
yard depth as a minimum.
3. No accessory structures shall be allowed prior to the construction of the principal
structure. No more than one principal building may be located on one lot in a residential
district.
4. An accessory building which is structurally attached to a principal building, shall be
subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of this ordinance applicable to the
principle building.
5. Accessory buildings for townhouses or twinhomes may be constructed up to the
interior lot line.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
____________________________________________________________________________
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16
Princeton, Minnesota
V (6) R-3 - 4
6. Where townhouses/twinhomes abut, no setback is required at the abutment.
7. Lot width twinhome (non-street side).
8. 2,000 square feet lot area for each dwelling unit plus 200 square feet for each bedroom
over one bedroom per unit. Minimum lot area 12,500 square feet.
9. Conditional Use conditions in Chapter 4.
10. See other applicable regulations in District R-2.
11. All multi-family plans and specifications pertaining to site use design shall be approved
by the Planning Commission before any building permit is issued for a principal
use in this district. If the applicant feels the request was unjustly denied, the applicant
may appeal to the Board of Adjustments for relief.
E. Other Applicable Regulations
1. Single Family and Twinhomes – Same requirements as for R-2 District.
2. Before a certificate of occupancy will be issued, the following landscaping must
be completed: sodding in front and side yard and sodding or seeding in rear
yard; where seeding, integrated erosion control shall be used, e.g. bound
straw, decomposable mat. If because of weather conditions sodding and/or
seeding is unadvisable, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued
subject to the Contractor submitting a performance deposit to assure compliance
by no later than July 1st of the following year.
3. All non-residential uses within this district shall be subject to the following minimum
performance standards (Rev. 12-13-07; Ord. 609):
a. All access shall be restricted to a County State Aid Highway or other
collector roadway.
b. Parking areas shall be oriented away from residential sue and shall be
landscaped according to the performance standards section of this Ordinance.
c. No signage shall exceed 32 square feet in area or face a residential use.
d. all parking lot or signage lighting shall be directed away from any residential
use.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
____________________________________________________________________________
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16
Princeton, Minnesota
V (6) R-3 - 5
e. Hours of operation shall not extend earlier than 8 a.m. nor later than 6
p.m.
4. All siding and roofing used in residential construction shall consist of building
materials in common use in residential construction, but may also include
building materials which the Planning Commission finds to be in similar form,
function, and esthetics to building materials in common use in residential construction
(Rev. 05-10-12; Ord. 683).
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, Minnesota V (7) RM-1 - 1
7. RM-1 Residential Manufactured Housing
A. Intent
The intent of the RM-1 Residential Manufactured Housing District is to promote
health, safety, order, convenience, and general welfare by enforcing minimum
standards for mobile home parks, the location and use of mobile home parks, and
the design, construction, alteration, and arrangement of homes on said lots, authorizing
the inspection of mobile home parks, the licensing of operators, and fixing
penalties for violations. NO building or land shall be used and no building shall be
erected, converted, or structurally altered, unless otherwise provided herein.
B. Permits
1. Valid Permit
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, or extend any mobile
home park or structure within the park that is permanent in nature, where permanent
means structures that are not on wheels or mobile, within the limits of
the City of Princeton unless a valid permit for the specific construction, alteration,
or extension proposed is issued by the Building Official in the name of
such person.
2. Applications
All applications for permits shall contain a Preliminary Site Plan which must be
submitted to the Planning Commission for review and approval before any
building permits are issued and should be submitted to the Zoning Administrator
for staff review at least 28 days before the regularly scheduled Planning
Commission meeting. The Preliminary Site Plan must include the following
items:
a. Name and address of applicant.
b. Location and legal description of the mobile home park.
c. Complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed park including,
but not limited to, the following: the area and dimensions of the
tract of land; topography sketch of the land; the number, location, and size
of all mobile home lots; the location and width of roadways and walkways;
the location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes; plans and specifications
of the water supply and refuse and sewage disposal facilities; plans
and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed within
the mobile home park; the location and details of lighting electrical systems;
a landscaping plan approved by the City; and park ground area and
recreation equipment be shown on the landscaping plan.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, V (7) RM-1 - 2 Minnesota
No building permits or grading permits shall be issued for any mobile
home park development until the Final Plans are approved by the Zoning
Administrator. Said Final Plans must be in accordance with the above approved
Preliminary Plans or they must be reviewed and approved by the
Planning Commission before the Zoning Administrator can grant approval
to proceed.
C. Appeal
If approval of the preliminary or final plans is denied by the Planning Commission,
the applicant may file an Application for Appeal, which is available from the Zoning
Administrator, to the City Administrator within 30 days of the denial. Such appeal
shall be heard by the Board of Adjustment within sixty (60) days of the date that
such appeal is submitted to the Zoning Administrator.
D. Inspection of Mobile Home Parks
1. Compliance With Ordinance
The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections
as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this ordinance,
including the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or
public property for said purposes.
2. Registration Record
The Building Official, the Chief of Police, or their duly authorized representatives
shall have the power to inspect the register containing a record of all residents
of the mobile home park.
3. Access
It shall be the duty of the park management to give the Building Official free
access to all lots at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection.
4. Repairs
It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the owner
thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such mobile home park
at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as
are necessary to effect compliance with this ordinance.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, V (7) RM-1 - 3 Minnesota
E. Notices, Hearings, and Orders
1. Notice
Whenever the Building Official determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this ordinance,
the Building Official shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person to
whom the permit or license was issued, as hereinafter provided. Such notices
shall:
* Be in writing;
* Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
* Allow 30 days time for the performance of any act it requires. If work cannot
be completed in the 30-day period, extensions may be granted if reasons
for hardship do prevail and can be verified;
* Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require, provided
that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served
upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by registered
mail to his/her last known address, or when he/she has been served
with such notice by any method authorized or required by the laws of this
state.
2. Hearing
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with
the enforcement of any provision of this ordinance may request and shall be
granted a hearing of the same before the Planning Commission.
3. Emergency
Whenever the Building Official finds that an emergency exists which requires
immediate action to protect the public health or safety, an order may be ordered,
without notice of hearing, reciting the existence of such an emergency
and requiring that such action be taken as deemed necessary to meet the
emergency, including the suspension of the permit or license. Notwithstanding
any other provisions of this ordinance, such order shall be effective immediately.
Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately,
but upon petition to the Building Official, shall be afforded a hearing
before the Planning Commission as soon as possible. Pending any such hearing,
such emergency orders shall be in full force and effect until and unless
later removed, modified, or changed by the Building Official, the Planning
Commission, or the City Council.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, V (7) RM-1 - 4 Minnesota
F. Environmental, Open Space, and Access Requirements
1. General Requirements
Condition of soil, ground water level, drainage, and topography shall not
create hazards to the property or the health and safety of the occupants. The
site should not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors, or other adverse
influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable or sudden flooding.
2. Area
Minimum total park area shall be 10 acres.
3. Soil and Ground Cover Requirements
Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home park shall be
paved or covered with stone, screenings, or other solid material, or protected
with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating
objectionable dust.
4. Site Drainage Requirements
The ground surface in all parts of every mobile home park shall be graded and
equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner.
5. Use Requirements
a. No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except such
uses that are required for the direct servicing and well-being of park residents
and for the management and maintenance of the park.
b. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale
of a mobile home located on a mobile home stand and connected to the
pertinent utilities.
6. Required Separation Between Mobile Homes
a. Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings
and structures by at least 20 feet or the sum of the heights of both trailer
units, whichever is greater. Mobile homes placed end-to-end must have a
minimum clearance of 20 feet.
b. An accessory structure such as an awning, cabana, storage cabinet, carport,
windbreak, or porch which has an opaque top or roof, shall, for purposes
of all separation requirements, be considered to be part of the mobile
home.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, V (7) RM-1 - 5 Minnesota
c. Minimum lot sizes shall not be less than 5,000 square feet.
7. Open Space
A minimum of 400 square feet per mobile home shall be provided for definable
play areas and open space within the mobile home park and 100 square feet
per mobile home shall be provided that may be used for compound parking
space within the mobile home park. Such areas of open space, play area, and
compound parking area shall not be areas included within any setback nor
shall they include any areas of less than 20 feet in length or width.
8. Required Setbacks, Buffer Strips and Screening
a. All mobile homes shall be located at least 30 feet from any property boundary
line abutting upon a public street or highway and at least 20 feet from
other property boundary lines.
b. There shall be a minimum distance of 15 feet between the mobile home
stand and abutting park street.
c. All mobile home parks located adjacent to residential, recreational, commercial,
or industrial land uses shall provide screening, such as fences,
shrubs, and/or trees, which shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion
along the property line separating the park and such uses.
9. Cluster Development
Cluster development shall be encouraged. In such case, the Planning Commission
and City Council may vary or modify the strict application and requirements
of Section VI, Subd. 6, Subd. 7 and Subd. 8 as applied herein to
more readily accommodate this development concept.
10. Average Density
Notwithstanding the type of development used, the maximum density shall be
seven mobile homes per acre.
11. Accessory Buildings
a. One accessory building for outside storage of equipment and refuse is required
for the mobile home park. The accessory building shall be a minimum
of 48 square feet and shall be designed of weather resistant material
that will enhance the general appearance of the mobile home park.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, V (7) RM-1 - 6 Minnesota
One accessory building for outside storage of equipment and refuse will
be allowed for each individual mobile home site. The accessory building
cannot exceed the square footage of the principle building and shall be
designed of weather resistant material that will enhance the general appearance
of the mobile home park.
b. Emergency Shelter Building
Within three years of the adoption of this ordinance, all existing and future
mobile home park owners in the City shall provide emergency shelter for
their occupants. The shelter must be centrally located in the mobile home
park but must be within 700 feet of all park residents. It must be of sufficient
size to accommodate all residents of the park and be constructed to
standards of the City Code.
12. Park Street System and Car Parking
a. General Requirements
All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular
access from abutting public streets or roads to each mobile home lot.
Such access shall be provided by streets, driveways, or other means.
b. Park Entrance
Entrances to mobile home parks shall be designed to minimize congestion
and hazards and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. No
parking shall be permitted on the park entrance street for a distance of
100 feet from its point of beginning.
c. Internal Streets
Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated
traffic and shall meet the following requirements:
1) All streets, except minor streets, shall be a minimum of 30 feet in
width.
2) Dead-end streets shall be limited in length to 500 feet and shall be
provided at the closed end with a cul-de-sac having an outside roadway
diameter of at least 100 feet. All dead-end streets shall be
marked with approved signs at the entrance to the dead-end street.
3) Minor streets 24 feet in width shall be acceptable only if less than 500
feet long and serving less than eight mobile homes or of any length if
mobile home lots abut on one side only.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, V (7) RM-1 - 7 Minnesota
d. Car Parking
Off-street parking areas for the use of park occupants and guests shall be
furnished at a rate of at least two car spaces for each mobile home lot. All
off-street parking areas shall be paved concrete or bituminous surface or
crushed rock treated with oil so it is dust free.
e. Required Illumination of Park Street Systems
All parks shall be furnished with lighting units so spaced and equipped
with luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will provide the following
average maintained levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians
and vehicles at night.
1) All parts of the park systems: 0.6-foot candle.
2) Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street intersections and
steps or stepped ramps, individually illuminated with a minimum of
0.6-foot candle.
f. Street Construction and Design Standards
1) Pavements
All streets shall be provided with a paved concrete or bituminous surface.
Pavement edges shall be protected to prevent raveling of the
wearing surface and shifting of the pavement base. Street surfaces
shall be maintained free of cracks, holes, and other hazards.
2) Grades
Longitudinal grades of all streets shall range between 0.4% and
8.00%. Transverse grades (crown) of all streets shall be sufficient to
ensure adequate transverse drainage.
If conditions warrant, an adequate storm sewer system shall be provided
to dispose of all runoff water. The storm sewer system may be
connected to existing City storm sewer system upon City approval.
3) Intersections
Within 50 feet of an intersection, streets will be at right angles. A distance
of at least 85 feet shall be maintained between the centerlines
of off-set intersection streets. Intersections of more than two streets at
one point shall be avoided.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, V (7) RM-1 - 8 Minnesota
13. Walks
a. General Requirements
All parks shall be provided with safe, convenient, all-season pedestrian
access of adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient to
maintain, between individual mobile homes, the park streets, and all
community facilities provided for park residents. Sudden changes in
alignment and gradient shall be avoided.
b. Common Walk System
A common walk system shall be provided and maintained between locations
where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. Such common walks shall
have a minimum width of four and one-half feet.
c. Individual Walks
All mobile homes shall be connected to common walks, to paved streets,
or to paved driveways or parking spaces connecting to a paved street.
Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of two feet.
14. Trees
A minimum of one tree per lot is required. In open areas and park areas, a
minimum of 20 trees per acre is required.
15. Skirt
All mobile homes shall have skirts (made of metal, plastic, fiberglass or comparable,
noncombustible material approved by the Building Official) around the
entire trailer. Such skirts shall be painted to match the appropriate trailer so
that it will enhance the general appearance thereof.
G. Water Supply
All mobile homes shall be serviced by the City water system.
H. Sewage Disposal
All mobile homes shall be serviced by the City sanitary sewer system.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, V (7) RM-1 - 9 Minnesota
I. Service Buildings and Other Community Service Buildings
1. General
The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings, recreation
buildings, and other community service facilities, laundry facilities, indoor
recreation areas, and commercial areas supplying essential goods or services
for the exclusive use of park occupants.
2. Structural Requirements for Buildings
All portions of the structure shall be properly protected from damage by ordinary
uses and by decay, corrosion, termites, and other destructive elements.
Exterior portions shall be of such materials and be so constructed and protected
as to prevent entrance or penetration of moisture and weather.
3. Barbecue Pits, Fireplaces, Stoves, and Incinerators
Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces, woodburning stoves, and incinerators
shall be so located, constructed, maintained, and used as to minimize fire
hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on
neighboring property, and shall comply with all appropriate ordinances, laws,
or other regulations.
4. Pole-type construction shall not be permitted.
J. Refuse Handling
1. General Requirements
The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall
be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect
breeding, accident or fire hazards, or air pollution.
K. Insect and Rodent Control
1. Grounds, Buildings, and Structures
Grounds, buildings, and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent
harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to
control insects and rodents shall conform with any requirements of the County
Health Department.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, V (7) RM-1 - 10 Minnesota
2. Parks
Parks shall be maintained free of accumulation of debris which may provide
rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, and other pests.
3. Storage Areas
Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage. Lumber,
pipe, and other building material shall be stored at least one foot above
ground.
4. Screens
Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all exterior openings
in or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened with wire
mesh or other suitable materials.
5. Brush, Weeds, and Grass
The growth of brush, weeds, and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage
of ticks, chiggers, and other noxious insects. Parks shall be so maintained
as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison
sumac, and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open
areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description.
L. Fuel Supply and Storage
1. Natural Gas or Fuel Oil System
Approved natural gas or fuel oil piping systems shall be installed and maintained
in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such
systems. No outside or buried fuel tanks by each unit will be allowed.
M. Fire Protection
1. Litter, Rubbish, Etc.
Mobile home parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish, and other flammable
material.
2. Fire Extinguishers
Portable fire extinguishers rated for classes A, B, and C fires shall be kept visible
in service buildings and at other locations conveniently and readily accessible
for use by all of the occupants and shall be maintained in good operating
condition. Their capacity shall not be less than 10 pounds.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, V (7) RM-1 - 11 Minnesota
3. Fire
Fires shall be made only in stoves, indoor incinerators, and other equipment
intended for such purposes.
4. Fire Hydrants
Fire hydrants shall be installed if the park water supply is capable to serve
them in accordance with the following requirements.
a. The water supply system shall permit the operation of standard City fire
hydrants.
b. Fire hydrants, if provided, shall be located within 30 feet of any mobile
home, service building, or other structure in the park.
N. Miscellaneous Requirements
1. Responsibilities of the Park Management:
a. The person to whom a license for a mobile park is issued shall operate the
park in compliance with this ordinance and shall provide adequate supervision
to maintain the park, its facilities, and equipment in good repair and
in a clean and sanitary condition.
b. The park management shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions
of this ordinance and inform them of their duties and responsibilities
under this ordinance.
c. It shall be the duty of the operator of the mobile home park to keep a register
containing a record of all mobile home owners and occupants located
within the park. The register shall contain the date of arrival and departure
of each mobile home. The park shall keep the register available for inspection
at all times by Law Enforcement Officers, Public Health Officials,
and other officials whose duty necessitates acquisition of the information
contained in the register. The register record for each occupant registered
shall not be destroyed for a period of three years following the date of departure
of the registrant from the park.
O. Conditional Uses/Interim Uses
The following uses are permitted by the issuance of an interim use permit as outlined
in Section IV, subsection 6:
* None
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 02-11-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (8) B-1 - 1
8. B-1 Central Business
A. Intent
It is the intent of the B-1 Central Business District to create an area which will
serve as the focal point of community interest and as a focal point of commercial,
financial, office, entertainment, and governmental activity.
B. Permitted Uses
In a B-1 Central Business District, unless otherwise provided in this ordinance, no
building or land shall hereafter be erected, used, or structurally altered except for
one of the following, as well as similar uses:
* Accessory building up to 800 sq ft;
* Adult uses-accessory (as regulated by Chapter VI, Performance standards);
* Coffee shop and bakeries- where products are sold on premise;
* Dry cleaners- pick up and laundry pick up stations including incidental repair
but not including processing,
* Food services- grocery stores, fruit and vegetable markets, meat markets,
supermarkets;
* Laundromats- self-service washing and drying, provided that the hours of operation
are limited to 7 AM to 10 PM.;
* Licensed child care;
* Professional services including bank, medical clinics, funeral homes, offices;
* Personal services- barber, beauty shops, day spa, tanning salons, therapeutic
massage
* Restaurants- with/without drive thru service;
* Retail businesses and services, except no outdoor storage shall be permitted;
* Shoe repair;
* Tailoring services.
C. Conditional Uses (amended 10-15-15 Ord.724)
The following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use
Permit:
* Accessory Buildings which exceed 800 square feet per dwelling unit (as
regulated by Chapter VI, Performance Standards)
* ATV/Snowmobile/Motorcycle Sales and Service provided that
(a) The parking area for the outside sales and storage area, whether for
new or the expansion of an existing facility, shall be hard surfaced by
the date determined by the Planning Commission after consideration
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 02-11-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (8) B-1 - 2
of the size and scope of the project, and the effect of the cold weather
season on paving construction materials, but in no event more
than 10 months after final city approval. Parking areas shall be maintained
to control dust, erosion, and drainage before and after hard
surfacing. No parking or display of ATVs/Snowmobiles/Motorcycles
shall occur on landscaped areas. Customer parking shall be clearly
marked.
(b) Interior concrete or asphalt curbs shall be constructed within the
property to separate driving and parking surfaces from landscaped
areas.
(c) All areas of the property not devoted to building or parking areas shall
be landscaped.
* Automobile Service Stations provided that:
(a) The off-street loading space(s) and building access for delivery of
goods shall be separate from customer parking and entrances and
shall not cause conflicts with customer vehicles and pedestrian movements.
(b) The hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 AM to 10:00 PM, unless
extended by the Council as part of the conditional use permit.
(c) Motor fuel facilities shall be installed in accordance with State and City
standards. Additionally, adequate space shall be provided to access
gas pumps and to allow maneuverability around the pumps. Underground
fuel storage tanks are to be positioned to allow adequate access
by motor fuel transports and unloading operations which do not
conflict with circulation, access and other activities on the site. Fuel
pumps shall be installed on pump islands.
(d) A protective canopy (auxiliary canopy) located over pump islands may
be an accessory structure on the property and may be located twenty
(20) feet or more from the front lot line, provided adequate visibility
both on and off site is maintained.
(e) All canopy lighting for motor fuel station pump islands shall be recessed
or fully shielded.
(f) Litter Control. The operation shall be responsible for litter control within
three hundred (300) feet of the premises and litter control is to occur
on a daily basis. Trash receptacles must be provided at a convenient
location on site to facilitate litter control.
(g) All pumps and any related canopy shall be set back at least three hundred
(300) feet from residentially zoned or guided property, unless
screened by an intervening building or located across an arterial or
major collector roadway from residentially zoned or guided property.
* Entertainment businesses- bowling alleys, bars, theatres, convention facilities;
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 02-11-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (8) B-1 - 3
* Equipment and trade services- electronic shops, electrical appliances, plumbing,
heating electrical drywall painting shops, except no outdoor storage shall
be permitted;
* Hotels, Motels, Tourist rooming or boarding houses;
* Public buildings and facilities;
* Residential housing in a mixed use building provided that:
(a) Such residential units are located above the street level in nonresidential
structures, unless part of an approved Planned Unit Development
(b) All parking is provided for all uses (as regulated by Chapter VI, Performance
Standards)
(c) Residential amenities are provided
* Wholesale business when conducted wholly within a building provided that:
(a) Dock doors are situated away or fully screened from residential properties
(b) No outdoor storage is permitted.
* Maximum building height greater than (30) feet, as measured to the eaves.
D. Interim Uses (amended 02-11-16; Ord. 729)
The following uses are permitted by the issuance of an interim use permit:
* Churches or place of worship provided that:
(a) Such space is within a multi-tenant building
(b) Joint parking arrangements allow for compliance with parking requirements
for all uses (as regulated by Chapter VI, Performance Standards)
* Educational facilities provided that:
(a) Joint parking arrangements allow for compliance with parking requirements
for all uses (as regulated by VI Performance Standards)
* Kennels with overnight boarding, provided that:
(a) Animals allowed outside only under direct supervision.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 02-11-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (8) B-1 - 4
(b) A maximum number of animals allowed at the facility, as determined
by the Planning Commission at interim use permit issuance.
(c) Noise shall be mitigated so as to not create a public nuisance for adjoining
properties.
(d) Indoor and outdoor facilities are to be kept in a clean, dry, and sanitary
condition. Waste shall be picked up immediately and disposed of in a
sealed container.
(e) Adequate storage and refrigeration shall be provided to protect food
supplies against contamination and deterioration.
(f) Indoor facilities shall be adequately ventilated and have ample light and
heat.
(g) Adequate screening shall be provided, as determined by the Planning
Commission.
(h) Hours of operation shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission.
* Dog Daycare, Training, and Grooming Facility with no overnight boarding.
* Pet Store selling cats or dogs under eight months of age with overnight
boarding.
E. Prohibited Uses
* Any outdoor storage areas
F. Yard Requirements For B –1 District
All Uses
A. Lot area minimum 5,000 sq. ft.
B. Lot width minimum feet 25 feet
C. Maximum lot coverage NA
D. Front yard minimum 0 feet
E. Side yard minimum 0 feet
F. Rear yard minimum/alley 0 feet
G. Maximum height 30 feet1
1 Three stories in height or as measured 30 feet to the eaves. This requirement may be waived
upon demonstration of adequate fire protection.
G. Other Applicable Regulations
1. For aesthetic purposes all buildings and structures shall be faced with the
following:
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 02-11-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (8) B-1 - 5
a. Face brick;
b. Prefinished metal panels;
c. Glass and/or curtain wall construction;
d. Concrete block may be used alone or in conjunction with other permitted
materials or surfaced with stucco, stone, wood or properly applied
masonry paints;
e. Precast concrete panels;
f. Plastic panels when combined with modular exposed structural curtain
wall systems;
g. Or other approved material;
h. Windows are required in the front of the building pending planning review
and demonstration of need, e.g. security etc.;
2. Parking Requirements:
Businesses require no off-street parking. Conditional uses and mixed occupancy
uses must provide off-street parking according to the schedule provided
in this ordinance or by determination of the Planning Commission.
3. Screening Fence Requirement:
Where any business or industrial use (i.e. structured parking or storage) is
adjacent to property zoned for residential use, that business or industry shall
provide 6 foot privacy screening along the side facing the residential property.
4. Plans and Specifications
All plans and specifications pertaining to site use design shall be approved
by the Planning Commission before any building permit is issued. If the applicant
feels the request was unjustly denied, the applicant may appeal to the
Board of Appeal for relief.
All business condominiums shall follow the Uniform Condominium Act of the
State of Minnesota.
A business condominium coverage of a lot shall follow the parking requirements
and all other requirements in the business zone in which the condominium
will be located.
5. Pole-type construction shall not be permitted.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 02-11-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (9) B-2 - 1
9. B-2 Neighborhood Commercial District
A. Intent
B-2, Neighborhood Commercial District: The purpose of the B-2, Neighborhood
Business District is to provide for the establishment of highly limited scale neighborhood
commercial centers and uses in existing commercial nodes that offer
basic, convenience-type goods and services to the immediately surrounding areas
in which they are located.
B. Design Character
Due to the close proximity to existing and future planned residential areas, the
character of this district shall reflect the character of surrounding residential
neighborhoods. Building scale, setback and design should be consistent with existing
neighborhoods. Because this district is intended to serve surrounding residential
areas, pedestrian connectivity to existing neighborhoods is also important.
C Permitted Uses
In a B-2 Neighborhood Commercial District, unless otherwise provided in this ordinance,
no building or land shall hereafter be erected, used or structurally altered
except for one of the following, as well as similar uses:
* Accessory building up to 800 sq ft;
* Coffee shop, deli or restaurant without drive-thru service;
* Convenience stores of 3,000 square feet or less in gross floor area and not
associated with gas station;
* Food services including specialty grocery store or meat market, bakeries
whose products are sold on premise;
* Health clubs of 3,000 square feet or less in gross floor area;
* Multi-tenant structures-office, retail with 3,000 square feet or less gross floor
area;
* Prepared food: delivery and/or take out only, no interior seating;
* Professional office including financial institutions (without drive-thru), medical
uses and general office users;
* Personal services- barber, beauty shops, day spa; tanning salons, therapeutic
massage
* Public buildings and facilities;
* Specialty schools and learning centers.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 02-11-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (9) B-2 - 2
D. Conditional Uses (Rev. 02-11-16; Ord. 729)
The following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use
Permit:
* Automobile and recreational sales and service provided that (Rev. 10-11-12; Ord. 692):
(a) A minimum lot area of 0.75 acres is required and the use shall be on 1 lot or contiguous
lots not separated by a public street or other use.
(b) A minimum lot width of 100 feet is required.
(c) The parking area for the outside sales and storage area, whether for a new or the
expansion of an existing facility, shall be hard surfaced by the date determined
by the Planning Commission after consideration of the size and scope of the project,
and the effect of the cold weather season on paving construction materials,
but in no event more than 10 months after final city approval. Parking areas shall
be maintained to control dust, erosion, and drainage before and after hard surfacing.
No parking or display of vehicles for sale shall occur on landscaped areas.
Customer parking shall be clearly marked (Rev. 02-28-13; Ord. 696).
(d) Interior concrete or asphalt curbs shall be constructed within the property to separate
driving and parking surfaces from landscaped areas.
(e) All areas of the property not devoted to building or parking areas shall be landscaped.
(f) Noise from electronic speaker devices shall be regulated in Chapter VI, Performance
Standards.
* Licensed daycare facilities provided that:
(a) All buildings and outdoor play areas shall be set back at minimum of 50
feet from residential zoned property
* Mixed use buildings provided that:
(a) Residential units are located above street level;
E. Interim Uses (02-11-16; Ord. 729)
The following uses are permitted by the issuance of an interim use permit:
* Churches/Place of worship provided that:
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 02-11-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (9) B-2 - 3
(a) The principal structure and any accessory structures used for assembly
shall be located at least fifty feet (50’) from any lot line adjacent to a residential
zoning district.
(b) Joint parking arrangements allow for compliance with parking requirements
for all uses (as regulated by Chapter VI, Performance Standards)
* Dog Daycare, Training, and Grooming Facility with no overnight boarding.
* Kennel, with overnight boarding, provided that:
(a) Animals allowed outside only under direct supervision.
(b) A maximum number of animals allowed at the facility, as determined by
the Planning Commission at time of interim use permit issuance.
(c) Noise shall be mitigated so as to not create a public nuisance for adjoining
properties.
(d) Indoor and outdoor facilities are to be kept in a clean, dry, and sanitary
condition. Waste shall be picked up immediately and disposed of in a
sealed container.
(e) Adequate storage and refrigeration shall be provided to protect food supplies
against contamination and deterioration.
(f) Indoor facilities shall be adequately ventilated and have ample light and
heat.
(g) Adequate screening shall be provided, as determined by the Planning
Commission.
(h) Hours of operation shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission.
* Pet Store selling cats or dogs under eight months of age with overnight
boarding.
* Veterinary Clinic with overnight boarding proved that: (02-11-16; Ord. 729)
(a) Animals allowed outside only under direct supervision.
(b) A maximum number of animals allowed at the facility, as determined by
the Planning Commission at time of interim use permit issuance.
(c) Noise shall be mitigated so as to not create a public nuisance for adjoining
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 02-11-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (9) B-2 - 4
properties.
(d) Indoor and outdoor facilities are to be kept in a clean, dry, and sanitary
condition. Waste shall be picked up immediately and disposed of in a
sealed container.
(e) Adequate storage and refrigeration shall be provided to protect food supplies
against contamination and deterioration.
(f) Indoor facilities shall be adequately ventilated and have ample light and
heat.
(g) Adequate screening shall be provided, as determined by the Planning
Commission.
(h) Hours of operation shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission.
F. Yard Requirements For B –2 District
All Uses
A. Lot area minimum 20,000 sq. ft.
B. Lot width minimum feet 75 feet
C. Maximum lot coverage 50%
D. Front yard minimum 20 feet
E. Side yard minimum 10 feet
F. Rear yard minimum 30 feet
G. Maximum height 30 feet
G. Exterior Building Materials
Buildings with in the Neighborhood Business District shall be designed so as to
be compatible with the surrounding residential uses. High quality, exterior building
materials shall be limited to one or combination of the following:
a. Face brick;
b. Natural or synthetic stone;
c. Stucco or EFIS;
d. Glass and or curtain wall construction;
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 02-11-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (9) B-2 - 5
e. Decorative concrete block;
f. Fiber-cement siding;
g. Windows are required in the front of the building pending planning review and
demonstration of need; e.g. security, etc;
h. Or other materials approved by the Planning Commission if determined to
have a similar or better longevity and durability as material listed above.
H. General Design Criteria
Buildings fronts shall include three of the following elements:
a. Articulation of facades into house-size segments;
b. Residential scale building modules similar to adjacent buildings
c. Similar façade proportions to those on neighboring buildings
d. Residential scale building components such as porches, patios, decks,
columns and balconies
e. A roof configuration which reflects traditional residential structures and is
pitched such as gable, hip, or shed.
f. Display windows a minimum of six feet in height shall exist along at least
fifty percent of the linear length of the building front.
I. Parking Requirements
a. For every building erected or structurally altered, off-street parking shall
be provided according to the schedule provided in this ordinance.
b. All off-street parking areas shall include unpaved landscaped islands
that are distributed throughout the parking area. These islands shall be
located to break up expanses of paved areas and facilitate traffic control.
c. Landscaped islands shall be equal or greater than the size of a parking
stall (180 s.f.). Such parking areas shall devote not less than three hundred
sixty (360) square feet of land to internal landscape islands (in addition
to required traffic safety islands) for each one thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet of parking space after the first one thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet. Such islands shall be bounded by concrete curbing.
Trees may be installed in approved traffic safety islands to delineate
parking spaces from drive aisles and other areas. The land area devoted
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 02-11-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (9) B-2 - 6
to internal landscape islands may be decreased in cases where the land
area devoted to traffic islands meets or exceeds the above requirement.
d. No landscaping or screening shall interfere with driver or pedestrian
visibility for vehicles entering or exiting the premises.
J. Screening Fence Requirement
a. Commercial uses which are adjacent to residential area shall be screened
to minimize visual impact. Loading docks and refuse containers shall also
be screened. Fencing/screening shall be provided according to this ordinance.
This provision shall not be construed as requiring a screening
fence in any required front or adjacent to a public alley.
K. Landscaping
a. All landscaping requirements shall meet the provisions outlined within this
Ordinance. In addition, fifty percent (50%) of the building perimeter shall
be landscape in a area not less then 5 feet in width.
L. Utilities
a. All lots are to be served by underground utilities.
M. Plans and Specifications
a. All plans and specifications pertaining to site use design shall be approved
by the Planning Commission before any building permit is issued for a
principal use in this district. Any applicant that fails to comply with the time
frame and provisions of the plan review shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
except those violations specifically subject to administrative fines under
this ordinance. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute
a separate offense. If the applicant feels the request was unjustly denied,
the applicant may appeal to the Board of Adjustments for relief.
b. All business condominiums shall follow the Uniform Condominium Act of
the State of Minnesota.
c. A business condominium coverage of a lot shall follow the parking requirements
and all other requirements in the business zone in which the
condominium will be located.
N. Accessory Structures
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 02-11-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (9) B-2 - 7
Architectural and building material standards as outlined in this section shall apply
to accessory buildings. No accessory structure (except signs) shall exceed
the height of the principal structure.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-13-17 V ( 10) B-3 - 1 Princeton, Minnesota
10. B-3 General Commercial District
A. Intent
The intent of the B-3 General Business District is to create an area to serve the
commercial and service needs of the general population. The objective is to
provide services to both pedestrian and vehicular traffic and to accommodate
those businesses which require large areas for off-street parking or generate
substantial traffic originating from outside the community.
B. Permitted Uses (Rev. 06-7-17; ord. 753)
In a B-3 General Commercial District, unless otherwise provided in this ordinance,
no building or land shall hereafter be erected, used or structurally altered
except for one of the following, as well as similar uses:
* Any use permitted in B-1 and B-2 Districts;
* Car washes and automobile service stations provided that:
(a) The off-street loading space(s) and building access for delivery of
goods shall be separate from customer parking and entrances and shall
not cause conflicts with customer vehicles and pedestrian movements
within the public right-of-way.
(b) Motor fuel facilities shall be installed in accordance with State and City
standards. Additionally, adequate space shall be provided to access gas
pumps and to allow maneuverability around the pumps. Underground fuel
storage tanks are to be positioned to allow adequate access by motor fuel
transports and unloading operations which do not conflict with circulation,
access and other activities on the site. Fuel pumps shall be installed on
pump islands.
(c) A protective canopy (auxiliary canopy) located over pump islands may
be an accessory structure on the property and may be located twenty (20)
feet or more from the front lot line, provided adequate visibility both on and
off site is maintained.
(d) All canopy lighting for motor fuel station pump islands shall be recessed
or fully shielded.
(e) Litter Control. The operation shall be responsible for litter control within
three hundred (300) feet of the premises and litter control is to occur on a
daily basis. Trash receptacles must be provided at a convenient location
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-13-17 V ( 10) B-3 - 2 Princeton, Minnesota
on site to facilitate litter control.
(f) All pumps and any related canopy shall be set back at least three hundred
(300) feet from residentially zoned or guided property, unless
screened by an intervening building or located across an arterial or major
collector roadway from residentially zoned or guided property.
(g) The site shall provide stacking space for the car wash. The amount of
stacking space shall take into account the type of car wash and the
amount of time it takes to wash a vehicle. Stacking spaces shall not interfere
with parking spaces or traffic circulation within the public right-of-way.
(h) The exit from the car wash shall have a drainage system which is subject
to the approval of the City and gives special consideration to the prevention
of ice build-up during winter months.
(i) Neither the car wash nor an accessory vacuum shall be located within
three hundred (300) feet of any residentially zoned or guided property, unless
completely screened by an intervening building or located across an
arterial or major collector roadway from residentially zoned or guided
property.
(j) Both the car wash and accessory vacuum shall conform to noise regulations
as defined in Section Chapter VI, Performance Standards of this
Chapter.
* Entertainment and recreational business- bowling alleys, bars, theatres,
health clubs, amusement parks, community centers, roller skating, convention
facilities, clubs and lodges;
* Hotel – motels;
* Licensed commercial day care facilities;
* Public buildings and facilities;
* Restaurants and eating establishments, including drive thru services provided
that:
(a) Residential properties shall be screened from vehicle lights in the
stacking area.
(b) Adequate stacking is provided at the menu board and pick up window.
(c ) The drive-thru hours of operation are limited to 7:00 AM to 10:00 PM,
unless extended by the City Council as part of the conditional use permit.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-13-17 V ( 10) B-3 - 3 Princeton, Minnesota
* Retail businesses and service business establishments less than 50,000
square feet in total building area, including those with outside display provided
that:
(a) Outdoor display areas shall be one hundred percent (100%) screened
at a minimum of six feet (6') in height from view of adjacent residential uses
and residential uses located across the street.
* Wholesale business establishments less than 15,000 square feet in total
building area, when conducted wholly within a building;
* Equipment and trade services – electronic shops, appliance repair, plumbing,
heating, electrical, drywall, painting shops – no outside storage
C. Conditional Uses (Rev. 04-13-17; Ord. 748)
The following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use
Permit:
* Automobile and truck repair provided that:
(a) The entire site, other than that devoted to structures and landscaped
areas, shall be an impervious surface and maintained for control of dust,
erosion, and drainage.
(b) Location and number of access driveways shall be approved by the
City Engineer.
(c ) No vehicles shall be parked on the premises other than those utilized
by employees, customers awaiting service, or as allowed through a CUP.
Storage of salvage vehicles shall be prohibited.
(d) All areas utilized for the storage and disposal of trash, debris, discarded
parts, and similar items shall be fully screened. All structures and
ground shall be maintained in an orderly, clean, and safe manner.
(e) Screening shall be provided to buffer the use from adjacent residential
land uses.
* Automobile and recreational sales and service provided that:
(a) A minimum lot area of 1 acre is required and the use shall be on 1 lot
or contiguous lots not separated by a public street or other use.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-13-17 V ( 10) B-3 - 4 Princeton, Minnesota
(b) A minimum lot width of 100 feet is required.
(c) The parking area for the outside sales and storage area, whether for a
new or the expansion of an existing facility, shall be hard surfaced by the
date determined by the Planning Commission after consideration of the
size and scope of the project, and the effect of the cold weather season on
paving construction materials, but in no event more than 10 months after
final city approval. Parking areas shall be maintained to control dust, erosion,
and drainage before and after hard surfacing. No parking or display
of vehicles for sale shall occur on landscaped areas. Customer parking
shall be clearly marked (Rev. 02-28-13; Ord. 696).
(d) Interior concrete or asphalt curbs shall be constructed within the property
to separate driving and parking surfaces from landscaped areas.
(e) All areas of the property not devoted to building or parking areas shall
be landscaped.
(f) Noise from electronic speaker devices shall be regulated in Chapter VI,
Performance Standards.
* Equipment and trade with outside storage;
* Indoor shooting range provided that (Rev. 07-25-13; Ord. 698):
(a) The Applicant demonstrates that noise, air pollution, and any hazardous
wastes are properly mitigated and managed;
(b) The Applicant provides to the City a copy of the current publication of
the National Rifle Association’s Range Source Book: A Guide to Planning
and Construction, and follows the recommendations therein for the type of
shooting range being proposed by the Applicant;
(c) The Applicant operates the shooting range in accordance with (and
provide a copy to the City) all other local, state, and federal regulations;
and
(d) The hours of operation are reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission.
* Mini-storage facilities, including exterior and interior only accessible facilities
provided that:
(a) No building to exceed 4,000 square feet with no more than 4 (four)
buildings per site.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-13-17 V ( 10) B-3 - 5 Princeton, Minnesota
(b) No site shall be closer than 1,000 feet from another mini-storage facility.
(c) No buildings shall be closer than 50 feet from a neighboring residential
zone.
(d) Units are to be used for dead storage only. Units are not to be used for
retailing, auto repair, human habitation, or any commercial activity. Storage
of any flammable or hazardous material is prohibited.
(e) No outdoor storage is permitted.
(f) The facility shall be secured by either the walls of the structure and/or
fencing. All doors on the units shall face inward and away from the street.
* Retail businesses and service business establishment more than 50,000
square feet in total building area, including those with outside storage provided
that:
(a) The physical design may include more than one building. If there is an
open space between two (2) buildings, the space shall not be less than
one-half (1/2) the sum of the heights of the two (2) buildings.
(b) No building shall be nearer than sixty feet (60') to any exterior lot line
except when abutting or across the street from an residential district in
which case the minimum setback distance shall be one hundred feet
(100').
(c) The design shall include adequate internal circulation drives not less
than twenty four feet (24') in width which are exclusive of the required
parking areas;
* Retail lumber yards, nurseries, wholesale business with outside display/
storage provided that:
(a) The outdoor display area shall be clearly identified upon an approved
site plan for the property. The display area shall meet the required side
and rear yard setbacks for the district in which it is located, and shall be
set back no less than ten feet (10') from the front property line. The appropriate
height of the display area shall be determined by considering the
size of the item(s) to be displayed, the proportion of the display area to the
building, and the location of the display area on the site.
(b) No displayed merchandise shall exceed a maximum height of twelve
feet (12') above the display surface.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-13-17 V ( 10) B-3 - 6 Princeton, Minnesota
(c) Outdoor display areas shall be one hundred percent (100%) screened
at a minimum of six feet (6') in height from view of adjacent residential uses
and residential uses located across the street.
(d) No additional lighting shall be installed to illuminate the display area.
(e) The display area shall be surfaced with concrete or an approved
equivalent to control dust and erosion. The surface shall be properly maintained
to prevent deterioration. The display area shall be architecturally
compatible with the principal structure of the site through the use of similar
building materials or fencing around the perimeter of the display area. The
display area shall be enhanced with appropriate, year round landscaping.
(f) The display area shall not take up required parking spaces or landscaping
areas. No outdoor display shall be permitted upon a sidewalk.
(g) All display of merchandise shall occur in a neat and orderly fashion
without signage. The display of wearing apparel, highly flammable materials,
and merchandise with wind movable parts and appendages shall be
prohibited.
* Maximum building height greater than (30) thirty feet, as measured to the
eaves.
D. Interim Uses (Rev. 04-13-17; Ord. 748)
The following uses are permitted by the issuance of an interim use permit:
* Churches and transitional/ interim churches provided that:
(a) The principal structure and any accessory structures used for assembly
shall be located at least fifty feet (50’) from any lot line adjacent to a
residential zoning district.
(b) Joint parking arrangements allow for compliance with parking requirements
for all uses (as regulated by Chapter VI, Performance Standards)
* Dog Daycare, Training, and Grooming Facility with no overnight boarding.
* Educational facilities provided that:
(a) Joint parking arrangements allow for compliance with parking requirements
for all uses (as regulated by Chapter VI, Performance Standards)
* Kennels with overnight boarding, provided that:
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-13-17 V ( 10) B-3 - 7 Princeton, Minnesota
(a) Animals allowed outside only under direct supervision.
(b) A maximum number of animals allowed at the facility, as determined by
the Planning Commission at the time of interim use permit issuance.
(c) Noise shall be mitigated so as to not create a public nuisance for adjoining
properties.
(d) Indoor and outdoor facilities are to be kept in a clean, dry, and sanitary
condition. Waste shall be picked up immediately and disposed of in a
sealed container.
(e) Adequate storage and refrigeration shall be provided to protect food supplies
against contamination and deterioration.
(f) Indoor facilities shall be adequately ventilated and have ample light heat.
(g) Adequate screening shall be provided, as determined by the Planning
Commission.
(h) Hours of operation shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission.
* Outdoor storage of approved material, such as sand, gravel, fill dirt, or
crushed material, provided that: (Rev. 10-13-11; Ord. 674)
(a) The specific project and site location where the material will be utilized
is identified by the applicant and subject to the approval of the
Planning Commission and City Council.
(b) The material storage area shall be clearly identified upon an approved
site plan for the property.
(c) The material storage area shall meet the required front, side, and
rear yard setbacks for the B-3 district.
(d) The maximum height of the material shall be determined by the
Planning Commission and City Council, taking into consideration
the following factors: the size, amount, and location of the material
being stored, along with the proportion of the material storage area
to any uses/buildings on site and/or adjacent to the subject property,
(e) Temporary security fencing shall be provided around the material
storage area by the applicant.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-13-17 V ( 10) B-3 - 8 Princeton, Minnesota
(f) Measures shall be taken to control dust and erosion.
(g) Screening measures, as determined appropriate by the Planning
Commission and City Council, shall be provided when the subject
property on which the material storage is proposed is adjacent to or
across the street from a residentially-zoned property.
(h) No hazardous materials shall be allowed to be stored.
* Pet Store selling cats or dogs under eight months of age with overnight
boarding.
* Veterinary clinic with outside boarding facilities provided that:
(a) Animals allowed outside only under direct supervision.
(b) A maximum number of animals allowed at the facility, as determined
by the Planning Commission at time of Interim use permit
issuance.
(c) Noise shall be mitigated so as to not create a public nuisance for
adjoining properties.
(d) Indoor and outdoor facilities are to be kept in a clean, dry, and sanitary
condition. Waste shall be picked up immediately and disposed
of in a sealed container.
(e) Adequate storage and refrigeration shall be provided to protect food
supplies against contamination and deterioration.
(f) Indoor facilities shall be adequately ventilated and have ample light
and heat.
(g) Adequate screening shall be provided, as determined by the Planning
Commission.
(h) Hours of operation shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-13-17 V ( 10) B-3 - 9 Princeton, Minnesota
E. Yard Requirements For B–3 District
All Uses
A. Lot area minimum 10,000 sq. ft. (or existing lots of record
as of date of passage of this ordinance)
B. Lot width minimum feet 75 feet
C. Maximum lot coverage 60%
D. Front yard minimum 20 feet 1
E. Side yard minimum 5 feet 2
F. Rear yard minimum 20 feet 3
G. Maximum height 30 feet 4
1 Business that is abutting a highway shall have two front yards.
2 Side yard setback - 5 feet, except when abutting a residential district then the side yard shall be 15 feet.
On a corner lot, the side yard on any street side shall conform to the predominant setback on the side
street, but in no case shall the side yard be less than 15 feet.
3 Rear yard setback - 30 feet when abutting a residential district
4 Maximum building height - three stories in height or as measured 30 feet to the eaves. This requirement
may be waived upon demonstration of adequate fire protection.
F. Exterior/Interior Building Materials (Rev. 07-14-16; Ord. 738)
Buildings with in the General Business District shall be faced with the following:
a. Face brick;
b. Natural or synthetic stone;
c. Stucco or EFIS;
d. Prefinished metal panels;
d. Glass and or curtain wall construction;
e. Integrally colored split face (rock face) burnished or glazed concrete masonry
units (excluding smooth, plain or painted).
f. Precast concrete panels;
g. Fiber-cement siding;
h. Windows are required in the front of the building pending planning review
and demonstration of need; e.g. security, etc;
i. Or other materials approved by the Planning Commission, such as insulated
concrete form, structures and pole type structures if determined to
have a similar or better longevity and durability as material listed above,
and maintains the integrity of the surrounding structures while meeting the
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-13-17 V ( 10) B-3 - 10 Princeton, Minnesota
requirements for building materials in the General Business District. Pole
type construction must have a site plan review including an architectural
design review with the Planning Department Staff and/or the Zoning Administrator.
G. Parking Requirements
a. For every building erected or structurally altered, off-street parking shall be
provided according to the schedule provided in this ordinance.
b. All off-street parking areas shall include unpaved landscaped islands that
are distributed throughout the parking area. These islands shall be located
to break up expanses of paved areas and facilitate traffic control.
c. Landscaped islands shall be equal or greater than the size of a parking
stall (180 s.f.). Such parking areas shall devote not less than three hundred
sixty (360) square feet of land to internal landscape islands (in addition
to required traffic safety islands) for each one thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet of parking space after the first one thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet. Such islands shall be bounded by concrete curbing.
Trees may be installed in approved traffic safety islands to delineate
parking spaces from drive aisles and other areas. The land area devoted
to internal landscape islands may be decreased in cases where the land
area devoted to traffic islands meets or exceeds the above requirement.
d. No landscaping or screening shall interfere with driver or pedestrian visibility
for vehicles entering or exiting the premises.
H. Screening Fence Requirement
a. Commercial uses which are adjacent to residential area shall be screened
to minimize visual impact. Loading docks and refuse containers shall also
be screened. Fencing/screening shall be provided according to this ordinance.
This provision shall not be construed as requiring a screening
fence in any required front or adjacent to a public alley.
I. Landscaping
a. All landscaping requirements shall meet the provisions outlined within this
Ordinance. In addition, fifty percent (50%) of the building perimeter shall
be landscape in an area not less then 5 feet in width.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-13-17 V ( 10) B-3 - 11 Princeton, Minnesota
J. Utilities
a. All lots are to be served by underground utilities.
K. Plans and Specifications
a. All plans and specifications pertaining to site use design shall be approved
by the Planning Commission before any building permit is issued for a
principal use in this district. Any applicant that fails to comply with the time
frame and provisions of the plan review shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
except those violations specifically subject to administrative fines under
this ordinance. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute
a separate offense. If the applicant feels the request was unjustly denied,
the applicant may appeal to the Board of Adjustments for relief.
b. All business condominiums shall follow the Uniform Condominium Act of
the State of Minnesota.
c. A business condominium coverage of a lot shall follow the parking requirements
and all other requirements in the business zone in which the
condominium will be located.
L. Accessory Structures. Architectural and building material standards as outlined
in this section shall apply to accessory buildings. No accessory structure (except
signs) shall exceed the height of the principal structure.
M. General Design Criteria.
a. Building facades shall be designed to avoid monolithic or monotonous appearance
by employing designs which prevent the appearance of straight,
unbroken lines in their horizontal and vertical surfaces.
b. Portions of buildings facing or oriented toward public rights-of-way or residentially
zoned or designated parcels shall features breaks/divisions in
materials, separate entrances/entrance treatments, variation in roof lines
and/or variation in building setbacks.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, Minnesota V (11) ES - 1
11. Essential Services Overlay District
A. Statement of Intent
Essential services and public buildings shall be a permitted use for all districts
which are currently in the public domain and which is the location of actual or
planned facilities intended to serve the public; to permit orderly and economic
development of public service utilities.
B. Definition of Essential Service and Buildings
The erection, construction, alternation, or maintenance by public utilities or
municipal departments or commissions of underground or overhead telephone,
gas, electrical, steam, communication, or water transmission, distribution,
collection, supply, or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains,
sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, policy call boxes, traffic signals,
hydrants, and other similar equipment and buildings in connection therewith for the
furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or
commissions to the residents of Princeton.
C. General Standards
1. Area and yard requirements, if relevant (e.g. buildings), shall be the same as
the underlying district.
2. Building/structural provisions shall be governed only by the State Building
Code and other state mandated ordinances such as: Flood Plain
Management, Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area, etc. This
ordinance does not relieve the need for additional permits that may be
required for the project.
3. Parking requirements shall be based on the use.
4. Buffer requirements: Where an essential service is located adjacent to
another district in which the principal permitted use may be in conflict with or
may be negatively affected by a building in the district, the Planning
Commission may require buffer strips or other landscaping and related
measures to protect the public interest and/or to comply with the spirit and
intent of this ordinance.
5. Pole buildings may be used if the building is on a five (5) acre site or larger.
Area and yard requirements shall be reviewed for comment by the Planning
Commission.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts - DRAFT
Zoning Ordinance V (20) MOR - 1 Princeton, Minnesota
12. MOR Medical Office Residential District
A. Intent
The Medical/Office/Residential district use joins medical facilities, office parks and
associated residential uses to form a cohesive development. Uses should include
the Fairview Northland Medical Center, medical office facilities such as doctor/
dentist offices, and assisted living and nursing home facilities and limited retail
or commercial uses that support the medical facilities within the City.
B. Permitted Uses
No building shall be erected, converted, or structurally altered in the MOR Health
Care District unless otherwise provided herein, except for one or more of the following,
as well as similar uses:
• Human medical clinics;
• Therapeutic facilities;
• Long-term health care facilities;
• Hospice facilities;
• Other professionally licensed health care offices;
• Assisted living facilities
C. Conditional Uses/Interim Uses
• Daycare facility;
• Mixed Use Health Care Living Facilities, including both residential and commercial
uses in a cohesive development pattern;
• Helicopter landing pad;
• Drug/Convenience Stores
• Day Care Facilities
• Health Clubs
• Healthcare-related pylon and monumental signage.
• Religious Facilities
• Educational Facilities
• Beauty Salon/Barber shop
• Coffee Shop/ Restaurant
• General Merchandise Retail Stores.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts - DRAFT
Zoning Ordinance V (20) MOR - 2 Princeton, Minnesota
• D. Yard Requirements for MOR District
A. Lot area minimum 20,000 sq. ft.
B. Lot width minimum feet ---
C. Front yard minimum 20 feet
D. Side yard minimum 20 feet
E. Street side yard 20 feet
F. Rear yard minimum 20 feet
G. Maximum height 40 feet
E. Other Applicable Regulations
1. All developments that include more than one use as outlined in Subsections
B and C shall be considered as a Planned Unit Development. Other Uses
may be considered or approved by action of the Planning Commission.
2. For aesthetic purpose all buildings and structures shall be faced with the following:
a. Face brick;
b. Pre-finished metal panels;
c. Glass and/or curtain wall construction;
d. Concrete block may be used alone or in conjunction with other permitted
materials or surfaced with stucco, wood, or properly applied masonry
paints;
e. Plastic panels when combined with modular exposed structural curtain
wall systems;
f. Other approved materials.
2. Parking Requirements
a. For every building erected or structurally altered, off street parking shall
be provided according to the schedule provided in this ordinance.
3. Screening Fence Requirement
a. Commercial uses which are adjacent to residential area shall be
screened to minimize visual impact. Loading docks and refuse containers
shall also be screened. Fencing/screening shall be provided
according to this ordinance. This provision shall not be construed as
Chapter V – Zoning Districts - DRAFT
Zoning Ordinance V (20) MOR - 3 Princeton, Minnesota
requiring a screening fence in any required front or adjacent to a public
alley.
4. Landscaping
a. All landscaping requirements shall meet the provisions outlined within
this ordinance.
5. Utilities
a. All lots are to be served by underground utilities.
6. Plans and Specifications
a. All plans and specifications pertaining to site use design shall be approved
by the Planning Commission before any building permit is issued
for a principal use in this district. If the applicant feels the request
was unjustly denied, the applicant may appeal to the Board of Adjustments
for relief.
7. Pole-type construction shall not be permitted.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (13) MN-1 - 1
13. MN-1 Industrial
A. Intent
The intent of the MN-1 Industrial District is to provide a district for the development
and operation of manufacturing, storage, and distribution type business.
This district shall encourage the development of industrial uses which promote
high-tech quality uses more likely to be compatible with existing uses and which
shall be free of hazardous or objectionable elements such as noises, odor, dust,
smoke, glare, or other pollutants.
B. Permitted Uses (Rev. 06.14.12; Ord. 687)
In the MN-1 Industrial District, unless otherwise provided herein, no building or
land shall be used and no building shall be erected, converted, or structurally altered,
except for one or more of the following, as well as similar uses:
* Equipment and service trade with outside storage, provided that:
(a) The exterior storage area must be located to the rear of the building
or site;
(b) The exterior storage area must be fenced and fully screened from
view.
* Manufacturing uses and manufacturing uses with exterior storage is permitted
as an accessory use to the permitted use, provided that:
(a) The exterior storage area must be located to the rear of the building
or site;
(b) The exterior storage area must be fenced and fully screened from
view.
* Motor freight terminals;
* Offices – business and professional;
* Printing and publishing;
* Public buildings and facilities;
* Research and design laboratories;
* Warehousing;
* Wholesale business;
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (13) MN-1 - 2
* Wholesale business with outside storage provided that:
(a) The exterior storage area must be located to the rear of the building;
(b) The exterior storage area must be fenced and fully screened from
view.
* Veterinary clinics with outdoor boarding facilities;
* Wholesale business with outside storage, provided that:
(a) The exterior storage area must be located to the rear of the building
or site;
(b) The exterior storage area must be fenced and fully screened from
view.
* Truck and heavy equipment sales & repair;
C. Prohibited Uses
The following uses are not permitted:
* Residence or place of abode of any persons (facilities may be furnished within
an industrial building to provide sleeping for security reasons).
* No noxious or offensive trades, services, or activities, and nothing which may
become a nuisance or annoyance-unsightliness, excessive emission of odors,
dusts, fumes, smoke, or noise.
D. Conditional Uses (Rev. 6-14-12; Ord. 687)
The following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use
Permit:
* Any use in which over 50% of the site would be used for uncovered outside
storage, provided that:
(a) The exterior storage area must be located to the rear of the building
or site;
(b) The exterior storage area must be fenced and fully screened from
view.
* Auction business (indoor or outdoor), provided that (Rev. 09-13-12, Ord. 689):
(a) A principal building shall be located on the property.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (13) MN-1 - 3
(b) An adequate paved parking area shall be provided according to the
Zoning Code provisions to accommodate the building size and use
and also identified upon an approved site plan.
(c) Outdoor storage areas for auction merchandise and parking areas
for auction attendees shall be clearly identified upon an approved
site plan.
i. Where measures are planned to control dust and drainage
and approved by the City Engineer, such parking and storage
areas may be surfaced with rock, gravel or other pervious
material approved by the city engineer.
(d) Access to and from the property shall be addressed on the site plan
and in a written statement.
(e) Adequate area shall be provided for the loading and unloading of
auction merchandise.
(f) Screening measures shall be provided to address nuisance problems,
such as noise and dust, if determined necessary by the Planning
Commission.
* Heavy equipment contractors that require outside storage of equipment and
construction materials, provided that:
(a) The exterior storage area must be located to the rear of the building
or site;
(b) The exterior storage area must be fenced and fully screened from
view.
* Indoor shooting range provided that (Rev. 07-25-13; Ord. 698):
(a) The Applicant demonstrates that noise, air pollution, and any hazardous
wastes are properly mitigated and managed;
(b) The Applicant provides to the City a copy of the current publication
of the National Rifle Association’s Range Source Book: A Guide to
Planning and Construction, and follows the recommendations
therein for the type of shooting range being proposed by the Applicant;
(c) The Applicant operates the shooting range in accordance with (and
provide a copy to the City) all other local, state, and federal regulations;
(d) The hours of operation are reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission; and
(e) Retail sales allowed as an accessory use as reviewed and approved
by the Planning Commission.
* Retail sales as an accessory use, provided that:
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (13) MN-1 - 4
(a) Retail sales of products stored or manufactured on the site shall be
allowed as an accessory use. A maximum of twenty percent (20%) of
the floor area of the space occupied by the particular business, up to
a maximum of eight hundred fifty (850) square feet, may be used for
retail sales purposes. A single structure leased to more than five (5)
tenants under separate leases shall have no more than ten percent
(10%) of the total building area devoted to retail space as an accessory
use. An accessory retail sales area of greater than eight hundred
fifty (850) square feet per business may be approved by conditional
use permit, provided that the maximum floor area percentages
of this subsection are not exceeded.
(b) Parking as required for retail in this title shall be provided in addition
to that required for the principal use.
(c) No sign or display in excess of four (4) square feet shall be placed on
or off the property advertising the existence of the retail sales facility.
E. Interim Uses (Rev. 06-14-12; Ord. 687)
The following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of an Interim Use Permit:
* Churches and transitional/interim churches provided that:
(a) The principal structure and any accessory structures used for assembly
shall be located at least fifty feet (50’) from any lot line adjacent
to a residential zoning district.
(b) Joint parking arrangements allow for compliance with parking requirements
for all uses (as regulated by Chapter VI, Performance
Standards).
* Daycare accessory to a principal use;
* Ready mix and asphalt plants;
* Stockpiling of sand, gravel, fill dirt, or other approved material.
F. Yard Requirements for MN - 1 District
All Uses
A. Lot area minimum 12,500 sq ft
B. Lot width minimum feet ---
C. Front yard minimum 40 feet3
D. Side yard minimum 20 feet
E. Street side yard 30 feet
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (13) MN-1 - 5
F. Rear yard minimum 20 feet1
G. Maximum height 30 feet2
1 Rear Yard Setback – 50 feet when abutting a residential district.
2 Maximum building height greater than (30) thirty feet, as measured to the eaves.
3 Business that is abutting a highway and a street shall have two front yards.
G. Other Applicable Regulations (Rev. 07-14-16; Ord. 738)
1. For aesthetic purpose, all buildings and structures shall be faced with the
following:
a. Face brick;
b. Pre-finished metal panels;
c. Pre-cast concrete panels;
d. Glass and/or curtain wall construction;
e. Concrete block may be used alone or in conjunction with other
permitted materials or surfaced with stucco, wood, or properly applied
masonry paints;
f. Plastic panels when combined with modular exposed structural curtain
wall systems;
g. Other approved materials provided they maintain the integrity of the
surrounding structures while meeting the requirements for building
materials in the MN-1 Industrial District. Pole type construction
must have a site plan review including an architectural design review
with the Planning Department Staff and/or Zoning Administrator;
h. Windows are required in the front of the building pending planning
review and demonstration of need, e.g. security etc;
2. Parking Requirements
a. For every building erected or structurally altered, off-street parking
shall be provided according to the schedule provided in this ordinance.
3. Screening Fence Requirement
a. Commercial uses which are adjacent to residential area shall be
screened to minimize visual impact. Loading docks and refuse containers
shall also be screened. Fencing/screening shall be provided
according to this ordinance. This provision shall not be construed
as requiring a screening fence in any required front or adjacent to a
public alley.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (13) MN-1 - 6
4. Landscaping
a. All landscaping requirements shall meet the provisions outlined
within this ordinance.
5. Signs
a. Only monument and wall signs are allowed.
6. Utilities
a. All lots are to be served by underground utilities.
7. Plans and Specifications
a. All plans and specifications pertaining to site use design shall be
approved by the Planning Commission before any building permit is
issued for a principal use in this district. If the applicant feels the request
was unjustly denied, the applicant may appeal to the Board of
Adjustments for relief.
b. All business condominiums shall follow the Uniform Condominium
Act of the State of Minnesota.
c. A business condominium coverage of a lot shall follow the parking
requirements and all other requirements in the business zone in
which the condominium will be located.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (14) MN-2 - 1
14. MN-2 Industrial
A. Intent
The intent of the MN-2 Industrial District is to preserve areas for heavy industrial
uses, such as manufacturing with some environmental impacts (e.g. noise, dirt)
and visual impacts which could be observed beyond property boundaries.
B. Permitted Uses (Rev. 06-14-12; Ord. 687)
In the MN-2 Industrial District, unless otherwise provided herein, no building or
land shall be used and no building shall be erected, converted, or structurally altered,
except for one or more of the following, as well as similar uses:
* Any use permitted in the MN-1 district;
* Adult Use/Principal (as regulated by Chapter VI, Performance Standards);
* Grain elevators, feed mixing plants;
* Heavy equipment contractors that require outside storage of equipment and
construction materials.
C. Prohibited Uses
The following uses are not permitted:
* Residence or place of abode of any persons (facilities may be furnished within
an industrial building to provide sleeping for security reasons).
* No noxious or offensive trades, services, or activities, and nothing which may
become a nuisance or annoyance-unsightliness, excessive emission of odors,
dusts, fumes, smoke, or noise.
D. Conditional Uses (Rev. 06-14-12; Ord. 687)
The following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use
Permit:
* Any conditional use in the MN-1 District;
* Auction business (indoor or outdoor), provided that (Rev. 09-13-12, Ord. 689):
(a) A principal building shall be located on the property.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (14) MN-2 - 2
(b) An adequate paved parking area shall be provided according to the
Zoning Code provisions to accommodate the building size and use and
also identified upon an approved site plan.
(c) Outdoor storage areas for auction merchandise and parking areas for
auction attendees shall be clearly identified upon an approved site
plan.
i. Where measures are planned to control dust and drainage and
approved by the City Engineer, such parking and storage areas
may be surfaced with rock, gravel or other pervious material approved
by the city engineer.
(d) Access to and from the property shall be addressed on the site plan
and in a written statement.
(e) Adequate area shall be provided for the loading and unloading of auction
merchandise.
(f) Screening measures shall be provided to address nuisance problems,
such as noise and dust, if determined necessary by the Planning
Commission.
* Indoor shooting range provided that (Rev. 7-25-13; Ord. 698):
(a) The Applicant demonstrates that noise, air pollution, and any hazardous
wastes are properly mitigated and managed;
(b) The Applicant provides to the City a copy of the current publication of
the National Rifle Association’s Range Source Book: A Guide to Planning
and Construction, and follows the recommendations therein for
the type of shooting range being proposed by the Applicant;
(c) The Applicant operates the shooting range in accordance with (and
provide a copy to the City) all other local, state, and federal regulations;
(d) The hours of operation are reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission; and
(e) Retail sales allowed as an accessory use as reviewed and approved
by the Planning Commission.
* Structures exceeding 30’;
* Any industrial use not specifically listed as a permitted use in this district, and
which has by its nature a minimum impact of noise, dirt, dust, or visual impacts
which could be observed beyond property boundaries.
E. Interim Use (Rev. 06-14-12; Ord. 687)
The following uses are permitted by the issuance of an interim use permit:
* Concrete and asphalt plants;
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (14) MN-2 - 3
* Salvage yards when completely enclosed with screening, e.g. solid fence or
approved plantings.
F. Yard Requirements for MN-2 District
All Uses
A. Lot area minimum 1 acre
B. Lot width minimum feet ---
C. Front yard minimum 50 feet3
D. Side yard minimum 20 feet
E. Street side yard 40 feet
F. Rear yard minimum 20 feet1
G. Maximum height 30 feet2
1 Rear Yard Setback – 50 feet when abutting a residential district.
2 Maximum building height greater than (30) thirty feet, as measured to the eaves.
3 Business that is abutting a highway and a street shall have two front yards.
G. Other Applicable Regulations (Rev. 07-14-16; Ord. 738)
1. For aesthetic purpose all buildings and structures shall be faced with the following:
a. Face brick;
b. Pre-finished metal panels;
c. Pre-cast concrete panels;
d. Glass and/or curtain wall construction;
e. Concrete block may be used alone or in conjunction with other permitted
materials or surfaced with stucco, wood, or properly applied masonry
paints;
f. Plastic panels when combined with modular exposed structural curtain
wall systems;
g. Other approved materials provided they maintain the integrity of the surrounding
structures while meeting the requirements for building materials
in MN-2 Industrial District. Pole type construction must have a site
plan review including an architectural design review with the Planning
Department Staff and/or the Zoning Administrator;
h. Windows are required in the front of the building pending planning review
and demonstration of need, e.g. security etc;
2. Parking Requirements
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota V (14) MN-2 - 4
a. For every building erected or structurally altered, off-street parking shall
be provided according to the schedule provided in this ordinance.
3. Screening Fence Requirement
a. Commercial uses which are adjacent to residential area shall be
screened to minimize visual impact. Loading docks and refuse containers
shall also be screened. Fencing/screening shall be provided according
to this ordinance. This provision shall not be construed as requiring
a screening fence in any required front or adjacent to a public alley.
4. Landscaping
a. All landscaping requirements shall meet the provisions outlined within
this ordinance.
5. Signs
a. Only monument and wall signs are allowed.
6. Utilities
a. All lots are to be served by underground utilities.
7. Plans and Specifications
a. All plans and specifications pertaining to site use design shall be approved
by the Planning Commission before any building permit is issued
for a principal use in this district. If the applicant feels the request
was unjustly denied, the applicant may appeal to the Board of Adjustments
for relief.
b. All business condominiums shall follow the Uniform Condominium Act
of the State of Minnesota.
c. A business condominium coverage of a lot shall follow the parking requirements
and all other requirements in the business zone in which the
condominium will be located.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, Minnesota V (15) C-1 - 1
This type of area is not considered suitable for building sites and shall only be used for
wildlife habitat.
15. C - 1 Conservation
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-07 Princeton, Minnesota V (16) D-1 - 1
16. D - 1 Airport
All permitted uses, conditional uses, controls, and restrictions are contained in separate
text and maps which have been adopted separately.
Pole-type structures will be allowed.
Exterior metal siding and/or exterior metal roofing of non-glare and non-reflective factory
finished materials shall be permitted.
Yard Requirements:
Side Yard Minimum – 5 feet
Rear Yard Minimum – 5 feet
Permitted Uses:
All airport related businesses.
Interim Uses:
Emergency Service Provider Living Quarters, if the applicant demonstrates that the following
additional conditions are met:
1. To be effective, the Applicant's first responders must be housed in immediate
proximity to equipment necessary to their emergency operations 24 hours of every
day.
2. The number of first responders occupying the Living Quarters is the minimum necessary
to effectively complete the applicant's mission.
3. The living quarters are accessory to the Principal Use on the property
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 V (17) F-1 - 1 Princeton, Minnesota
17. F - 1 Floodplain
All permitted uses, conditional uses, controls, and restrictions have been adopted
separately and are contained in a separate section of this book.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, Minnesota V (18) WS-1 - 1
18. WS - 1 Wild & Scenic Rum River Protection Area
All permitted uses, conditional uses, controls, and restrictions have been adopted
separately and are contained in a separate chapter of this ordinance.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, Minnesota V (19) AT - 1
19. AT - Antenna Tower Overlay District
Regulations for the location, construction, and use of communications towers and antenna.
A. Purpose
The purpose of the Antenna Tower Overlay District is to protect the public health,
safety, general welfare, and to accommodate the telecommunication needs of residents
and businesses by providing a specific zoning district for the use of land for
the establishment and operation of wireless telecommunication towers. Since this
is unique, a special zoning district is appropriate and the City of Princeton reserves
the right to determine the suitability of a rezoning request to Antenna Tower District
based on criteria which includes the following:
1. The compatibility of the rezoning request with surrounding land uses.
2. That the proposed rezoning is necessary in order to provide effective wireless
telecommunication coverage for the City.
3. The rezoning is in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan for the City.
Wireless telecommunications towers shall not be permitted nor conditional uses in
any other zoning district. This section shall apply to all towers over 60 feet in
height.
B. Findings
In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses
while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare, the Council finds
these regulations necessary in order to:
1. Establish standards which permit a reasonable and equitable opportunity for
the establishment of a wireless telecommunication service in the City;
2. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through
structural standards and setback requirements;
3. Minimize adverse effects of towers through careful design and siting standards
which attempt to screen and/or camouflage towers and antennas from
adjacent private and public property;
4. Maximize the use of existing and approved towers, buildings, and other
structures to accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in order
to reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, V (19) AT - 2 Minnesota
C. Uses
The Antenna Tower Overlay District (AT) is an overlay zoning district; land zoned
into the AT will also maintain its original zoning classification. All permitted accessory
and conditional uses allowed in the underlying zoning district will continue to
be allowed on land rezoned to AT, subject to all restrictions and requirements applicable
in the underlying district. In addition to the uses allowed in the underlying
district, the following uses shall be allowed as a conditional use in the AT:
Antenna arrays, including radio, television, commercial wireless telecommunication,
microwave transmitting and receiving equipment, supporting towers, buildings,
and enclosures accessory to the tower and antennas.
D. Co-Location Requirements
A proposal for a new commercial wireless telecommunication service tower shall
not be approved unless it can reasonably be documented by the applicant that the
telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated
on an existing or approved tower or building within a one mile search
radius (one half mile search radius for towers under 120 feet in height, one quarter
mile search radius for towers under 80 feet in height) of the proposed tower due to
one or more of the following reasons:
1. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing
or approved tower or building, as documented by a competent radio frequency
engineer;
2. The planned equipment would cause interference, materially impacting the
usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as
documented by a competent radio frequency engineer;
3. Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius cannot
accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably
as documented by a qualified engineer;
4. Other reasons affecting technical performance, system coverage, and system
capacity that make it impractical to place or locate the planned telecommunications
equipment upon an existing or approved tower.
E. Tower Design Requirements.
All antennas erected, constructed, or located within the City shall comply with the
following requirements:
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, V (19) AT - 3 Minnesota
1. Towers shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment to the
maximum extent possible through the use of color, except in instances where
the color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation
Administration.
2. Commercial wireless telecommunication service towers shall be of a monopole
design unless the Planning Commission determines that an alternative
design is preferred.
F. Design Standards.
All antennas erected, constructed, or located within the City shall comply with the
following requirements:
1. All applicable provisions of this code.
2. Tower designs shall be certified by a qualified engineer to conform to the latest
structural standards and wind loading requirements of the Uniform Building
Code and the Electronics Industry Association.
3. With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service and connection
lines approved by the City, no part of any antenna or tower, nor any
lines, cable equipment, wire, or braces in connection with either, shall at any
time extend across or over any part of any right-of-way, public street, highway,
sidewalk, or property line.
4. All towers shall be protected against unauthorized climbing. The bottom of
the tower (measured from ground level to 12 feet above ground level) shall
be constructed in such a manner to preclude unauthorized climbing.
The tower, antenna, and supporting equipment shall be enclosed by an eight
foot high chain link fence with a locked gate.
5. Only one tower shall exist at any one time on any lot or parcel. The minimum
lot size requirement shall be one acre.
6. Towers and antennas shall be designed to conform with accepted electrical
engineering methods and practices and to comply with the provisions of the
National Electrical Code.
G. Signs and Advertising.
No advertising, logos, or identification of any kind is permitted, except as may be
required by Federal and State authorities.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, V (19) AT - 4 Minnesota
H. Accessory Utility Buildings.
All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall be architecturally designed
to blend in with the surrounding environment and shall meet such setback
requirements as are compatible with the actual placement of the tower. Ground
mounted equipment shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except
where a design of non-vegetative screening better reflects and complements the
architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood.
I. Tower lighting.
Towers and antennas shall not be illuminated or display strobe lights unless specifically
required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other Federal or State
authority. When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures
used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be attached to the
tower at the City’s discretion.
J. Tower Setbacks and Tower Height.
Towers shall conform with each of the following requirements:
1. Towers shall not be located between a principal structure and a public street.
2. Towers shall meet setback requirements, equal to the height of the tower,
from all property lines.
3. Towers shall not encroach upon any easements.
4. The maximum height of any tower, including antennas and other attachments,
shall not exceed 150 feet. The height of a tower may be increased by
20 feet to accommodate each additional user above those required by colocation
up to a maximum height of 190 feet.
K. Time Limit On Tower Completion.
Once a tower is approved by the City, the tower must be substantially completed
within one year, including any structures accompanying the tower, following the
date of tower approval.
L. Interference with Telecommunications.
No new or existing telecommunication service shall interfere with public safety telecommunication.
All applications for new services shall be accompanied by an intermodulation
study which provides a technical evaluation of existing and proposed
transmissions and indicates all potential interference problems.
Chapter V – Zoning Districts
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, V (19) AT - 5 Minnesota
M. Additional Submittal Requirements.
In addition to the information required elsewhere in this code, development applications
for towers and/or antennas shall include the following supplemental information:
1. A report from a qualified engineer that 1) describes the tower and antenna
height and design, including a cross-section and elevation; 2) documents the
approximate height above grade for potential mounting positions for colocated
antennas and the approximate minimum separation distances between
antennas; and 3) describes the tower’s capacity generally, including
the number and type of antennas that it can accommodate.
2. For all commercial wireless telecommunication service towers, a letter of intent
committing the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the
shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable
terms and conditions for shared use.
N. Antennas Mounted On Roofs, Walls, and Existing Towers.
The placement of the wireless telecommunication antennas on roofs, walls, and
existing towers may be approved administratively, without requiring rezoning to
Antenna Tower Overlay District, provided the antennas meet all applicable requirements
of this code and the following:
1. The maximum height of an antenna shall not exceed 15 feet above the roof
and shall be set back at least 10 feet from the roof edge.
2. A site plan application which includes the location of the proposed antennas
on the structure and elevations, and an application for a building permit.
3. Any equipment placed on water towers within city limits shall be subject to
the approval and control of the Public Utilities Commission.
O. Abandoned or Unused Portions of Towers.
Abandoned or unused towers or portions of towers and accompanying accessory
facilities shall be removed within twelve months of the cessation of operations of
an antenna facility at the site unless a time extension is approved by the Planning
Commission. In the event that a tower is not removed within twelve months of the
cessation of operations at a site, the tower and associated facilities may be removed
by the City and costs of removal assessed against the property.
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 1
Chapter 6
PERFORMANCES
STANDARDS
The guiding of urban development so as to bring about a compatible relationship of uses
depends upon certain standards being maintained. Permitted uses, uses by conditional
permit, and accessory uses in the various districts shall conform to the following standards.
A. Noise
Any use established shall be so operated that no noise resulting from said use is
perceptible and excessive to the normal senses beyond the boundaries of the lot line
of the site on which such use is located. Noise levels shall be regulated by the
standards of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. If the City determines
excessive noise is emanating from a site, the City may require a noise study and
require cooperation by the property owner including full payment of the noise study.
This standard shall not apply to incidental traffic, parking, loading, construction, or
maintenance operations. (Rev. 11-18-2010; Ord. 658)
B. Smoke and Particulate Matter
Any use established, enlarged, or remodeled after the effective date of this ordinance
shall be so operated as to control the emission of smoke or particular matter to the
degree that it is not detrimental to the normal senses or shall endanger the health,
safety, comfort, or general welfare of the public.
1. Intent
2. Standards
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 2
C. Toxic or Noxious Matter
Any use established shall be so operated as not to discharge across the boundaries
of the lot or through percolation into the subsoil beyond the boundaries of the lot
wherein such use is located toxic, or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be
detectable or to endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause
injury or damage to property or business.
D. Odors
Any use established, enlarged, or remodeled shall be so operated as to prevent the
emission of odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable by normal
senses at any point beyond the lot line of the site on which such use is located.
E. Glare or Heat
Any use requiring an operation producing an intense heat or light transmission shall
be performed with the necessary shielding to prevent such heat or light from being
perceptible and excessive to the normal senses beyond the lot line of the site on
which the use is located.
F. Refuse and Other Waste Material
It shall be prohibited to allow the piling, storing, keeping, or accumulation of garbage,
trash, ashes, old machinery, wrecked or unlicensed vehicles, other discarded or
uncared for building materials, and/or other property and debris. Waste material shall
not be washed into the public storm sewer system nor any toxic or noxious matter into
the sanitary sewer system. Should the waste be of a solid form rather than fluid, the
storage area shall be so located and fenced as to be removed from public view and
be disposed of according to State regulations. (Refer to applicable sewer ordinances.)
G. Height Limitations
The requirements and regulations specified heretofore in this ordinance shall be
subject to the following:
1. Height limitations as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance shall be increased to
60 feet when applied to the following:
* Light Poles (not including Flag Poles) (Rev. 11-18-2010; Ord. 658)
* Signs
* Silos
* Smoke Stacks
* Water Towers
* Windmills
* Flagpoles Located in a Business or Industrial District (Rev. 11-22-11; Ord. 675)
Heights in excess of those allowed under this section shall be permitted only by
a Conditional Use Permit granted by the Planning Commission.
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 3
H. Building Relocation
It shall be the stated policy of the City of Princeton to maintain a harmonious and high
standard of residential, commercial, and industrial development, and to protect
residential, commercial and industrial areas from deleterious effects through ensuring
that both new and relocated dwellings and commercial and industrial properties from
other areas, both within the City of Princeton and from outside, shall meet specified
requirements. Such relocations of dwellings and commercial and industrial properties
as stated above must conform to all regulations of the Building Code and may only be
permitted in the zoning district where all necessary specifications as to lot sizes,
setbacks, type of use, height regulations, and all other conditions as laid down in this
ordinance are met. In addition, such relocations must be approved by the Zoning
Administrator and Building Inspector prior to being moved.
I. Fences (Rev. 9-25-14; Ord. 711)
1. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation, except on a farm and related to farming, shall
construct or cause to be constructed or erected within the City of Princeton any
fence without first making an application for and securing an administrative
fence permit. A fence more than six (6) feet in height shall require a building
permit.
2. General Standards.
a. A current Certificate of Survey by a registered land surveyor may be
required by the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector to establish the
property lines.
b. Fences may be constructed within public and private drainage and utility
easements provided that removal or replacement of the fence, or a portion
thereof, shall be at the property owner’s expense if access is required.
c. No fence shall obstruct the flow of water nor divert water onto a neighboring
property.
d. Tennis courts shall be enclosed with fencing. Chain link fences used for the
enclosure of tennis courts or other such recreational purposes shall not
exceed ten (10) feet in height and shall be located in the rear yard in
Residential Districts.
3. Construction and Maintenance.
a. Every fence shall be constructed in a substantial, workmanlike manner and
of substantial material reasonably suited for the purpose for which the fence
is proposed to be used.
b. All fences shall be constructed of either stone, brick, finished wood, durable
vinyl or other durable plastic materials, ornamental non-corrosive aluminum
or iron, or chain link.
c. Fences shall be constructed so that their more attractive side faces
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 4
neighboring property.
d. Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair; if
allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair or danger, or
constitute a nuisance, public or private, the Zoning Administrator shall
commence proper proceedings for the abatement thereof.
e. Link fences, wherever permitted, shall be constructed in such a manner that
no barbed ends shall be at the top.
f. Barbed wire fences and electric fences shall only be permitted on farms.
Barb wire fences shall also be permitted for demonstrated security purposes
in commercial and industrial districts.
g. Fences that exist as an enclosure and restrict access shall provide a gate
that affords reasonable and convenient access for public safety.
h. No physical damage of any kind shall result to abutting property.
4. Locations:
a. Fences may be located on a property line adjoining another property, if:
(1) The property owner has a current Certificate of Survey; or
(2) The property identification irons have been located; or
(3) The neighboring property owner agrees in writing.
b. If the conditions of subsection 4a. cannot be met, then a fence shall be
located a minimum of two (2) feet off the reasonably-identified property line.
c. No fence shall be located on public right-of-way.
5. Residential District Fences.
a. No fence shall be erected or maintained more than six (6) feet in height in
any Residential District.
b. No fence shall be erected in any required front yard and side yard
adjacent to a street to a height in
excess of three and one-half feet (3
1/2).
c. No fence shall be higher than three (3)
feet above grade on any corner lot
within the tri-angular area formed by
the intersecting street right-of-way lines
and a straight line joining the two (2)
street lines at points which are twenty
(20) feet distant from the point of
intersection. See graphic.
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 5
6. Commercial and Industrial District Fences.
a. Fences in all Commercial and Industrial Districts shall not exceed eight
(8) feet in height.
b. Boundary line fences abutting residential districts shall conform to those
conditions applying to the residential district.
c. Fences on which barbed wire may be placed and are erected primarily to
secure a particular given area may have arms not to exceed thirty-six (36)
inches in length located a minimum of seven feet (7') and a maximum of
eight feet (8') above the ground surface.
d. Fences erected within the required front yard or side yard adjacent to a
street shall not be over eight (8) feet in height and shall be at least
seventy-five (75) percent open for the passage of air and light and
provide for traffic visibility.
J. Home Occupations (Rev. 11-18-2010; Ord. 658 & Rev. 04-28-2016; Ord. 733)
A home occupation is that accessory use of a dwelling that shall constitute either
entirely or partly the livelihood of a person living in the dwelling. All permitted home
occupations require an approved conditional use permit.
1. Permitted Home Occupations
The following are permitted home occupations with an approved conditional use
permit:
* Childcare.
* Dressmaking, sewing, and tailoring.
* Home micro brewing, cooking and preserving.
* Home crafts such as model making, rug weaving, lapidary work, and
woodworking.
* Laundry-related services.
* Telephone answering and clerical work.
* Tutoring, limited to four students at a time.
* Other approved occupancy.
The following conditions must be met to meet the conditional use permit
requirements:
a. The home occupation does not change the outside appearance of the
dwelling and is not visible from the street.
b. The home occupation does not generate traffic, deliveries, parking, or
sewerage and/or water use in excess of what is normal in the residential
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 6
neighborhood.
c. The home occupation does not create a hazard to person or property or
generate hazardous waste.
d. The home occupation does not create any detriments to the residential
character of the neighborhood due to the emission of noise, smoke, dust,
gas, heat, glare, vibration, electrical interference, or any other nuisance
resulting from it.
e. The home occupation does not result in the outside storage or display of
anything except a nameplate no larger than two square feet in area which
may only be attached to the wall of the dwelling.
f. The home occupation does not utilize more than 25% of the total floor
area of the dwelling. If an accessory building is used for such home
occupation, it shall not exceed 625 square feet in total floor area.
g. The home occupation is conducted by no more than two persons, one of
whom shall reside within the dwelling.
K. Kennels (Rev. 02-11-16; Ord. 729)
A Kennel is any property, except veterinary clinics and doggie daycares, where
more than three dogs or three cats over the age of eight months are owned,
boarded, bred, trained, or offered for sale. All kennels in approved zoning districts
require an interim use permit.
The following conditions, as well as any other conditions found necessary by the
Planning Commission must be met to receive and remain in compliance with an
interim use permit:
a. Animals are allowed outside only under direct supervision.
b. A maximum number of animals allowed at the facility will be
established by the Planning Commission at the time of interim use
permit issuance.
c. Noise shall be mitigated so as to not create a public nuisance for adjoining
properties.
d. Indoor and outdoor facilities are to be kept in a clean, dry, and sanitary
condition. Waste shall be picked up immediately and disposed of in a
sealed container.
e. Adequate storage and refrigeration shall be provided to protect food
supplies against contamination and deterioration.
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 7
f. Indoor facilities shall be adequately ventilated and have ample light
and heat.
g. Adequate screening shall be provided, as determined by the Planning
Commission.
h. Hours of operation shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission.
L. Land Reclamation
Under this ordinance, reclamation is the reclaiming of land by depositing of material
so as to elevate the grade. Land reclamation shall be permitted only by conditional
use permit in all districts unless there is an approved building permit or part of a
subdivision plat grading plan. Any lot or parcel upon which 400 cubic yards or more of
fill or excavation is to be deposited shall be land reclamation. The permit shall include
as a condition thereof a finished grade plan which will not adversely affect the
adjacent land, and as a condition thereof, shall regulate the type of fill permitted,
control of vehicular ingress and egress, and for control of material dispersed from
wind or hauling of material to or from the site.
M. Landscaping (Rev. 11-18-2010; Ord. 658)
1. Purpose and Objectives.
The preservation of existing trees and vegetation as well as the planting of new
trees and vegetation can significantly add to the quality of the physical
environment of the community. This section provides for the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the City and is intended to:
a. Promote the reestablishment of vegetation in urban areas for aesthetic,
health and urban wildlife reasons;
b. Establish and enhance a pleasant visual character which recognizes
aesthetics and safety issues;
c. Promote compatibility between land uses by reducing the visual, noise
and lighting impacts of specific development on users of the site and
abutting uses;
d. Unify development, and enhance and define public and private spaces;
e. Promote the retention and use of existing vegetation;
f. Aid in energy conservation by providing shade from the sun and shelter
from the wind;
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 8
g. Reduce flooding and erosion by stabilizing soils with trees and
vegetation.
2. Landscaping Plan.
a. A landscaping plan shall be submitted at the time of site plan/preliminary
plat review for any:
1) New development or new building construction in any commercial,
industrial, single-family residential, multiple-family residential,
public/institutional or planned unit development.
2) Modification or expansion of a building or improvements to a site
that affect greater than 10% of the existing non-residential
structure/site, and/or when there is a change in land use.
Landscaping requirements shall be applied to those portions of the
site that are directly affected by the proposed improvements, or
change in land use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. In
all cases appropriate screening and buffering shall be provided for
the entire site.
3) No building permit for any non-single family residential construction
shall be issued until a landscape plan, if necessary, is approved and
a security is obtained by the City.
b. Plan Requirements. Complete landscaping, screening, and erosion
control plans in the R-3 (excluding single family), B-1, B-2, B-3, HC-1,
MOR, MN-1 and MN-2 districts shall be prepared and submitted for
approval based on the following requirements:
1) Plans: (as determined by Zoning Administrator may include or be
modified by the Planning Commission for the following)
a) Detailed natural land analysis, including vegetation, soil types
and slopes.
b) Man-made features.
c) Details of all proposed vegetative landscaping materials,
including placement, Latin name, common name,
caliper/height, quantity.
d) Details of all proposed non-vegetative land landscaping and
screening materials.
e) Where landscape or man-made materials are used to provide
required screening from adjacent and neighboring properties, a
cross-section shall be provided at a legible scale illustrating the
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 9
prospective of the site from the neighboring property and
property line elevation.
f) Planting and construction schedule for completion of
landscaping and screening plans. The final landscaping and
screening plan must be approved by the Planning Commission
at the time of site plan review.
c. Copies: as required (seven (7) 2' x 3' and fifteen (15) 11" x 17" of site
plan.
3. Landscaping requirements specific to Single-Family Detached Dwellings; Two-
Family Dwellings; Twinhomes; and Townhomes:
a. Lots must maintain sod in the City’s right-of-way and along the 5-foot
perimeter of the property, except in areas where the required driveway
access is located. An exception to this restriction would be landscape
materials (2 to 3 feet in width) adjacent to a residential driveway.
b. Number of trees. The minimum number of major or over-story trees on
any given site shall be as indicated below with a minimum percentage of
landscape area for non-residential use districts. These are the minimum
substantial plantings, in addition to other under-story trees, shrubs,
flowers, and ground cover, deemed appropriate for a complete quality
landscape treatment of the site.
c. Each lot shall contain trees totaling at least 8 inches in diameter at
installation with a minimum of 2 trees located in the front yard. The
Zoning Administrator may authorize the placement of some of the
required trees within the side or rear yard if, due to the shape of the lot,
there are unique circumstances.
4. Landscape requirements specific to Business Districts:
a. B-1 Central Business District:
1) No specific Area requirement.
b. B-2 Neighborhood Commercial District business:
1) At least thirty percent (30%) of the land area shall be sodded and
landscaped with approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
2) At least eight percent (8%) of the internal parking area shall be
landscaped. This area is counted as part of the overall required
"landscape area."
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 10
c. B-3 General Business District:
1) At least twenty five percent (25%) of the land area shall be sodded
and landscaped with approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
2) At least three percent (3%) of the internal parking area shall be
landscaped. This area is counted as part of the overall required
"landscape area."
d. MOR Medical Office Residential and HC-1, Health Care District:
1) At least twenty five percent (25%) of the land area shall be sodded
and landscaped with approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
2) At least three percent (3%) of the internal parking area shall be
landscaped. This area is counted as part of the overall required
"landscape area."
5. Landscape requirements specific to Industrial Districts:
a. MN-1 Industrial District:
1) At least fifteen percent (15%) of the land area shall be sodded and
landscaped with approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
2) At least three percent (3%) of the internal parking area shall be
landscaped. This area is counted as part of the overall required
"landscape area."
b. MN-2 Industrial District:
1) At least fifteen percent (15%) of the land area shall be sodded and
landscaped with approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
2) At least three percent (3%) of the internal parking area shall be
landscaped. This area is counted as part of the overall required
"landscape area."
6. Landscape requirements specific to Multiple Family Dwelling, Condominiums,
and Other Uses in Residential Districts not aforementioned (including, but not
limited to: churches, schools, public buildings, nursing homes, commercial
licensed daycare facility, recreation (facilities):
a. At least fifty percent (50%) of the land area shall be sodded and
landscaped with approved ground cover, shrubbery and trees.
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 11
b. At least eight percent (8%) of the internal parking area shall be
landscaped. This area is counted as part of the overall required
“landscaped area.”
7. Landscaping shall provide for an appropriate mix of plantings around a
minimum of fifty (50) percent of the exterior footprint of all buildings, except for
buildings in the Industrial Districts, which shall provide for an appropriate mix of
plantings along the front building wall elevation. Landscaping shall improve the
appearance of the structure and break up large unadorned building elevations.
8. Minimum size of plantings:
a. Over story deciduous - 2 1/2 inch caliper.
b. Coniferous - 6 feet in height.
c. Shrubs - 24-inch pot.
d. Ornamental trees - 2 inch caliper.
In the event a site plan layout does not have adequate open space to
accommodate plant quantities as per ordinance, such quantities per species
can be combined into less quantities per species, provided total required height
or caliper is maintained. Trees shall be of varying species and shall be in
accordance with the minimum size of plantings.
9. Species:
a. All trees and plantings used in site developments shall be indigenous to
the appropriate hardiness zone and physical characteristics of the site.
b. All deciduous trees proposed to satisfy the minimum requirements of this
policy shall be long-lived hardwood species.
c. The complement of trees fulfilling the requirements of this section shall
be not less than 25% deciduous and not less than 25% coniferous.
Single-family residential development is exempt from this requirement.
e. Species of trees and plantings selected for any site shall follow the City’s
list of prohibited and acceptable trees and plantings available at City Hall.
10. Method of installation:
All deciduous and coniferous trees shall be ball and burlap and staked and
guyed per National Nurseryman's Standards. All shrubs shall be potted.
11. Sodding and ground cover:
All open areas of any site not occupied by buildings, parking, or storage, shall
be sodded or seeded over four (4) inches of topsoil. Exceptions are as follows:
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 12
a. Seeding over four (4) inches of topsoil of future expansion areas (areas
to be built upon within eighteen (18) months as shown on approved
plans.
b. Undisturbed areas containing existing natural vegetation which can be
maintained free of foreign and noxious materials.
c. Areas designated as open space for future expansion area properly
planted and maintained with grass.
12. Slopes and berms:
a. Final slope grade steeper than the ratio of 3:1 will not be permitted
without special approval of treatment, such as terracing or retaining walls.
b. Berming used to provide required screening of parking lots and other
open areas shall not have a slope to exceed 3:1.
13. Use of Landscaping for Screening:
Where natural materials, such as trees or hedges are approved in lieu of
required screening by means of walls or fences, density and species of planting
shall be such to achieve ninety (90%) percent opaqueness year round.
14. Maintenance Policy:
All new plants shall be guaranteed for 12 months from the time planting has
been completed. All plants and sodding shall be alive, of good quality, and
disease-free at the end of the warranty period or be replaced. Any
replacements shall be warranted for 12 months from the time of planting. It is
the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that the landscaping is
maintained in an attractive condition at all times. The owner shall replace any
damaged or dead trees, shrubs, ground covers, and sodding.
15. Erosion Control:
All open disturbed areas of any site shall be seeded as an erosion control
measure.
16. Clear Cutting:
No clear cutting of woodland areas shall be permitted. Shade trees of six (6)
inches or more in caliper shall be saved unless it can be demonstrated that
there is no other way to develop the site.
17. Landscaping may be permitted in utility and drainage easements or road rightof-
way with the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 13
18. No plantings that may interfere with traffic visibility shall be permitted within the
intersection sight distance triangle.
N. Lot Provisions (Lot of record)
A lot or parcel of land for which a plat of record has been recorded with the County
Recorder upon or prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be deemed a
buildable lot provided it has frontage on a public right-of-way and meets all setbacks.
All subdivision applications submitted for approval to the City shall, in all respects,
fully comply with the City of Princeton's Subdivision Ordinance, found under separate
cover.
O. Mining
The extraction and incidental processing of sand, gravel, or other material from the
land in the amount of 1,000 cubic yards or more and removal thereof from the site
shall be mining. In all districts the conduct of mining shall be permitted only upon
issuance of a conditional use permit. Such permit shall include, as a condition
thereof, the route of trucks moving to and from the site and a plan for a finished grade
which will not adversely affect the surrounding land or the development of the site on
which the mining is being conducted. Subdivision plats are exempt from the above
permit if they provide a landscaping plan showing fill and excavating.
P. Off-Street Loading and Unloading
On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, involving the
receipt and distribution of vehicles, materials, merchandise, supplies, or equipment
there shall be provided and maintained on the lot, in addition to off-Street parking
requirements as specified in this ordinance, adequate space for maneuvering,
standing, loading, and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use
of dedicated right-of-way. Such space shall be provided as follows:
1. All spaces shall be laid out in dimensions of at least 10 feet by 50 feet, or 500
square feet in area, with a clearance of at least 14 feet in height. Loading dock
approaches shall be provided with a pavement having a permanent, durable,
and dustless surface. All spaces shall be provided in at least the following ratio.
Gross Floor Area
(in square feet)
Loading and Unloading Space
Required in Terms of Square Feet
of Gross Floor Area
0
-
3,000
None
3,000
-
20,000
One space
20,001
-
100,000
One space plus one space for each
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 14
20,000 square feet in excess of
20,001 square feet.
100,001 and over
Five spaces
2. No off-street loading space shall be located in any yard adjoining any residential
use.
3. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of width of the roadway
for the free movement of vehicle traffic, and no person shall stop stand or park
a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to
abutting property, except to unload commercial products, and then only for a
period of up to 20 minutes.
4. Parking of commercial vehicles is permitted in duly designated and sign-posted
loading zones, and in alleys, for a period of up to twenty minutes, provided that
such alley parking does not prevent the flow of traffic therein, except when
impossible to do so, all of which shall be for the purpose of access to abutting
or adjacent property for loading or unloading.
5. The Council may by resolution establish loading or truck zones. Such zones
shall be marked by appropriate signs.
6. During loading zone hours, as posted, no person shall stop, stand, or park any
vehicle in a loading zone except to receive or discharge passengers or freight
and then only for a period no longer than is necessary for the purpose. No
person shall occupy a loading zone with a vehicle other than a truck for more
than five (5) minutes during such hours.
Q. Off-Street Parking (Revised 02-22-07, Ord. 597)
Q.1 Space Layout, Standards, Construction, and Maintenance
Off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained in accordance
with the following standards and regulations:
1. No building permit shall be granted for the construction of any parking lot until
the parking lot plan is in conformance with all provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
2. Plans for the layout of an off-street parking lot shall be in accord with the
following minimum requirements. Each space shall be a minimum of one
hundred-eighty (180) square feet in area with a minimum width of nine (9) feet
and minimum depth of 18 feet, with adequate maneuvering as determined by
the Zoning Administrator and/or Building Inspector.
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 15
3. All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes.
Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited.
4. Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and
defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles. Ingress and egress to a parking
lot on commercially or industrially zoned land shall not be across land in a
residentially zoned district.
5. The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes,
required under this section shall be provided with a durable, dustless surface in
accordance with specifications approved by the City Engineer. The parking area
shall be hard-surfaced within one year of the date the permit is issued, except
for automobile and recreational sales areas, which follow the requirements
specified in Chapter V (Rev. 02-28-13; Ord. 696).
6. Off-street parking lots shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water
accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water
onto adjacent property or towards buildings.
7. The owner of any parking or loading area shall maintain the area in good
condition without holes and free of all dust, trash, and other debris.
8. Shared access points and common parking areas may be approved by the
Planning commission during the site plan review process.
Parking Lot Dimensions For Full Sized Cars
Angle (in
degrees)
Stall Width
Stall Length
Aisle
Width
utilization and
double loading
single aisle
45 12.0’ 18.0’ 13.5’* 49.0’
60 10.0 18.0’ 18.5’* 55.0’
75 9.0’ 19.0’ 23.0’* 60.0’
90 9.0’** 18.0’** 26.0’ 62.0’
Parallel 23.0’ 8.5’ 22.0’ 38.0’
? One Way Aisles Only.
** Denotes Minimum Required
Q.2 Design Standards
1. In all residential districts, required parking spaces shall be located on the same
premises as the use they serve. In other districts, they shall be located on the
premises or within 100 feet distance.
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 16
2. Parking areas for one or two family dwellings shall be in the garage, in the rear
yards, or on the driveway leading to the garage only.
3. Parking areas shall be used for automobile parking only, with no sales, repair
work, dismantling, or servicing of any kind permitted.
4. All uses, excluding one and two family residences, where parking or access
facilities are located within 20 feet of a one or two family property line shall be
required to effectively screen their parking facility from the residential use.
Screening may include a sight obscuring fence at least 5 feet in height or
plantings of sufficient type, density, and height so as to provide year-round
screening. Before a building permit shall be issued, the building official shall
approve the screening proposal.
5. Off-street parking areas shall be improved with a durable surface and afford
adequate drainage.
6. All sources of parking area lighting shall be fixed, directed and designed so as
to not create a nuisance to any abutting residential properties.
7. Bicycle Parking. The total parking requirement is one space for each 50 offstreet
parking spaces required. The bicycle parking spaces shall be equipped
with bicycle racks.
8. All parking facilities designed for a capacity of five (5) or more parking stalls
shall have a setback from all adjoining property lines of three (3) feet.
9. When sufficient off-street parking cannot be provided on the same lot or a lot
contiguous to the principal use because of unique circumstances, and
arrangements can be made to provide off-street parking on a noncontiguous
lot, such parking arrangements shall be considered by the Planning
Commission on a case-by-case basis. The Planning Commission may grant
permission to provide parking on a noncontiguous lot provided traffic or land
use problems are not created, and a long-term agreement can be negotiated so
the required off-street parking is maintained as long as the principal use exists.
10 The Planning Commission may allow sharing of required off-street parking by
two separate uses provided the normal peak parking times of the two uses do
not coincide. Only the off-street parking spaces not normally used by the offpeak
use shall be counted as off-street parking for the peak use. Each use shall
have the total required off-street parking available during their respective
periods of peak parking use. A long-term agreement shall be negotiated
whereby both uses are bound to the establishment and maintenance of the
shared off-street parking.
11. If it can be demonstrated by the property owner through market studies or other
means that the required off-street parking is excessive and lesser requirement
justifiable, the Planning Commission may reduce the number of required
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 17
spaces by passage of a resolution approved by a majority of the members of
the Planning Commission.
12. Required off-street parking shall be provided in such a manner that vehicles do
not encroach on a public right-of-way.
Q.3 Number of Minimum Parking Spaces Per Unit of Measure
Reference herein to “employee (s) on the largest shift” means the maximum number
of employees employed at the facility regardless of the time period during which this
occurs and regardless of whether any such person is a full-time employee. The
largest shift may be a particular day of the week or a lunch or dinner period in the
case of a restaurant.
The term “capacity,” as used herein, means the maximum number of persons which
may be accommodated by the use as determined by its design or by building or fire
code regulations, whichever is greater.
Any use not specifically mentioned below shall meet the requirements for uses most
clearly related as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
Handicapped parking – All parking lots must meet minimum handicapped space
parking requirements as per state codes.
1. Residential
Boarding house & Bed and
Breakfast
Two plus one for each room.
Group Day Care, Nursery School Five parking spaces plus one for each five
program participants based on facility’s licensed
capacity.
Group Home, State Licensed
Residential Facility
Two parking spaces for each five beds offered
for residence purposes.
Multi-family Two for each dwelling unit, one for efficiency
unit.
Residential, single-family and
townhouse, two-family,
Manufactured/Mobile
Two for each dwelling unit.
Senior Citizen / Elderly Housing One parking space per dwelling unit.
2. Institutional
Chemical dependent and similar
group homes
One for each three residents plus one for facility
and each staff member.
Community Centers Parking shall be based on the uses within the
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 18
building.
Hospitals One for each three hospital beds and one for
each employee on the maximum shift.
Institutional group homes One for each four group home residents allowed
by this ordinance.
Libraries, Museums, Art Gallery One for each 350 square feet of floor area in
the principal structure.
Nursing home or boarding care
home
One for each five beds and one for each
employee on the largest shift.
Playground and Play Fields Two parking spaces per acre for playground and
40 parking spaces for each play field. When a
public recreation site has more than one use
designation, the required parking spaces must
be determined for each separately. The sum of
those use requirements shall be the total
number of spaces required.
Post Offices, Parcel Delivery
Services
Ten parking spaces plus one parking space for
each 500 square feet of floor area devoted to
office, processing, or service plus one space for
each vehicle customarily kept on the premises.
Private clubs or lodge halls One for each three persons allowed within the
maximum occupancy load as established by
local, county, or state fire, building, or health
codes.
Religious Institutions One parking space for each three seats based
on the design capacity of the main assembly
hall. Up to 50 percent of the required parking
can be provided through a nonexclusive written
agreement with the owner of another property
located within 200 feet of an entrance to the
religious institution which authorizes parking
during times of worship or events conducted at
the religious facility at times other than usual
business hours on property which is an off-street
parking lot which meets the design requirements
of this ordinance and satisfies the parking
requirements for the use of the other property
during ordinary business hours during the usual
work week.
School-Elementary & Junior High At least two parking spaces for each Classroom.
School-High School through
College
One space per teacher and staff member
on the largest shift, plus one space per
five students
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 19
3. Business and Commercial
Banks One for each 250 square feet of useable floor
area and one for each employee.
Beauty and Barber Shops Two spaces per operator, plus one space per
employee on the largest shift.
Bowling Alley Five parking spaces for each alley. Other
uses which are commonly associated with
bowling alleys, such as restaurants and game
room space, will require additional parking
and loading space, the number of which shall
be determined by the parking requirements
for those other uses specified in this section.
Business/Trade /Schools One parking space per student calculated by
reference to the design of the school
structure plus one space for each classroom.
Clubs and Lodges One parking space for each three seats
calculated by reference to the design of the
meeting hall plus one parking space for every
50 square feet of customer space in the
dining area and bar areas.
Convenience store, grocery store,
or any other use
requires additional parking determined by the
parking requirements for those other uses
specified in this section.
Convention/Exhibition Hall One parking space for each three seats
calculated by reference to the design of the
meeting hall.
Fast Food Establishments a. With seating- One space per three
patron seats, plus one space per
employee on the largest shift.
b. Without seating. One space per 200
square feet of gross floor area, plus
one space per employee on the largest
shift.
Food Service/Bakeries One parking space for each 25 square feet of
customer floor area.
Funeral Home One parking space for each five seats plus
one parking space for each 250 square feet
of floor area not used for seating, if fixed
seats are not provided, the requirements
shall be one space for every 35 square feet
of seating area.
Furniture and Home Furnishing
Stores
One space per 500 square feet of customer
sales, plus one space for every 1,000 square
feet of storage area.
Golf Courses At least four parking spaces for each golf
hole plus one space for each 200 square feet
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 20
of locker rooms and clubrooms. If the
clubhouse contains dining or bar facilities, the
parking requirements shall be the same as
for a restaurant.
Golf or Archery Driving Range One parking space for each target or driving
tee.
Laundromats and coin operated
cleaners
One for each four machines.
Hotel/Motel 1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit, guestroom,
or hotel room. Any other use, such as
restaurant and conference space, requires
additional parking and loading spaces
determined by the parking requirements for
those other uses specified in this section.
Miniature Golf 1.5 parking spaces per golf hole.
Motor vehicle sales and service
establishments
One for each 200 square feet of usable floor
area of sales room and two for each service
stall and one for each employee.
Oil Change Station One parking space per employee working on
largest shift, plus one additional parking
space for each service stall.
Medical and Dental Offices and
Clinics
One parking for each 200 square feet of
useable floor area but not less than five
spaces.
Motor Vehicle Service Station One parking space per employee working on
the largest shift plus three additional parking
spaces for each service stall.
Offices One parking space for every 250 square feet
of useable floor area.
Open Sales or Rental Lots
One parking space for each 2,500 square
feet of land which is to be used for sales and
display area.
Restaurants One space per four patron seats or one
space per 100 square feet of gross floor
area, whichever is greater, plus one space
per employee on the largest shift.
Retail stores except as otherwise
specified herein
One for each 250 square feet of useable floor
area and one for each employee.
Skating Rink, Ice or Roller One space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
Sports/Health Clubs, Swimming
Pool
One parking space for every 200 square feet
of non-court area plus two parking spaces
per tennis or racquet ball court and one
parking space for each 50 square feet of
deck area for a swimming pool.
Taverns, Dance Halls, Night Clubs,
and Lounges
One space per 50 square feet of gross floor
area.
Theaters, Auditoriums, Assembly One for each four seats plus one for each
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 21
Hall, Meeting Hall employee on the largest shift.
Veterinary Office Three spaces per doctor, plus one space per
employee on the largest shift.
4. Industrial
Industrial Uses, General except as specifically designated below –
one space per employee on the largest
shift, plus one space per company
vehicle regularly stored on premises.
Industrial or manufacturing
establishments
Five plus one for each employee on the
largest working shift, but not less than
one per 1,000 square feet.
Wholesale and warehouse
establishments
Five plus one for each employee on the
largest working shift, but not less than
one per 2,000 square feet.
Adult Entertainment Center One space per employee on the largest
shift, plus one space per 150 square feet
of gross floor area.
R. Sidewalks
Sidewalk maintenance, replacement, and/or snow and ice removal shall be the
responsibility of the adjacent property owner.
S. Swimming Pools
General Provisions. Private swimming pools are regulated by this section and are
defined as follows: Any enclosure, designed, or intended or used for the containment
of water, whether constructed below ground level or above ground level, having a
surface area exceeding 100 square feet and a depth exceeding 18 inches which is
designed, intended, or used for swimming, wading, or other recreational use by the
owner or tenant of the property upon which the pool is constructed, or by their family
or invited guests without payment of a fee.
1. Building Permit Required. No swimming pool shall be constructed or
established, and no such pool construction shall be commenced in the City of
Princeton without first obtaining a building permit from the Building Official as
required by the State Building Code.
2. Application for Building Permit. The application for the permit shall include,
without limitation, the following information:
a. Complete plans and specifications for the construction of the pool and
accessory features;
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 22
b. A site plan showing size and location of the proposed pool and
surrounding features (ex: patio, deck, landscaping), setback to property
lines, location of all structures on the lot, including the house, garage,
fences, trees, overhead or underground wiring, utility easements, and
other significant improvements or natural features.
c. The proposed location pool equipment, including pumps, filters, electrical
power source (if applicable), flushing and drainage outlets, and other
operational features;
d. Location and specifications of protective fencing.
3. Location Requirements. Private swimming pools shall be constructed so as to
avoid hazard or damage to the occupants of the subject property or the
occupants of adjacent property and shall meet the following minimum
requirements.
a. Utility Lines. No pool shall be located beneath any overhead utility line or
over any underground utility line of any type.
b. Easements. No pool shall be located within any public or private utility
easement, ingress, or egress easement, drainage way, marsh, or other
location in which it will represent a threat to the natural environment.
c. Setbacks. Swimming pools are shall meet accessory structure setback
regulations.
d. Electrical. All electrical installations shall comply with current building,
electrical, and other applicable state and local codes.
3. Walls and/or Fence Required.
a. A structure or safety fence at least four (4) feet in height, but not greater
than eight (8) feet in height, shall enclose the pool to inhibit children from
gaining uncontrolled access.
1) As an alternative to a safety fence, an automatic pool cover may be
utilized if it meets the standards of F1346-91 (reapproved 1996) of the
American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM), as such standards
may be modified, superseded or replaced by ASTM.
2) For above-ground pools, the pool wall may count as the safeguard if it
meets the height requirements as stated above, and a removable
ladder is installed and removed when not in use.
b. All openings or points of entry into the pool area shall be equipped with
gates or doors. All access gates or doors shall contain self-closing and
self-latching hardware in accordance with the Building Code placed at a
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 23
sufficient height so as to be inaccessible to small children. All gates and
doors shall be latched when the pool is not in use. Spacing between the
bottom of the access gate and the ground shall not exceed three (3)
inches.
c. If a property has a fence in the backyard that meets the height
requirements as stated above, then an additional fence shall not be
required around the pool. Such fences shall be required to have a selflatching
mechanism on the interior side of the fence.
5. Miscellaneous Requirements.
a. Nuisance. The conduct of persons and the operation of pools shall be the
responsibility of the owner and the tenant thereof and such conduct of
persons and operation of the pool shall be done in such a manner so as to
avoid any nuisance or breach of the peace, and it shall be unlawful to
allow loud noises to go beyond the boundaries of the property upon which
the pool is located to adjacent property.
b. Drainage. All back flushing water or pool drainage water shall be directed
onto the property of the owner, or onto approved drainage ways. Drainage
onto public streets or other public drainage ways shall require permission
from the Public Works Department.
c. Lighting. Any outdoor lighting of the pool shall not be permitted to spill or
shine upon adjacent properties.
d. Filling. The filling of pools from fire hydrants or other public facilities is
prohibited without prior approval of the Public Utilities Commission.
e. Ladder. Removable ladders shall be removed from the pool when not in
use to prevent uncontrolled access.
T. Traffic Visibility
No fence, wall, hedge, screen, sign, structure,
vegetation, planting, or other obstruction shall be
higher than three (3) feet above grade on any corner
lot within the triangular area formed by the
intersecting street right-of-way lines and a straight
line joining the two (2) street lines at points which
are thirty (30) feet distance from the point of
intersection, measured along or within twenty (20)
feet distant from the point of intersection. See
graphic.
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 24
U. Utility Easement
Where public utility easements are required and/or dedicated, the minimum width of
said easement shall be no less than 10 feet on each side of a property line, or no less
than 20 feet total unless approved by the Planning Commission. No permanent
structure or accessory building shall be allowed within said easement. (Fences and
shrubs can be placed in utility easements with the understanding they will be
removed at the owners expense if access is required.)
V. Water Supply, Storm and Sanitary Sewage Disposal
The design and installation of individual sewage disposal systems and wells or
central water supply systems and central sewage disposal systems shall meet or
exceed the design standards of the Minnesota Department of Health and the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. Any property proposed to be developed outside
of the City sewer zones shall be required to have a sewage disposal system installed
and shall contain a minimum lot size of 2.5 acres. Otherwise, hook-up into the City’s
sewer system is required.
1. It shall be unlawful for any individual, firm, or corporation to construct any
structure which causes or permits the deposit of storm water in the sanitary
sewer collection and disposal system or causes or permits the deposit of
sanitary sewage in the storm water sewer collection and disposal system of the
City of Princeton.
2. Requirements for Alternate Drainfield Site. On each newly created lot outside of
City sewer zones there shall be an area preserved for the construction of two
(2) drainfields. The area set aside for these drainfields shall be of a size and so
located that drainfields can be constructed that will meet all standards of the
Minnesota Department of Health and the Pollution Control Agency.
3. Installers must be MPCA certified.
4. On-site Septic Systems
a. Septic systems may be grandfathered in when becoming a part of the City
and outside of the city sewer zone if the Minnesota Department of Health
and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency standards are met. Otherwise,
hook-up to the City’s system is required.
b. Drainfield - 600 square feet minimum and two (2)-1,000 gallon tanks
(recommended) or at least one (1) 1,250 gallon tank must be installed
exactly as per approved design and MN Chapter 7080.
c. All new and replacement systems require a permit and must be installed
by a licensed and MPCA certified contractor. Systems must be inspected
before being covered. Any system in need of replacement and located
within a City sewer zone must hook up into the City’s sewer system
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 25
W. Adult Uses
1. Purpose: The purpose of Section 2. X. Adult Uses is to provide the opportunity
for operation and establishment of adult land uses while providing controls that
limit negative impacts of adult uses on residential and commercial areas.
2. General: Adult use as defined in this ordinance shall be subject to the following
general provisions:
a. Activities classified as obscene as defined by Minnesota Statute 617.241
are not permitted and are prohibited.
b. Adult uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating
in any building which is also utilized for residential purposes.
c. An adult use which does not qualify as an accessory use shall be
classified as an adult use/principal.
d. Zoning Controls and District Text Application:
1) So as to provide specific opportunity for adult uses to exist within the
City of Princeton, an analysis of the existing city ordinance text and
map has been conducted. It was determined that the MN-1 zoned
districts provided the most appropriate zones to accommodate adult
uses classified as principal activity. Only amendments to the MN-1
text are, therefore, proposed to accommodate adult uses/principal.
Principal adult uses are permitted only in the MN-1 zoned districts.
2) Table 1, as follows, provides an initial basis for determining adult
principal use opportunity within the City of Princeton. The MN-1
zoned districts have been first evaluated as to area as related to the
balance of the City (Table 1).
TABLE 1
CITY OF PRINCETON
PROPOSED ZONING DISTRICTS
ALLOWING ADULT USE/PRINCIPAL
Total
Developable Acres
MN-2
Zoned Acres
Percent of
City
2,030 40 1.9%
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 26
3. Adult Use/Principal
a. Adult use/principal activities shall be located at least seven hundred (700)
radial feet, as measured in a straight line from the building upon which the
adult use/principal is located to the property line, from the following:
1) Residentially zoned property.
2) A licensed daycare center.
3) A public or private educational facility classified as an elementary,
middle, junior high, or senior high school.
4) A public library.
5) A public park.
6) A church.
7) Amusement places such as, but not limited to, roller and skating
rinks, dance halls, and bowling alleys.
8) Liquor sales.
9) Hospitals/clinics.
b. Adult use/principal activities shall be located at least four hundred (400)
radial feet apart as measured from one another.
c. Adult use/principal activity is a separate use and no two adult/principal
activities shall be located in the same building or upon the same property
and each use shall be subject to the above.
d. Adult use/principal activities shall adhere to the following signing
regulations:
1) Sign messages shall be generic in nature and shall only identify the
type of business which is being conducted.
2) Sign messages shall not contain material classified as advertising.
3) Sign messages shall comply with the requirements of size and
number for the district in which they are located.
e. Adult use/principal activities shall be prohibited in establishments where
liquor is served.
f. Adult use/principal activities shall be prohibited at any place or event
where minors are permitted.
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 27
4. Adult Use/Accessory
a. Adult use/accessory activities are permitted only in the B-1, B-2, or B-3
zoned districts.
b. Adult use/accessory activities shall comprise no more than ten percent
(10%) of the floor area of the establishment in which it is located or shall
comprise an area no greater than 100 sq. ft. of floor area in which it is
located, whichever is smaller.
c. Adult use/accessory activities shall be restricted and prohibited from
access to minors by the physical separation of such items from areas of
general public access:
1) Movie Rentals. Display area shall be restricted from general view
and shall be located within a separate room, the access of which is
in clear view and under the control of the persons responsible for the
operation.
2) Magazines. Publications classified or qualifying as adult uses shall
be covered with a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any
material other than the publication title.
3) Other Use. Adult use/accessory activities not specifically cited shall
comply with the intent of this section subject to the approval of the
Planning Commission.
d. Adult use/accessory activities shall be prohibited from both internal and
external advertising and signing of adult materials and products.
e. Adult use/accessory activities shall be prohibited in establishments where
liquor is served.
f. Adult use/accessory activities shall be prohibited at any public show,
movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical, or other performance or
exhibition presented to the general public where minors are admitted.
X. Yards and Open Space
1. The following guidelines shall be required when determining yards and open
space for all developed areas. (See Zoning Districts for maximum allowed
building coverage)
2. No yard or other open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to
make such yard or other open space less than the minimum required by this
ordinance, and if the existing yard or other open space as existing is less than
the minimum required, it shall not be further reduced.
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 28
3. No required yard or other open space allocated to a building or dwelling group
shall be used to satisfy minimum lot area requirements for any other building.
4. The following shall not be considered to be encroachments of yard and setback
requirements:
a. Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental
features, and cornices, provided they do not extend more than two and
one-half feet into any required setback.
b. Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, stoops, or similar structures which
do not extend above the height of the ground level floor of the principal
building and do not extend into required yard setback a distance of five (5)
feet, and yard lights in the residential districts, trees, shrubs, plants,
floodlights, or other sources of light illuminating authorized illuminated
signs, or light standards for illuminating parking areas, loading areas, or
yard for safety and security reasons provided the direct source of light is
not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent residential zoned
property.
c. In side or rear yards only: window or similar bays, window wells not to
exceed a depth of two feet into required yard setback nor to contain an
area of more than 20 square feet, fire escapes not to exceed a width of
three feet, and off-street parking.
d. Rear yard only: decks, balconies, breezeways, detached outdoor picnic
shelters, and recreational equipment, except as regulated hereinafter.
Y. General Development Standards Plan
All proposed developments shall conform with the provisions of this section with
respect to site plan, parking and landscaping. General Development Plan shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission. The Development Plan shall
include as follows:
1. Complete details of the proposed site development including, but not limited to,
identification signs, location of buildings, streets, driveways, parking spaces,
dimensions of the lot, lot area, and yard dimensions.
2. Complete landscaping plans reflecting all information showing planting size and
type.
3. Complete plans for proposed sidewalks or walkways and access driveways to
parking showing distance from street intersection and service areas.
4. Complete plans for storm water drainage systems sufficient to drain and
dispose of all surface water accumulations within the area of the site.
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 29
5. Complete plans and specifications for exterior wall finishes proposed for all
principal and accessory buildings. Elevation drawings shall show proposed
rooftop equipment and any proposed screening.
6. Complete plans for screening of storage areas for waste and garbage.
7. Minimum required building pad shall be at least (3) three feet above the highest
known water table.
8. Lowest floor shall be (3) three feet above the highest known water table.
Z. Planned Unit Development
Planned unit residential, business, and industrial projects may include any
developments having one or more principal uses or structures on a single parcel of
ground or contiguous parcels. The PUD shall consist of a harmonious selection of
uses and grouping of buildings, parking areas, circulation, and open spaces, and
shall be designed as an integrated unit. The plan will be permitted if the PUD meets
the requirements of this ordinance. After the unit plan is approved, all development,
construction, and use shall be in accordance with that plan unless a new planned unit
project plan is submitted to and approved by the City Planning Commission as
required by this ordinance. Any development contrary to the approved unit plan shall
constitute a violation of this ordinance.
1. Properties adjacent to the unit plan shall not be adversely affected.
2. The average density of (dwelling) units per acre shall not be higher than
permitted in the district in which the plan is located.
3. The use of the land shall not differ substantially from the uses permitted in the
district in which the plan is located, except that limited business facilities
intended to serve only the residents of the planned unit project and fully
integrated into design of the project may be considered in residential districts,
multiple-family (dwelling), business, and industrial districts.
4. Without limiting the flexibility of zoning and design standards of a planned unit
development, as defined, the unit plan shall in all other respects, be consistent
with the purposes and procedural requirements of the Ordinance and the
subdivision ordinance. (Rev. 07-08-04, Ord. #555)
5. The unit plan shall be reviewed by the City Planning Commission to determine if
the proposed project is consistent with the City Comprehensive Plan and in the
best welfare of the City and recommendations will be made to the City Council
for final approval.
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 30
AA. Temporary Dwellings (Motorhomes, etc.)
No temporary dwelling may be erected or occupied on any parcel of land within the
City of Princeton, with the following exceptions:
1. Travel and motorhome coaches may be occupied for a period of not more than
two (2) weeks in any six month period, except in designated campgrounds.
(Revised 06-06-05, Ord. #573)
BB. Chickens (Rev. 10-11-12, Ord. 691)
1. Purpose.
It is recognized that the ability to cultivate one’s own food is a sustainable
activity that can also be a rewarding past time. Therefore, it is the purpose
and intent of this ordinance to permit the keeping and maintenance of
chicken hens for eggs and meat sources in a clean and sanitary manner that
is not a nuisance to or detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare of
the community.
2. Interim Use Permit required.
No person shall own, keep, harbor, or have custody of any live chickens
without first obtaining an Interim Use Permit in writing from the City, in
accordance with the provisions of Section IV.6 of the Zoning Ordinance and
subject to the following conditions:
a. The keeping of any poultry besides chickens is prohibited.
b. Roosters are prohibited.
c. No more than four (4) chickens shall be housed or kept on any one
residential lot in any area of the city zoned R-1, R-2, or R-3.
d. Chickens shall only be allowed on single family home lots.
e. Outdoor slaughtering of chickens in city limits is prohibited.
f. Chicken fighting shall not be allowed within city limits.
g. Leg banding of all chickens is required. The bands must identify the
owner’s name, address, and telephone number.
h. Chickens shall not be housed in a residential house or an attached or
detached garage.
i. A separate coop is required to house the chickens. Coops must be
constructed and maintained to meet the following minimum standards:
Chapter VI – Performance Standards
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 04-28-2016 Princeton, Minnesota
VI - 31
1) Located in the side or rear yard.
2) Meet the accessory structure setback requirements.
3) Construction shall be adequate to prevent access by rodents.
j. A run or exercise yard is required to be provided and must be enclosed
by a fence.
k. All premises on which chickens are kept or maintained shall be kept
clean from filth, garbage, and any substances which attract rodents.
The coop and its surroundings must be cleaned frequently enough to
control odor. Manure shall not be allowed to accumulate in a way that
causes an unsanitary condition or causes odors detectible on another
property.
l. All food shall be stored in an enclosed, rodent proof container.
m. Dead chickens shall be disposed of according to the Minnesota Board
of Animal Health rules, which require chicken carcasses to be disposed
of as soon as possible after death, usually within 48 to 72 hours. Legal
forms of chicken carcass disposal include offsite burial, offsite
incineration or rendering, or offsite composting.
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 1
Chapter VII
Signs
The purpose of this Ordinance shall be to coordinate the type, placement, and scale of
signs within the different zoning districts to recognize the commercial communication
requirements of all sectors of the business community; to encourage the innovative use
of design; to promote both renovation and proper maintenance; to allow for special circumstances;
and to guarantee equal treatment under the law through accurate record
keeping and consistent enforcement. These shall be accomplished by regulation of the
display, erection, use, and maintenance of signs. No sign shall be permitted as a main
or accessory use except in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
General Definitions:
Abandoned Sign - a sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business,
lessor, service, owner, product, or activity, and/or for which no legal owner can be
found.
Awning - a shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed
of non rigid materials on a supporting framework. (compare "Marquee")
Building Face - the exposed face of a building, including windows and doors, from
ground level to the roof line. Where a building has a facade, mansard, or awning, the
zoning administrator shall work with the applicant to determine what constitutes the aggregate
building face for purposes of signage.
Canopy - a rigid multi-sided structure covered with fabric, metal, or other material and
supported by a building at one or more points or extremities and by columns or posts
embedded in the ground at other points or extremities. May be illuminated by means of
internal or external sources. (compare "Marquee")
Clearance - (of a sign) the smallest vertical distance between the grade of the adjacent
street, highway, or street curb and the lowest point of any sign, including framework and
embellishments, extending over that grade.
1. Intent
2. Definitions (Rev. 03-10-14; Ord. 706 & Ord. 707) &
(Rev. 03-10-16; Ord. 730)
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 2
Copy - the graphic content of a sign surface in either permanent or removable letter,
pictographic, symbolic, or alphabetic form.
Double-faced sign - a sign with two faces, essentially back-to-back or v-construction.
Electrical sign - a sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring, connections, or fixtures
are used.
Facade - the entire building front including the parapet.
Face of sign - the area of a sign on which the copy is placed.
Frontage - the length of the property line of any one premise along a public right-of-way
on which it borders.
Gas Station Canopy Tube Lighting – lighting that borders gas or filling station canopies.
(Rev. 03-10-16; Ord. 730)
Height (of a sign) - the vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign,
excluding decorative embellishments, to the grade of the adjacent street or the surface
grade beneath the sign, whichever is less (compare "Clearance").
Illegal sign - a sign which does not meet the requirements of this code and which has
not received legal nonconforming status.
Incidental sign - a small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods, facilities,
or services available on the premises, e.g., a credit card sign or a sign indicating hours
of business. Maximum size is four square feet.
Maintenance - for the purposes of this ordinance, the cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement
of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy,
design, or structure of the sign.
Mansard - a roof having two slopes on all sides with the lower slope steeper than the
upper one.
Marquee - a permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and
extending from the facade of a building (compare "Awning").
Multiple-faced sign - a sign containing three (3) or more faces, not necessarily in backto-
back configuration.
Nameplate - a non-electric on-premise identification sign giving only the name, address,
and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants.
Nonconforming sign:
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 3
1. A sign which was erected legally, but which does not comply with subsequently
enacted sign restrictions and regulations.
2. A sign which does not conform to the sign code requirements, but for which a
special permit has been issued.
Owner - a person recorded as such on official records. For the purposes of this ordinance,
the owner of property on which a sign is located is presumed to be the owner of
the sign unless facts to the contrary are officially recorded or otherwise brought to the
attention of the Administrator, e.g., a sign leased from a sign company.
Painted wall sign - any sign which is applied with paint or similar substance on the surface
of a wall.
Parapet - any low wall along the roof of a building (Added 05-08-14; Ord. 707).
Political sign - a temporary sign used in connection with a local, state, or national election
or referendum.
Portable sign - any sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently affixed to
the ground or to a structure or building.
Premise - a parcel of land with its appurtenances and buildings which, because of its
unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit of real estate.
Projecting sign - a sign, other than a flat wall sign, which is attached to and projects
from a building wall or other structure not specifically designed to support the sign.
Real estate sign - a temporary sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is
located being for rent, lease, or sale.
Roof sign - any sign erected over or on the roof of a building. (compare "Mansard,"
"Wall sign")
Sign - any device, structure, fixture, or placard using graphic, symbols, and/or written
copy for the primary purpose of identifying, providing directions, or advertising any establishment,
product, goods, or services.
Sign, Area of - includes the space inside a continuous line drawn around and enclosing
all letters, designs, and background materials exclusive of border, trim and structural
supports. For the purpose of calculating the sign area of multiple-faced or back-to-back
signs the stipulated maximum sign area shall refer to a single face.
Snipe sign - a temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, fence, etc.
Temporary sign - a sign not constructed or intended for long-term use. Such sign is
intended for special events, prior to a permanent sign, etc.
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 4
Under-canopy sign - a sign suspended beneath a canopy, ceiling, roof, or marquee.
Wall graphic - visual artistic representations and symbols.
Sign Styles (Rev. 05-10-07; Ord. 601; Rev. 05-08-14; Ord. 706 & 707)
Awning Sign - a sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat against the surface of an
awning.
Banner Sign - a sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material with no enclosing framework.
Billboard - a sign erected and used for the purpose of advertising a product, event,
place, person, or subject not related to the premises on which the sign is located. (See
off-premises sign).
Canopy Sign - a sign affixed or applied to the exterior facing surface or surfaces of a
building or freestanding canopy.
Changeable Copy (Electronic) Sign – A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic,
non-pictorial text information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic, or symbol
is defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light
emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the
display area. Electronic changeable copy signs include computer programmable, microprocessor
controlled electronic displays. Electronic changeable copy signs do not include
official or time and temperature signs. Electronic changeable copy signs include
projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects
(Added 05-08-14; Ord. 706).
Construction Sign - a temporary sign identifying an architect, contractor, subcontractor,
and/or material supplier participating in construction on the property on which the
sign is located.
Directional sign, off-premise - an off-premise sign which provides directional assistance
to access an establishment conveniently and safely. Such signs shall be limited
by the Administrator in size, height, and placement as justified.
Directional sign, on premise - an on-premise sign giving directions, instructions, or
facility information and which may contain the name or logo of an establishment but no
advertising copy, e.g., parking or exit and entrance signs.
Electronic Graphic Display Sign – a sign or portion thereof that displays electronic,
static images, static graphics or static pictures, with or without text information, defined
by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes
(LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area
where the message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 5
fade, repixalization or dissolve modes. Electronic graphic display signs include computer
programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic or digital displays. Electronic
graphic display signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics
onto buildings or other objects (Added 05-08-14; Ord. 706).
Flashing Sign - a sign which has distracting flashing or moving lights resembling an
emergency vehicle or so designed as to be a traffic hazard (Added 05-08-14; Ord. 706).
Fascia / Soffit Sign – a sign fastened to the fascia or soffit of a building (Added 05-08-14;
Ord. 707).
Freestanding sign - any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or
anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure.
Government sign - any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the
city, county, state, or federal government for traffic direction or for designation of or direction
to any school, hospital, historical site, or public service, property, or facility.
Identification sign - a sign whose copy is limited to the name and address of a building,
institution, or person and/or to the activity or occupation being identified.
Marquee sign - any sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure.
Monument sign - a sign where the extent of the sign surface is attached to the ground
or a foundation in the ground; and where there are no poles, braces, or other visible
means of support other than attachment to the ground.
Multi-Tennant Business Sign (MTB) – a pylon, monument or on premises advertising
sign structure designed to offer coordinated signage for larger commercial or industrial
areas along major highways (Added 05-10-07; Ord. 601).
Off-premise sign - a sign structure advertising an establishment, merchandise, service
or entertainment which is not sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property
on which said sign is located, e.g., "billboards" or "outdoor advertising."
Pylon Sign “On-premise Advertising” sign - a sign which pertains to the use of the
premises and/or property on which it is located.
Sandwich sign – two sign faces that are back to back and are connected together at
the top and apart from each other at the bottom.
Subdivision identification sign - a freestanding or wall sign identifying a recognized
subdivision, condominium complex, or residential development.
Video Display Sign - A sign that changes its message or background in a manner or
method of display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery, which may or may not
include text and depicts action or a special effect to imitate movement, the presentation
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 6
of pictorials or graphics displayed in a progression of frames which give the illusion of
motion, including but not limited to the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or
bands of light, or expanding or contracting shapes, but not including electronic changeable
copy signs. Video display signs include projected images or messages with these
characteristics onto buildings and other objects (Added 05-08-14; Ord. 706).
Wall sign - a sign attached essentially parallel to and extending not more than twentyfour
(24) inches from the wall of a building with no copy on the sides or edges. This definition
includes painted, individual letter, cabinet signs, parapet signs, and signs on a
mansard (Rev. 05-08-14; Ord. 707).
Window sign - lettering placed directly on a window surface.
The following described signs are permitted without a building permit:
A. Bulletin boards not exceeding 32 square feet used in connection with any church,
school, or similar building.
B. A temporary real estate or construction sign not exceeding eight square feet used
on property being sold, leased, or developed. Such signs shall be removed when
the property is sold, developed, or occupied.
C. Banners or pennants commemorating a special event not connected with a business,
are permitted when installed not more than twenty-five (25) days prior to the
event and removed within five (5) days following the event.
D. Banners or pennants for business anniversaries, grand openings, and other special
events and promotions are allowed only for a maximum of ten (10) days.
E. Political Signs.
1. A noncommercial advertising sign expressing the opinion of the owner or occupant
of the appurtenant property regarding political, religious, social, or
economic topics of public interest shall be permitted for a period of ninety
(90) days as long as the message remains noncommercial in nature. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, in any state general election year, such signs
may be posted in any number from forty-six (46) days before the state primary
election until ten (10) days following the state general election (Rev. 05-13-
2010; Ord. 651).
2. Only one such sign per candidate may be displayed per premise. Signs advocating
a position regarding specific candidates or proposition shall be removed
at the expense of the candidate or property owner within ten (10)
3. Signs Permitted without a Building Permit
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 7
days after the election.
F. Sandwich signs are permitted if the following qualifications are met (Rev. 12-22-11; Ord.
676):
1. Only one sandwich sign per establishment per street frontage shall be allowed.
2. Signs shall be located immediately in front of the establishment advertised
upon said sign.
3. Signs shall be no more than four (4) feet high; each sign face shall not exceed
six (6) square feet in area; and the base of said sign shall not exceed
two (2) feet by two (2) feet.
4. Signs shall be posted only during the operating hours of the establishment
advertised upon said sign.
5. Signs shall be located perpendicular to and abutting the back of the curb, or
no closer than two (2) feet to the road surface.
6. Four (4) feet of clear space on a sidewalk shall be maintained for the passage
of pedestrians.
7. Signs shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet from any street or alley
corner.
8. Signs shall only be posted if the adjacent city street(s), sidewalk(s), and curb
are clear of snow.
9. Signs must be securely anchored.
G. In residential areas, signs advertising garage sales or home sales are permitted if
the sign meets the following qualifications:
1. The sale is not part of or used in connection with a commercial enterprise.
2. The sign may not be larger than four square feet.
3. The sign must be removed within 72 hours of the time when it is erected.
H. Identification signs for one or two family dwellings less than two square feet in area.
I. Pedestrian, vehicular traffic, and parking directional signs in parking lots less than
nine square feet in area.
J. Traffic control signs, noncommercial governmental signs, local notices, and temChapter
VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 8
porary non-advertising safety or emergency signs are permitted.
K. Temporary displays which are erected to celebrate, commemorate, or observe a
civil or religious holiday are to be removed within ten (10) days after the event.
L. Signs which do not exceed an aggregate of thirty-two (32) square feet in area denoting
the architect, engineer, contractor, or owner when placed upon a work site.
Such signs must be removed ten (10) days after completion of construction.
M. Signs or posters painted on or attached to the inside of a display window occupying
less than 25 percent of the display window area. This shall include illuminated
signs, but not flashing signs.
N. Flags, badges, or insignia of any government or governmental agency, or Of any
civic, religious, fraternal or similar organizations. Free standing flags shall be limited
to no more than thirty (30) feet in height. The bottom of the flag or pendant
shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet above any walkway.
O. Wall graphics are allowed provided they are not used for advertising and provided
the approval of the Zoning Administrator has been granted.
P. Real estate signs as follows:
1. Temporary signs for the purpose of selling or leasing individual lots or buildings,
provided that: such signs are less than ten (10) square feet for residential
property and thirty-two (32) square feet for other property; have a maximum
height of ten (10) feet, unless located on the building, and provided that
only one (1) sign is permitted for each property. The signs must be removed
within ten (10) days following the lease or sale.
2. One (1) sign per building for the purpose of leasing dwelling units or office
space in buildings containing two (2) or more units, provided such signs are
limited to ten (10) square feet in area.
3. One sign for the purpose of announcing or promoting a residential, commercial,
or industrial development shall be allowed subject to the following conditions.
Each residential project must contain at least six (6) dwellings or lots.
The sign must be located at least one hundred thirty (130) feet from any preexisting
home. The sign must be removed within two (2) years of issuance of
a first building permit in the development or when the particular development
is ninety percent (90%) sold or rented, whichever is sooner. Each sign shall
not exceed the following size limitations; project area under ten (10) acres –
32 square feet; project area over ten (10) acres – 140 square feet.
Q. Unlit or externally lit bulletin boards not exceeding 32 square feet used in connection
with any church, school, or similar building. (Rev. 03-26-09; Ord. 629).
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 9
A building permit issued by the Building Inspector is necessary prior to the installation or
remodeling of any sign as follows:
A. Bulletin boards exceeding 32 square feet used in connection with any church,
school, or similar public building.
B. General Provisions Wall-mounted business signs (Rev. 05-08-14; Ord. 707; 08-28-14;
Ord. 709)
Wall Mounted Business Signs shall be permitted by staff, except in areas zoned R-
1, R-2, and R-3, if they meet the following requirements:
1. Signs shall not contain information or advertising for any product or service
not sold on the premises.
2. Wall signs:
a. Single tenant buildings. There shall not be more than three (3) wall
signs for each principal building, except where the building abuts two
(2) or more streets: three (3) oriented to each abutting street shall be
permitted, provided that the design of which is approved by the Zoning
Administrator. The gross surface area of the wall signs on one building
wall shall not exceed (10) percent of the area of the building wall, including
doors and windows, to which the signs are to be affixed, or two
hundred (200) square feet, whichever is smaller.
b. Multi-tenant buildings. Each tenant is allowed three (3) wall signs in accordance
with 2A. Future wall sign permits on new multi-tenant buildings,
including shopping centers, shall be issued only after the building
owners have submitted a comprehensive sign plan approved by the
Zoning Administrator. The comprehensive sign plan shall include similar
design standards involving sign material, color, style, spacing, and size.
c. For those buildings that are allowed multiple wall signs, the Zoning Administrator
has the authority to allow individual wall signs that are larger
than 200 square feet in exchange for reducing or removing other wall
signage normally allowed by Subsections (A) and (B). In no case shall
any individual wall sign occupy more than 10% of that particular building
wall area.
3. The sign shall not exceed 24 inches in depth.
4. Signs Permitted with a Building Permit (Rev. 05-08-14; Ord. 707; 08-28-14; Ord.
709)
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 10
4. Signs shall not extend beyond the side edge of the building.
5. Signs may be illuminated but the source of light must be hidden. Outside
lights shall be deemed part of the sign. Illumination of any sign must be kept
in good repair, provided that no sign can be erected involving flashing lights
or lighting which constitutes a traffic hazard.
6. Signs must be constructed of a durable exterior material and meet all applicable
building and electrical codes at the time of installation or repair or replacement
and painted signs must be repaired and maintained without excessive
fading, chipping, or peeling.
7. A maximum of ten (10) percent of a sign shall be allowed to extend above the
roof line of a flat roof, mansard roof, or parapet.
C. Canopies and awnings shall be permitted if they meet the following requirements:
1. Canopy and awning sign area to be included in total wall area.
2. The total sign area on any one side of a building may not exceed five percent
(5%) of the building façade on which the sign is erected, or forty (40) square
feet, whichever is greater. Sign height shall not exceed the top of the parapet
wall or, if there is no parapet wall, sign height shall not exceed height of
eaves.
a. For the purposes of calculating area, the building itself shall be used.
The building façade shall not include the area of any canopy.
b. For purposes of this provision, all sides of a building facing the same
general direction shall be considered one wall.
D. The bottom of canopy and awnings must be at least eight (8) feet over any walkway.
E. Unlit or externally lit bulletin boards exceeding 32 square feet used in connection
with any church, school, or similar building. (Rev. 03-26-09; Ord. 629).
F. Projecting Signs*
1. One projecting sign shall be allowed per building wall abutting a street.
2. Each sign cannot exceed a total of four (4) square feet.
3. Clearance of at least eight (8) feet shall be required from the bottom of the
sign to the ground.
4. Each sign shall not project more than four (4) feet from the building wall.
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 11
5. Each sign shall be thoroughly secured and anchored to the building wall.
6. No illumination allowed.
G. Under-Canopy signs (a.k.a. Suspended Signs)*
1. One under-canopy sign shall be allowed per building wall abutting a street.
2. Each sign cannot exceed a total of four (4) square feet.
3. Clearance of at least eight (8) feet shall be required from the bottom of the
sign to the ground.
4. Each sign cannot extend beyond the canopy.
5. Each sign shall be thoroughly secured and anchored.
6. Sign can be either parallel or perpendicular to the building wall.
7. No illumination allowed.
H. Fascia/Soffit Signs*
1. Clearance of at least eight (8) feet shall be required from the bottom of the
sign to the ground.
2. Each sign shall be thoroughly secured and anchored to the fascia or soffit.
3. Each sign shall allow for snow and water to run between the building and
sign.
4. Each sign cannot exceed two (2) feet in height.
5. The bottom of the sign cannot be higher than the top of the fascia.
6. Each sign shall meet electrical code standards.
I. Wall, Projecting, Under-Canopy, and Fascia/Soffit/Signs:
1. A combination of wall, projecting under-canopy, and/or fascia/soffit signs is
allowed.
a. No more than three signs in any combination (wall, projecting, undercanopy,
and/or fascia/soffit signs).
b. Total square footage shall meet the wall sign square footage requirement.
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 12
Temporary And Portable Ground Signs (commemorating a special event, business anniversary,
grand opening, and other promotions) shall be permitted subject to the following:
A. Permit Requirements:
1. Permit Application: Temporary and/or portable signs shall not be permitted
without a temporary sign permit. A temporary sign permit application form and
fee, as set by council resolution, shall be submitted to the Building Inspector,
who is hereby authorized to review and approve permits for temporary signs
and/or portable signs, ten (10) days prior to the special event.
2. Duration Of Permit; Expiration; Sign Removal Required: All permits issued
hereunder shall be for a maximum duration of fourteen (14) calendar days
and shall automatically expire after said period. Upon permit expiration, the
applicant shall cease to display any and all signage permitted by the permit,
unless the applicant has received a new permit for said signage.
3. Limitation On Permits:
a. No more than one temporary sign permitted under this subsection shall
be allowed on any one property at one time.
b. No more than four (4) permits per calendar year shall be issued to any
one property.
c. Multi-tenant building properties. No more than six (6) permits per calendar
year shall be issued to any one property.
d. No more than four (4) permits per calendar year shall be issued to any
one business.
e. If two (2) permits are obtained in succession by any applicant, both
permits shall be counted for the purpose of determining the yearly limitations
of this subsection.
B. Maximum Size: Maximum temporary or portable sign size shall be limited to forty
eight (48) square feet.
C. Location/Setbacks:
1. Signs shall not be placed in any Residential Zoning District.
5. Signs Permitted with a Temporary Sign Permit (Rev. 12-22-2011; Ord. 676;
Rev. 05-08-14; Ord. 707).
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 13
2. Signs shall not be placed in the right-of-way.
3. Signs shall not be placed in a location that could cause a visual obstruction at
or within a right-of-way or intersection.
D. Charitable Nonprofit Organization Signs; Charitable Event Signs; or Local Unit of
Government Signs:
1. Nonprofit organizations, which are solely charitable in nature, or local units of
government may have off premise signs for their special events, provided the
property owner signs the temporary sign permit application. (Off premise
signs for charitable events shall also be allowed, provided the property owner
signs the temporary sign permit application).
2. Signs under subsection 5.D may be located within any Zoning District.
3. Signs under subsection 5.D shall not be counted as one of the four (4) permits
allowed to any one property.
4. Only one sign per property at any one time shall be allowed.
5. Signs under subsection 5.D shall be limited to three (3) signs per event.
E. Dangerous Signs Prohibited/Anchors Required:
1. Signs shall not be unsafe or dangerous.
2. Signs shall be securely anchored. The applicant shall be responsible for locating
all utilities.
The Planning Commission may, in its discretion, issue a permit for the establishment
and maintenance of home occupation signs in any zoned district of the City, provided
that the permit is issued subject to the following conditions:
A. Application for a sign to be constructed under this subdivision shall be submitted to
the Planning Commission on a form to be provided by the Zoning Administrator.
B. No home occupation sign shall exceed two square feet in exterior size, unless the
Planning Commission approves the increase.
C. No home occupation sign shall be illuminated.
6. Home Occupation Signs
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 14
The Planning Commission may, in its discretion, issue a permit authorizing construction
of freestanding signage. The replacement of an existing sign shall require Zoning Administrator
approval. The granting of a permit will be subject to the following conditions:
A. Application for a sign to be constructed under this subdivision shall be submitted to
the Planning Commission on a form to be provided by the Zoning Administrator.
B. Billboards - General Provisions:
1. Outdoor advertising structures and billboards which advertise products or
businesses not connected with the site or building on which they are located
shall be permitted only on property which is zoned Industrial MN-1 or B-3.
2. Billboards shall be restricted to property adjoining Highway 169 and State
Highway 95.
3. Size:
a. The maximum gross surface area of a billboard shall be fifty (50)
square feet. Two facings per structure shall be the maximum permitted,
and double faced signs shall be attached back to back with the internal
structure or framework concealed.
b. The billboard shall be a free standing sign with a maximum height of
thirty (30) feet above the lot level.
4. Location:
a. The minimum lineal distance between billboards on the same side of
the highway shall be one thousand (1000) feet.
b. The minimum setback from the highway right-of-way lines shall be thirty
(30) feet.
c. The minimum setback at any intersection shall be five hundred feet
(500).
d. No billboard or structure shall be located within five hundred (500) feet
of a residential district, park, playground, school, rest area, or building
used for religious purposes.
e. The exposed uprights, superstructure and/or backside of all signs shall
be painted a neutral color, such as light blue, gray, brown, or white, un-
7. Signs Requiring Planning Commission Approval (Rev. 05-10-07; Ord. 601;
Rev. 05-08-14; Ord. 706; Rev. 08-28-14; Ord 709)
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 15
less it can be illustrated that such part of the sign designed or painted in
another manner is integral to the overall design of the sign.
f. Removal of signs. It shall be the responsibility of the billboard owner to
send written notification to the Zoning Administrator when a billboard
has been removed from the City.
g. Specifications. The structure of the signs shall be metal, which shall be
either painted or treated in such a manner as to prevent deterioration.
Sign facing and border may be constructed of or finished in wood.
h. A billboard shall be considered the principal use of a site. If another use
or structure is added to the site, the billboard must be removed.
i. The billboard must blend harmoniously with the scale of the neighborhood,
does not distract or cause confusion to motorists or pedestrians,
and does not conflict with the purpose of this ordinance to preserve and
enhance aesthetic value of the commercial areas.
j. The Planning Commission may, as a condition of issuing the permit,
place restrictions on the type of sign to be erected and maintained.
These restrictions may include, but are not necessarily limited to: the
size of the sign; the denial of use of lighting; if lighting is permitted, the
amount and type of lighting; the location of the sign on the property; and
the type of construction to be used for the sign.
k. Signs must be constructed of a durable exterior material and meet all
applicable building and electrical codes at the time of installation, repair,
or replacement. Painted signs must be repaired and maintained without
excessive fading, chipping, and peeling.
C. Pylon Business Signs – General Provisions:
A permit will be issued by the Planning Commission based on the following size
and height standards:
District
Maximum
Sign Area
Maximum
Sign Height
B-1 75 sq. ft. 20 ft.
B-2
In excess of 900 feet from the Highway 169
and Rum River Drive Interchange
75 sq. ft. 20 ft.
B-2
Less than 900 feet from the Highway 169 and
Rum River Drive Interchange
150 sq. ft. 60 ft.
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 16
B-3 150 sq. ft. 60 ft.
MN-1 150 sq. ft. 20 ft.
MN-2 150 sq. ft. 20 ft.
HC-1 150 sq. ft. 20 ft.
1. The sign is supported by one or two poles or other approved methods which
shall be metal in the B-1 zone and metal or treated wood in the B-2, B-3, and
MN-1 zones, and are sufficient in size and strength to support the sign.
2. Ten feet of clearance shall exist between grade levels and the bottom of the
sign.
3. The sign cannot be attached to any building or structure and must be a minimum
of 15 feet from any surrounding buildings or structures.
4. The sign must be located on the property where the business advertised is
located, except for highway billboard advertising.
5. The sign cannot extend over public sidewalks or streets.
6. There shall be no more than one pylon sign per lot, except as provided in
subdivision D of this section.
D. Multi-Tennant Business Signs (MTB) – General Provisions:
1. Sign Intent. Multi-Tennant Business Signs, hereinafter referred to MTB
signs, shall only be permitted in the B-2, B-3 and MN-1 zoning districts. The
intent and purpose of MTB signs are:
a. To promote commercial depth rather than first tier strip development
along highway corridors.
b. To allow area identification and commercial identification of business
sites in a manner that coordinates traffic safely and effectively.
c. To minimize individual pylon signage by allowing clustering of two (2) or
more area identification signs on a single MTB in exchange for separate
pylons on each business site.
d. To cluster MTB signage at major intersections.
e. To require high architectural standards for MTB and to achieve a consistent
style or standard for commercial development along Highways
169 and 95.
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 17
f. To require pylon base landscaping and maintenance.
g. To require annual permit review for MTB to ensure compliance.
h. To promote MTB sign usage for sufficient sized areas to achieve the
other purposes listed above.
2. No MTB may be erected or maintained until a plan (the “MTB plan” or “plan”),
signed by the owner(s) of all properties on which any area or business is located
whose identification sign is proposed to be included on any MTB covered
by the plan, is filed with, and approved by the city. The MTB plan shall
also specify standards for each MTB sign proportions and landscaping
around the base of each MTB. The plan may contain other restrictions as
the owners of the affected properties may reasonably determine, shall be
signed by each of the owners and shall otherwise be in such form as required
by the city. An MTB plan may be amended by filing a new plan with
the city that otherwise conforms with all of the requirements of the city code
in effect at that time. No amendment shall be required for changing the identity
of any area or business whose identification sign is attached to an MTB
so long as all areas or businesses whose identification signs are attached to
the MTB are located on one of the properties covered by the plan under
which the MTB has been approved and the affected MTB otherwise conforms
to the MTB plan after the replacement sign is attached.
3. The applicant(s) shall submit diagrams, drawings, pictures and other information
as requested by city staff describing each MTB proposed, the location
on each MTB and the identity of each property proposed to be included in the
MTB plan including the name of the property owner, and the size and location
of each property included in the plan.
4. All MTBs shall require an annual administrative review for compliance.
5. After the city’s approval of an MTB plan, no sign pylons other than those included
in the approved plan shall be kept erected, placed or maintained on
the properties covered by the plan. The MTB plan may be enforced in the
same way as any other provision of this code. In case of any conflict between
the provisions of any approved MTB plan and this code, the approved
MTB plan shall control.
6. The permissible height of MTB pylon shall be no greater than sixty feet (60’)
with a minimum clear zone below the sign of ten feet (10’) unless approved
as a monument type sign. Pylon height shall be measured from the curb
height closest to the MTB site.
7. Total permissible sign face area on MTB pylon shall be no greater than five
hundred (500) square feet per face.
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 18
8. Setback standards in all applicable districts shall be as follows: the outermost
edge of the sign face must be a minimum of ten feet (10’) from any road
right-of-way., forty feet (40’) from any side lot line when the adjacent property
is zoned one classification category less in use intensity and a minimum of
ten feet (10’) from the side lot line of same zone classification.
9. Each MTB plan shall consist of at least ten (10) acres, not including public
right-of-way, and at least one of the businesses displayed on the MTB must
be located on same parcel as the MTB or a located on an approved outlot
owned and managed by the businesses located within the development area.
In addition thereto, each business displayed on the MTB must be within onehalf
(1/2) mile of the MTB and be within the city.
10. MTBs may only be located within 900 feet of the major interchanges of Trunk
Highway 169 within the City of Princeton or along Trunk Highway 95 west of
13th Avenue North.
11. Notwithstanding any other provision of the city code, no business located on
property which is covered by any approved MTB plan shall be permitted to
keep erect, place or maintain any pylon sign on such property except as referenced
in the approved plan. Such business may, however, erect, place
and maintain any other signs (such as building, monument, directional signs,
etc.) otherwise permitted by the city code.
12. No signage shall be allowed on any MTB other than area identification and
commercial business identification signs for developments and/or businesses
located within the city on property covered by the MTB plan under which
such MTB is approved. No sign advertising any product (rather than identifying
an area or business) shall be allowed on any MTB.
E. Residential and Business Monument Signs – General Provisions:
1. Only one permanent residential entrance ground sign shall be allowed per
each entrance to a residential subdivision or other residential development,
including townhome, condominium, apartment, and manufactured home developments.
2. Only external illumination shall be permitted for residential entrance ground
signs. Neon and internal illuminations are prohibited. Internal illuminations
are allowed only if approved by the Planning Commission as part of a
Planned Unit Development for a multi-family development (Rev. 11-08-07; Ord.
608).
3. The Sign shall be located on the property where the business or organization
advertised is located.
4. There shall be no more than one monument sign per lot, except as provided
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 19
in Section 1.
5. The maximum allowable sign areas and sign heights for business monument
identification signs and residential entrance monuments are regulated as follows:
District
Maximum
Sign Area,
Single Site
Maximum
Sign Height,
Single Site
Maximum
Sign Area,
Multi-Tennant
Site*
Maximum
Sign Height,
Multi-Tennant
Site*
B-1 50 sq. ft. 6 ft. 50 sq. ft. 6 ft.
B-2 60 sq. ft. 8 ft. 90 sq. ft. 8 ft.
B-3 100 sq. ft. 10 ft. 120 sq. ft. 10 ft.
MN-1 100 sq. ft. 10 ft. 120 sq. ft. 10 ft.
MN-2 100 sq. ft. 10 ft. 120 sq. ft. 10 ft.
RM-1 40 sq. ft. 6 ft. 40 sq. ft. 6 ft.
R-1, R-2 40 sq. ft. 6 ft. 40 sq. ft. 6 ft.
R-3 40 sq. ft. 6 ft. 40 sq. ft. 6 ft.
HC-1 100 sq. ft. 10 ft. 120 sq. ft. 10 ft.
MOR 60 sq. ft. 8 ft. 90 sq. ft. 8 ft.
* Or as approved by the Planning Commission as part of a Multi-tenant Business Sign
Plan
6. Internally lit bulletin board signs associated with a church, school, or public
building may be allowed by Conditional Use Permit in any residential district.
(Rev. 03-26-09; Ord. 629).
F. Video Display Signs, Electronic Changeable Copy Signs, and Electronic
Graphic Display Sign and Gas Station Canopy Tube Lighting – General Provisions
(Added 03-10-16; Ord. 730):
1. Location:
a. Signs shall only be permitted on property that is zoned B-2 Neighborhood
Business, B-3 General Commercial, HC-1 Health Care, MOR Medical
Office Residential, MN-1 Industrial, and MN-2 Industrial Districts.
b. Signs shall not be located within 125 feet of any existing residence (including
single family homes, townhomes, multi-family residential buildings,
apartments, etc). without proper shielding to ensure that the brightness
does not exceed maximum illumination of 5,000 nits (candelas per
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 20
square meter) during daylight hours and a maximum illumination of 500
nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk and dawn, as measured
from the sign’s face at maximum brightness.
2. Orientation:
a. Signs shall not interfere with traffic and road safety due to placement
and orientation, as determined by the city engineer.
3. Size and Height: The size and height of the sign shall be subject to the same
provisions as any other wall or freestanding sign.
4. Brightness:
a. No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance that it interferes with the effectiveness
of an official traffic sign, device, signal or the safety of the
public, or located where it would do so as determined by the city engineer.
b. Signs must not exceed a maximum illumination of 5,000 nits (candelas
per square meter) during daylight hours, and a maximum illumination of
500 nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk to dawn, as measured
form the sign’s face at maximum brightness.
1) The sign owner shall be required to provide an accurate field method
of ensuring that maximum light levels are not exceeded if requested
by City officials.
2) The sign owner shall sign a license agreement supplemental to the
building permit agreeing to operation of a sign in conformance with
these regulations. Violation of these regulations shall result in forfeiture
of the license, and the City shall be authorized to arrange
disconnection of electrical service to the facility.
3) Signs shall have an automatic dimmer control or other mechanism
to automatically adjust its nit level based on ambient light conditions.
5. Flashing Prohibited: Flashing signs are prohibited (refer to Definition section).
6. Malfunction: In the event of a malfunction, the sign shall be designed to freeze
the display, and the owner shall discontinue the display immediately upon malfunction,
or upon notice from the City that the display violates the City’s regulations.
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 21
Existing signs which do not conform to the specific provisions of this ordinance may be
deemed “legal nonconforming” if they were legal when the zoning ordinance or amendment
was adopted, in that they complied with the then existing ordinance and law. Legal
nonconforming signs generally have a statutory right to continue, often referred to as
“grandfather rights.”
A legal nonconforming sign may be continued through repair, replacement, restoration,
maintenance, or improvement, but not including expansion, unless:
1. The nonconforming sign is discontinued for a period of more than one year; or
2. The nonconforming sign is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of
greater than 50 percent of its assessed market value, and no building permit
has been applied for within 180 days of when the property is damaged. In this
case, a municipality may impose reasonable conditions upon a building permit
in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property.
The Zoning Administrator may order the removal of any sign erected or maintained in
violation of this ordinance. Ten days' notice in writing shall be given to the owners of
such sign, or the owner of the building, structure, or premises on which such sign is located,
to either bring the sign into compliance with this ordinance or effect its removal.
Upon failure to remove the sign or to comply with this notice, the Zoning Administrator
shall cause the sign to be removed. The sign shall be removed immediately and without
notice if it reasonably appears that the condition of the sign is such as to present an
immediate threat to the safety of the public. Any cost of removal incurred by the City
shall be assessed to the owner of the property on which such sign is located or may be
collected in appropriate legal proceedings. In the event of successful legal proceedings
to collect the cost of removal hereunder, as a part of its judgment, the City shall be entitled
to judgment against the defendant-violator for its costs and disbursements, including
reasonable attorneys' fees.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, alter, repair, move,
equip, or maintain any sign or sign structure or cause or permit the same to be
done in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates
any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, except those violations
specifically subject to administrative fines under this ordinance. Each day
that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
8. Non-Conforming Signs (rev. 08-28-14; Ord. 709)
9. Removal of Signs
10. Enforcement
Chapter VII – Signs
Zoning Ordinance
Rev. 03-10-16 Princeton, Minnesota
VII - 22
B. In addition to all other remedies available under this ordinance or other law, the
City shall have the right to apply to the Courts for injunctive relief; the Court granting
such equitable relief shall also grant the City judgment against the defendant
ordering the defendant to pay to the City its suit costs and disbursements, including
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in bringing such action.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 1 Princeton, Minnesota
Chapter VIII
Floodplain
Management
A. Statutory Authorization
The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in Minnesota Statutes, chapters
103F and 462, delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt
regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of the
City of Princeton, Minnesota does ordain as follows:
B. Findings of Fact
1. The flood hazard areas of the City of Princeton, Minnesota are subject to
periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures or flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
2. Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards. This Ordinance is based upon a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the
standards established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
3. National Flood Insurance Program Compliance. This Ordinance is adopted to
comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance
Program codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 59 -78, as
amended, so as to maintain the community’s eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
C. Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare and to minimize those losses described in Section 1, Subd. B.1 by
provisions contained herein.
1. Statutory Authorization,
Findings of Fact, and Purpose
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 2 Princeton, Minnesota
This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the City of Princeton Floodplain
Management Ordinance; except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as “this
chapter.”
A. Lands to Which Ordinance Applies
This Ordinance shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of
Princeton, Minnesota shown on the Official Zoning Map and/or the attachments
thereto as being located within the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe, or
General Flood Plain Districts.
B. Establishment of Official Zoning Map
The Official Zoning Map together with all materials attached thereto is hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The attached
material shall include: 1) Flood Insurance Study, Mille Lacs County, Minnesota and
Incorporated Areas, the Flood Insurance Rate Map Index for Mille Lacs County,
Minnesota and Incorporated Areas with a map number of 27095CIND2A, and
Flood Insurance Rate Maps numbered 27095C0500C, 27095C0503C,
27095C0504C, and 27095C0512C, all of these documents being dated March 4,
2013; and 2) Flood Insurance Study, Sherburne County, Minnesota and
Incorporated Areas and Flood Insurance Rate Map number 27141C0140F therein,
both of these documents being dated November 16, 2011. All of the
aforementioned flood insurance study texts and flood insurance rate maps have
been prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The Official
Zoning Map shall be on file in the Office of the Zoning Administrator (Rev. 01-10-13;
Ord. 694).
C. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation
The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one
foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation
caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a
floodway.
D. Interpretation
2. Title
3. General Provisions
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 3 Princeton, Minnesota
1. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be
held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of
the City Council and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other
powers granted by state statutes.
2. The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling
distances on the Official Zoning Map. Where interpretation is needed as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the Official Zoning
Map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions and there is a formal appeal of the
decision of the Zoning Administrator, the Board of Adjustment shall make the
necessary interpretation. All decisions will be based on elevations on the
regional (100-year) flood profile, the ground elevations that existed on the site
at the time the Community adopted its initial floodplain ordinance or on the
date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map showing the area
within the 100-year floodplain if earlier, and other available technical data.
Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Board of Adjustment and to
submit technical evidence.
E. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other
ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
F. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
This chapter does not imply that areas outside the flood plain districts or land uses
permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Princeton, Minnesota or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
G. Severability
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this
chapter shall not be affected thereby.
H. Definitions
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 4 Princeton, Minnesota
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be
interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage
and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
1. Basement - means any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its
floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of
the depth of excavation below ground level. (This definition shall only apply in
the Floodplain District).
2. Equal Degree of Encroachment - a method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
3. Flood - a temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of
a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
4. Flood Frequency - the frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood
stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
5. Flood Fringe - that portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. Flood
fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the flood
insurance studies adopted in Section 3, Subd. B.
6. Flood Plain - the beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional
flood.
7. Flood Proofing - a combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
8. Floodway - the bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the regional flood discharge.
9. Lowest Floor - the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement
area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor.
10. Manufactured Home - a structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include the term “recreational vehicle.” (This
definition shall only apply in the Floodplain District).
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 5 Princeton, Minnesota
11. Obstruction - any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into
any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood plain which may impede, retard,
or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or
collecting debris carried by such water.
12. Reach - a hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge
crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
13. Recreational Vehicle - a vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400 square
feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to
be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the
purposes of this chapter, the term recreational vehicle shall be synonymous
with the term travel trailer/travel vehicle. (This definition shall only apply in
the Floodplain District).
14. Regional Flood - a flood which is representative of large floods known to have
occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be
expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood"
used in a flood insurance study.
15. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation - The regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of
the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway.
16. Structure - anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories,
sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles
not meeting the exemption criteria specified in Section 10, Subd. C.1 of this
chapter and other similar items. (This definition shall only apply in the
Floodplain District).
17. Substantial Damage - means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
18. Substantial Improvement - within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 6 Princeton, Minnesota
repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes
structures that have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
b. Any alteration of an “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an “historic
structure.” For the purpose of this chapter, “historic structure” shall be
as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1.
19. Variance - means a modification of a specific permitted development standard
required in an official control including this chapter to allow an alternative
development standard not stated as acceptable in the official control, but only
as applied to a particular property for the purpose of alleviating practical
difficulty or unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in a
community's respective planning and zoning enabling legislation.
I. Annexations
The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference into Section 3, Subd.
B above may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate boundaries
of the City of Princeton, Minnesota at the time of adoption of this chapter. If any of
these floodplain land areas are annexed into the City of Princeton, Minnesota after
the date of adoption of this chapter, the newly annexed floodplain lands shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter immediately upon the date of annexation
into the City of Princeton, Minnesota.
A. Districts (Rev. 01-10-13; Ord. 694)
1. Floodway District. The Floodway District shall include those areas
designated as floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps adopted in
Section 3, Subd. B of this chapter.
2. Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District shall include those areas
designated as Zone AE and located outside of the floodway on the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps adopted in Section 3, Subd. B of this chapter.
4. Establishment of Zoning Districts
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 7 Princeton, Minnesota
3. General Flood Plain District. The General Flood Plain District shall include
those areas designated as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps
adopted in Section 3, Subd. B of this chapter.
B. Compliance
No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which
apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter. Within the Floodway, Flood
Fringe and General Flood Plain Districts, all uses not listed as permitted uses or
conditional uses in Sections 5, 6, and 7 that follow, respectively, shall be
prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here that:
1. New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain
travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of this
chapter and specifically Section 10.
2. Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal maintenance and
repair, or repair after damage to existing nonconforming structures and
nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the general
provisions of this chapter and specifically Section 12.
3. As-built elevations for elevated or flood proofed structures must be certified
by ground surveys and flood proofing techniques must be designed and
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified in the
general provisions of this chapter and specifically as stated in Section 11 of
this chapter.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck
farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
2. Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport landing strips.
3. Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges,
picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and
nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target
ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or
multiple purpose recreational trails.
5. Floodway District (FW)
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 8 Princeton, Minnesota
4. Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
B. Standards for Floodway Permitted Uses:
1. The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
2. The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if one exists.
3. The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations and shall
not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of materials or
equipment.
C. Conditional Uses:
1. Structures accessory to the uses listed in Subd. A above and the uses listed
in Subd. C.2 – C.8 below.
2. Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.
3. Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control structures.
4. Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines.
5. Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
6. Placement of fill or construction of fences.
7. Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of record or in existing or new
subdivisions or commercial or condominium type campgrounds, subject to the
exemptions and provisions of Section 10, Subd. C of this chapter.
8. Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes, and floodwalls
constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual structures
and levees or dikes, where the intent is to protect agricultural crops for a
frequency flood event equal to or less than the 10-year frequency flood event.
D. Standards for Floodway Conditional Uses:
1. All Uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for roads
and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment, or other
uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause any increase in the
stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages
in the reach or reaches affected.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 9 Princeton, Minnesota
2. All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the procedures and
standards contained in Section 11, Subd. D of this chapter.
3. The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if one
exists.
4. Fill:
a. Fill, dredge spoil, and all other similar materials deposited or stored in
the flood plain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
b. Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be allowed
in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted
which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
c. As an alternative, and consistent with Subsection (b) immediately above,
dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow
temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials which would have
caused an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional flood but
only after the City Council has received an appropriate plan which
assures the removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the
flood warning time available. The conditional use permit must be title
registered with the property in the Office of the County Recorder.
5. Accessory Structures:
a. Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
b. Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on
the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of
flood waters:
1) Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and
2) So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on
the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
c. Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry flood
proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an
accessory structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood
proofing classification in the State Building Code provided the accessory
structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square
feet in size at its largest projection, and for a detached garage, the
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 10 Princeton, Minnesota
detached garage must be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited
storage. All flood proofed accessory structures must meet the following
additional standards:
1) The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed
to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;
2) Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be
elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or
properly flood proofed; and
3) To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be
a minimum of two “automatic” openings in the outside walls of the
structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must
be openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of
all openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest
adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open
a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for
automatic openings.
6. Storage of Materials and Equipment:
a. The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant
life is prohibited.
b. Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning
and in accordance with a plan approved by the City Council.
7. Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross
section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be subject to the
provisions of Minnesota Statute, Chapter 103G. Community-wide structural
works for flood control intended to remove areas from the regulatory flood
plain shall not be allowed in the floodway.
8. A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not cause an
increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis must
assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
6. Flood Fringe District (FF)
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 11 Princeton, Minnesota
A. Permitted Uses
Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or structures listed as permitted uses in
the underlying zoning use district(s). If no pre-existing, underlying zoning use
districts exist, then any residential or non residential structure or use of a structure
or land shall be a permitted use in the Flood Fringe District provided such use does
not constitute a public nuisance. All permitted uses shall comply with the
“Standards for Flood Fringe District Permitted Uses” listed in Section 6, Subd. B
and the "Standards for all Flood Fringe Uses" listed in Section 6, Subd. E.
B. Standards for Flood Fringe Permitted Uses:
1. All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on fill so that
the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures shall be no lower
than one (1) foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation and the fill
shall extend at such elevation at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the outside
limits of the structure erected thereon.
2. As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that constitute a
minimal investment and that do not exceed 500 square feet at its largest
projection may be internally flood proofed in accordance with Section 5, Subd.
D.5.c.
3. The cumulative placement of fill, where at any one time in excess of onethousand
(1,000) cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel, shall be allowable
only as a conditional use, unless said fill is specifically intended to elevate a
structure in accordance with Section 6, Subd. B.1 of this chapter.
4. The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill to the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
5. The provisions of Section 6, Subd. E of this chapter shall apply.
C. Conditional Uses
Any structure that is not elevated on fill or flood proofed in accordance with Section
6, Subd. B.1 – B.2 or any use of land that does not comply with the standards in
Section 6, Subd. B.3 –B.4 shall only be allowable as a conditional use. An
application for a conditional use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and
evaluation procedures specified in Sections 6, Subd. D – E and Section 11, Subd.
C of this chapter.
D. Standards for Flood Fringe Conditional Uses
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 12 Princeton, Minnesota
1. Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be utilized to
elevate a structure's lowest floor above the regulatory flood protection
elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of stilts, pilings,
parallel walls, etc., or above-grade, enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or
tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be
considered above-grade and not a structure's basement or lowest floor if: 1)
the enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the structure; 2) it is
designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood resistant materials;
and 3) it is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage.
The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the following
additional standards:
a. Design and Certification - The structure's design and as-built condition
must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as
being in compliance with the general design standards of the State
Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities must
be at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or be designed to
prevent flood water from entering or accumulating within these
components during times of flooding.
b. Specific Standards for Above-grade, Enclosed Areas - Above-grade,
fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must
be designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:
1) A minimum area of openings in the walls where internal flooding is
to be used as a flood proofing technique. There shall be a
minimum of two openings on at least two sides of the structure and
the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot above
grade. The automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding unless a registered professional engineer
or architect certifies that a smaller net area would suffice. The
automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves,
or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters without any form of human
intervention; and
2) That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials
in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State
Building Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking
of vehicles or storage.
2. Basements, as defined by Section 3, Subd. H.1 of this chapter, shall be
subject to the following:
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 13 Princeton, Minnesota
a. Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
b. Non-residential basements may be allowed below the regulatory flood
protection elevation provided the basement is structurally dry flood
proofed in accordance with Section 6, Subd. D.3 of this chapter.
3. All areas of non-residential structures, including basements to be placed
below the regulatory flood protection elevation, shall be flood proofed in
accordance with the structurally dry flood proofing classifications in the State
Building Code. Structurally dry flood proofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-2
flood proofing classification in the State Building Code and this shall require
making the structure watertight with the walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
Structures flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not be
permitted.
4. When at any one time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other similar
material is located on a parcel for such activities as on-site storage,
landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge spoil
disposal or construction of flood control works, an erosion/sedimentation
control plan must be submitted, unless the community is enforcing a state
approved shoreland management ordinance. In the absence of a state
approved shoreland ordinance, the plan must clearly specify methods to be
used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the 100-year
or regional flood event. The plan must be prepared and certified by a
registered professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the
City Council. The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of
the material from the flood plain if adequate flood warning time exists.
5. Storage of Materials and Equipment:
a. The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant
life is prohibited.
b. Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning
and in accordance with a plan approved by the City Council.
6. The provisions of Section 6, Subd. E of this chapter shall also apply.
E. Standards for All Flood Fringe Uses
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 14 Princeton, Minnesota
1. All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an
elevation not more than two (2) feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Planning
Commission must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the
structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate flood
warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.
2. Commercial Uses - accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks, and
parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood protection
elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the employees
or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood warning
system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be
inundated to a depth and velocity such that when multiplying the depth (in
feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the product number exceeds four (4)
upon occurrence of the regional flood.
3. Manufacturing and Industrial Uses - measures shall be taken to minimize
interference with normal plant operations especially along streams having
protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses, such as yards and
parking lots, may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in
Section 6, Subd. E.2 above. In considering permit applications, due
consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires
that it be located in flood plain areas.
4. Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected by
the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards
should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
5. Flood plain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of
the channel and adjoining flood plain of any tributary watercourse or drainage
system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not been specified
on the Official Zoning Map.
6. Standards for recreational vehicles are contained in Section 10, Subd. C.
7. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 15 Princeton, Minnesota
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
A. Permitted Uses
1. The uses listed in Section 5, Subd. A of this chapter shall be permitted uses.
2. All other uses shall be subject to the floodway/flood fringe evaluation criteria
pursuant to Section 7, Subd. B below. Section 5.0 shall apply if the proposed
use is in the Floodway District and Section 6.0 shall apply if the proposed use
is in the Flood Fringe District.
B. Procedures for Floodway and Flood Fringe Determinations Within the
General Flood Plain District
1. Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval within the
General Flood Plain District, the applicant shall be required to furnish such of
the following information as is deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator
for the determination of the regulatory flood protection elevation and whether
the proposed use is within the Floodway or Flood Fringe District.
a. A typical valley cross-section(s) showing the channel of the stream,
elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, crosssectional
areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high
water information.
b. Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground,
pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations, the size, location, and
spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site,
and the location and elevations of streets.
c. Photographs showing existing land uses, vegetation upstream and
downstream, and soil types.
d. Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the
stream for at least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed
development.
2. The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the above
information to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for
technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe District and to determine the regulatory flood
7. General Flood Plain District
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 16 Princeton, Minnesota
protection elevation. Procedures consistent with Minnesota Regulations
1983, Parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200 and 44 Code of Federal Regulations Part
65 shall be followed in this expert evaluation. The designated engineer or
expert is strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed technical evaluation
methodology with the respective Department of Natural Resources' Area
Hydrologist prior to commencing the analysis. The designated engineer or
expert shall:
a. Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.
b. Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based upon a
hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas.
c. Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional flood
without increasing flood stages more than 0.5 foot. A lesser stage
increase than .5' shall be required if, as a result of the additional stage
increase, increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of
encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach shall be
assumed in computing floodway boundaries.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall present the technical evaluation and findings
of the designated engineer or expert to the City Council. The City Council
must formally accept the technical evaluation and the recommended
Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District boundary or deny the permit
application. The City Council, prior to official action, may submit the
application and all supporting data and analyses to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, the Department of Natural Resources or the Planning
Commission for review and comment. Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe
District Boundaries have been determined, the City Council shall refer the
matter back to the Zoning Administrator who shall process the permit
application consistent with the applicable provisions of Section 5 and 6 of this
chapter.
A. Review Criteria
No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason of flooding,
inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. All lots within
the flood plain districts shall be able to contain a building site outside of the
Floodway District at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All
subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the
provisions of this chapter and have road access both to the subdivision and to the
individual building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
8. Subdivisions
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 17 Princeton, Minnesota
elevation. For all subdivisions in the flood plain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe
District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required
elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision
drawings and platting documents.
B. Floodway/Flood Fringe Determinations in the General Flood Plain District
In the General Flood Plain District, applicants shall provide the information required
in Section 7, Subd. B of this chapter to determine the 100-year flood elevation, the
Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries and the regulatory flood protection
elevation for the subdivision site.
C. Removal of Special Flood Hazard Area Designation
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly
elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements
incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multistructure
or multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior
to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area
designation will be requested.
A. Public Utilities
All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply
systems to be located in the flood plain shall be flood proofed in accordance with
the State Building Code or elevated to above the regulatory flood protection
elevation.
B. Public Transportation Facilities
Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the flood plain shall comply
with Sections 5 and 6 of this chapter. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation
facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such
facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary
roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or
interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or
safety.
C. On-site Sewage Treatment and Water Supply Systems
9. Public Utilities, Railroads,
Roads, and Bridges
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 18 Princeton, Minnesota
Where public utilities are not provided: 1) On-site water supply systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
2) New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject to impairment or
contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in
accordance with the State's current statewide standards for on-site sewage
treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this Section.
A. New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured home
parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by Section 8 of this
chapter.
B. The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing
manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in flood
plain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only if elevated
in compliance with Section 6 of this chapter. If vehicular road access for preexisting
manufactured home parks is not provided in accordance with Section 6,
Subd. E.1, then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the
property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the City
Council.
1. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
C. Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria specified in Section
10, Subd. C.1 below shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and as
specifically spelled out in Section 10, Subd. C3 – C.4 below.
1. Exemption - Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter if they are placed in any of the areas listed in Section 10, Subd. C.2
below and further they meet the following criteria:
a. Have current licenses required for highway use.
10. Manufactured Homes and
Manufactured Parks and Placement of
Recreational Vehicles
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 19 Princeton, Minnesota
b. Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system,
are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly
used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks and the recreational
vehicle has no permanent structural type additions attached to it.
c. The recreational vehicle and associated use must be permissible in any
pre-existing, underlying zoning use district.
2. Areas Exempted For Placement of Recreational Vehicles:
a. Individual lots or parcels of record.
b. Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds.
c. Existing condominium type associations.
3. Recreational vehicles exempted in Section 10, Subd. C.1 lose this exemption
when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500 for a structural
addition to the recreational vehicle or exceeding $500 for an accessory
structure such as a garage or storage building. The recreational vehicle and
all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a new structure
and shall be subject to the elevation/flood proofing requirements and the use
of land restrictions specified in Sections 5 and 6 of this chapter. There shall
be no development or improvement on the parcel or attachment to the
recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of the recreational vehicle to a
flood free location should flooding occur.
4. New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and new
residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the
expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five (5) units or dwelling sites
shall be subject to the following:
a. Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will be allowed in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts provided said recreational vehicle
and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood protection
elevation and proper elevated road access to the site exists in
accordance with Section 6, Subd. E.1 of this chapter. No fill placed in
the floodway to meet the requirements of this Section shall increase
flood stages of the 100-year or regional flood.
b. All new or replacement recreational vehicles not meeting the criteria of
(a) above may, as an alternative, be allowed as a conditional use if in
accordance with the following provisions and the provisions of Section
11, Subd. C of this chapter. The applicant must submit an emergency
plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100
year flood. Said plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 20 Princeton, Minnesota
other qualified individual, shall demonstrate that adequate time and
personnel exist to carry out the evacuation, and shall demonstrate the
provisions of Section 10, Subd. C.1 (a) and (b) of this chapter will be
met. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement
recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not be
impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with
Section 9, Subd. C of this chapter.
A. Zoning Administrator
A Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the City Council shall administer
and enforce this chapter. If the Zoning Administrator finds a violation of the provisions
of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the person responsible for such
violation in accordance with the procedures stated in Section 13 of this chapter.
B. Permit Requirements
1. Permit Required
A Permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter shall be secured prior to the erection, addition, modification,
rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), or alteration of any
building, structure, or portion thereof; prior to the use or change of use of a
building, structure, or land; prior to the construction of a dam, fence, or on-site
septic system; prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use; prior
to the repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or
any other source; and prior to the placement of fill, excavation of materials, or
the storage of materials or equipment within the flood plain.
2. Application for Permit
Application for a permit shall be made in duplicate to the Zoning Administrator
on forms furnished by the Zoning Administrator and shall include the following
where applicable: plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot; existing or proposed
structures, fill, or storage of materials; and the location of the foregoing in
relation to the stream channel.
3. State and Federal Permits
11. Administration
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 21 Princeton, Minnesota
Prior to granting a permit or processing an application for a conditional use
permit or variance, the Zoning Administrator shall determine that the applicant
has obtained all necessary state and federal permits.
4. Certificate of Zoning Compliance for a New, Altered, or Nonconforming Use
It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed,
converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator stating
that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
5. Construction and Use to be as Provided on Applications, Plans, Permits,
Variances and Certificates of Zoning Compliance
Permits, conditional use permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued
on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use,
arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and
applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use,
arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter, and punishable as provided by Section 13
of this chapter.
6. Certification
The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a registered
professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that
the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. Flood proofing measures shall be certified by a
registered professional engineer or registered architect.
7. Record of First Floor Elevation
The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of the elevation of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all new structures and alterations or
additions to existing structures in the flood plain. The Zoning Administrator
shall also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures or alterations
and additions to structures are flood proofed.
8. Notifications for Watercourse Alterations
The Zoning Administrator shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent
communities and the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources
prior to the community authorizing any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work in the beds of
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 22 Princeton, Minnesota
public waters pursuant to Minnesota Statute, chapter 103G, this shall suffice
as adequate notice to the Commissioner of Natural Resources. A copy of
said notification shall also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
9. Notification to FEMA When Physical Changes Increase or Decrease the 100-
year Flood Elevation
As soon as is practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such
supporting information becomes available, the Zoning Administrator shall
notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a
copy of said technical or scientific data.
C. Conditional Uses
1. Procedure
a. Application for Conditional Use Permit
1) The provisions of Chapter IV, Section 3, Subd. A.1 of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be followed.
2) In addition, the following information shall be required to be
submitted by the applicant:
a) Plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, flood proofing measures,
and the relationship of the above to the location of the stream
channel; and
b) Specifications for building construction and materials, flood
proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement,
storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
c) Additional Information as deemed necessary by the Planning
Commission for designating the suitability of the particular site
for the proposed use.
3) The information described above shall be transmitted to a
designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical
assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in
relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood
damage to the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection, and
other technical matters.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 23 Princeton, Minnesota
4) Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or
expert, the Planning Commission shall determine the specific flood
hazard at the site and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in
relation to the flood hazard.
b. Public Hearing
The provisions of Chapter IV, Section 3, Subd. A.2 of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be followed.
In addition, the Zoning Administrator shall submit by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for
proposed conditional use sufficiently in advance so that the
Commissioner will receive at least ten days notice of the hearing.
c. Appeal
The provisions of Chapter IV, Section 3, Subd. A.3 of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be followed.
2. Standards
a. The review standards listed in Chapter IV, Section 3, Subd.B shall be
applied in the review of a conditional use permit.
b. In addition, the Planning Commission shall consider the following factors
in review of a conditional use permit located in the flood way, flood
fringe, or general flood plain districts:
1) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
2) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges,
culverts or other hydraulic structures.
3) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary
conditions.
4) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
5) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 24 Princeton, Minnesota
6) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
7) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
8) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
9) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and flood plain management program for the area.
10) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
12) Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
chapter.
3. Decision
a. If the Planning Commission denies or subsequently revokes a
Conditional Use Permit, it shall include in its determination findings as to
the ways in which the proposed use does not comply with the standards
required by this ordinance.
b. A copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits shall be
forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten
(10) days of such action.
4. Conditions
a. In approving any conditional use permit, the Planning Commission may
impose conditions which it considered necessary to meet the standards
of this ordinance and to protect the best interests of the surrounding area
or the City as a whole.
b. These conditions may include, but are not limited to those listed in
Chapter IV, Section 3, Subd. D.
c. Other such conditions may include, but are not limited to the following:
1) Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
2) Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 25 Princeton, Minnesota
3) Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
4) Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective
measures.
5) Flood proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building
Code and this chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan or
document certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the flood proofing measures are consistent with the
regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors
for the particular area.
5. Violation
Violations of any conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the conditional use permit is granted, shall be deemed a violation
of this chapter punishable under Section 13.
6. Expiration
The provisions of Chapter IV, Section 3, Subd. E of the Zoning Ordinance
shall be followed.
D. Variances
1. Procedure
The provisions of Chapter IV, Section 2 of the Zoning Ordinance shall be
applied.
a. Application for Variance
The provisions of Chapter IV, Section 2, Subd. A.1 of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be followed.
b. Public Hearing
The provisions of Chapter IV, Section 2, Subd. A.2 of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be followed.
In addition, the Zoning Administrator shall submit by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for the
proposed variance sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will
receive at least ten days notice of the hearing.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 26 Princeton, Minnesota
c. Appeal
The provisions of Chapter IV, Section 2, Subd. A.3 of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be followed.
2. Standards
a. The review standards listed in Chapter IV, Section 2, Subd.
B of the Zoning Ordinance shall be applied in the review of a variance.
b. In addition, the Planning Commission shall consider the following factors
in review of a variance in any flood plain district:
1) No variance shall have the effect of permitting a lower degree of
flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for
that particular area or permit standards lower than those required
by state law.
2) Variances shall not be issued by a community within any
designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge would result.
3) Variances shall only be issued by a community upon (i) a showing
of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant
the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant,
and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
chapters.
4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
3. Decision
a. If the Planning Commission denies a variance, it shall include in its
determination findings as to the ways in which the proposed use does
not comply with the standards required by this ordinance.
b. A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail to
the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such
action.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 27 Princeton, Minnesota
4. Conditions
a. Conditions may be imposed on granting of variances if those conditions
are directly related to and bear a rough proportionality to the impact
created by the variance.
5. Flood Insurance Notice and Record Keeping
The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant for a variance, and such
notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions, that:
a. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and
b. Such construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases
risks to life and property.
c. A community shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its
annual or biennial report submitted to the Administrator of the National
Flood Insurance Program.
C. Appeals
1. The appeal process shall follow those procedures outlined in Chapter IV,
Section 5 of the Zoning Ordinance.
2. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by
an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
A. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the
passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following conditions.
Historic structures, as defined in Section 3, Subd. H.18 (b) of this chapter, shall be
subject to the provisions of Section 12, Subd. A.1 – A.5 of this chapter.
1. No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that
increases its nonconformity.
12. Nonconformities
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 28 Princeton, Minnesota
2. Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage
potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood
proofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 thru FP-4 floodproofing classifications)
allowable in the State Building Code, except as further restricted in Section
12, Subd. A.3 and A.6 below.
3. The cost of all structural alterations or additions to any nonconforming
structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50 percent of the
market value of the structure unless the conditions of this Section are
satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions must include all
costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all
manpower or labor. If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations and
additions exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure, then the
structure must meet the standards of Section 5 or 6 of this chapter for new
structures depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood
Fringe District, respectively.
4. If any nonconforming use is discontinued for l2 consecutive months, any
future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter. The
Assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses that have been discontinued for a period of l2 months.
5. If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as defined in
Section 3, Subd. H.17 of this chapter, it shall not be reconstructed except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The applicable provisions for
establishing new uses or new structures in Sections 5, 6 , or 7 will apply
depending upon whether the use or structure is in the Floodway, Flood Fringe
or General Flood Plain District, respectively.
6. If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in Section 3, Subd. H.18 of
this chapter, from any combination of a building addition to the outside
dimensions of the existing building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction,
alteration, or other improvement to the inside dimensions of an existing
nonconforming building, then the building addition and the existing
nonconforming building must meet the requirements of Section 5 or 6 of this
chapter for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
A. Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
13. Penalties for Violation
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 29 Princeton, Minnesota
connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law.
B. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Princeton, Minnesota from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Such
actions may include but are not limited to:
1. In responding to a suspected Ordinance violation, the Zoning Administrator
and Local Government may utilize the full array of enforcement actions
available to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions,
after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a request to the
National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to
the guilty party. The Community must act in good faith to enforce these
official controls and to correct Ordinance violations to the extent possible so
as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
2. When an Ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought to the
attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall
immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of
the violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this
information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural
Resources' and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office
along with the Community's plan of action to correct the violation to the
degree possible.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the requirements
of this chapter and all other official controls and the nature and extent of the
suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/or use is under
construction or development, the Zoning Administrator may order the
construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or
approval is granted by the Community. If the construction or development is
already completed, then the Zoning Administrator may either: (1) issue an
order identifying the corrective actions that must be made within a specified
time period to bring the use or structure into compliance with the official
controls; or (2) notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact
permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed
30-days.
4. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the Zoning
Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that
lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter and shall be
prosecuted accordingly. The Zoning Administrator shall also upon the lapse
of the specified response period notify the landowner to restore the land to
the condition which existed prior to the violation of this chapter.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-11; 01-10-13 VIII - 30 Princeton, Minnesota
The flood plain designation on the Official Zoning Map shall not be removed from flood
plain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area has
been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is
contiguous to lands outside the flood plain. Special exceptions to this rule may be
permitted by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if he determines that, through
other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
All amendments to this chapter, including amendments to the Official Zoning Map, must
be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to
adoption. Changes in the Official Zoning Map must meet the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's (FEMA) Technical Conditions and Criteria and must receive
prior FEMA approval before adoption. The Commissioner of Natural Resources must
be given 10-days written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this
Ordinance and said notice shall include a draft of the Ordinance amendment or
technical study under consideration.
14. Amendments
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 1
Chapter IX
Wild and Scenic Rum River
Protection Area
A. This chapter of the Zoning Ordinance if for the controlling of riverland development in
order to protect and preserve the outstanding scenic, recreational, natural, historical,
and scientific values of the Rum River in Princeton, MN, in a manner consistent with
MN Statutes, Sections 103F.301-103F.345, MN Rules, Parts 6105.0010-.0250, Parts
6105.1400-.1500, and Parts 6120.2500-.3900 for the Rum River, hereafter referred to
as the Rum River rule.
A. Short Title
This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the City of Princeton Wild and
Scenic River Ordinance; except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as
"this chapter."
A. This chapter is to achieve the stated policy and to:
1. Designate land use districts along the shoreline of the Rum River.
2. Regulate the area and width of a lot suitable for a building site.
3. Regulate the setback of structures and sewage treatment systems from shorelines.
4. Regulate alterations of the natural vegetation and topography.
5. Maintain property values and prevent poorly planned development.
6. Conserve and protect the natural scenic values and resources of the Rum River
and to maintain a high standard of environmental quality.
7. To comply with Minnesota Rules, Parts 6105.1400-.1500.
1. Policy and Authorization
2. Title
3. Purpose
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 2
A. Jurisdiction
The jurisdiction of this chapter shall include all lands designated within the Rum River
land use districts within the City of Princeton as defined in MN Rules, Part 6105.1480.
B. Compliance
The use of any land within the Rum River land use districts; the size and shape of
lots; the use and location of structures on lots; the installation and maintenance of
water supply and sewage treatment systems; the filling, grading, or dredging of any
river area; the cutting of vegetation or alteration of the natural topography within the
district; and the subdivision of land shall be in full compliance with the terms of this
ordinance and other applicable regulations. Permits from the Zoning Administrator
are required by this ordinance for the construction of buildings, public or private water
supply and sewage treatment systems, and the grading and filling of the natural topography
within the Rum River land use district(s).
C. Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined as follows:
1. Agricultural Use
The use of land for the production of food or fiber, their storage on the area,
and/or the raising thereon of domestic and non-domestic animals.
2. Bluffline
A line along the top of a slope connecting the points at which the slope becomes
less than 13%. This applies to those slopes within the land use district
which are beyond the setback provisions from the ordinary high water level.
3. Boathouse
A structure used solely for the storage of boats or boating equipment.
4. Building Line
That line measured across the width of the lot at the point where the main structure
is placed in accordance with setback provisions.
4. General Provisions
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 3
5. Campground
An area accessible by vehicle and containing campsites or camping spurs for
tents and trailer camping.
6. Clear Cutting
The removal of an entire stand of vegetation.
7. Commissioner
The Commissioner of Natural Resources.
8. Essential Services
Underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water distribution systems;
and collection, communication, supply, or disposal systems, including poles,
wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in conjunction
therewith, but not including buildings or transmission services.
9. Forestry
The use and management, including logging, of a forest, woodland, or plantation
and related research and educational activities, including the construction,
alteration, or maintenance of wood roads, skidways, landings, and fences.
10. Land Use District
Those lands designated by the Commissioner as the protected land corridor
along those rivers or river segments which the Commissioner has designated
as components of the Minnesota wild and scenic rivers system.
11. Mining Operation
The removal of stone, sand and gravel, coal, salt, iron, copper, nickel, granite,
petroleum products, or other material from the land for commercial, industrial, or
governmental purposes.
12. Open Space Recreational Uses
Recreation use particularly oriented to and utilizing the outdoor character of an
area; including hiking and riding trails, primitive campsites, campgrounds, waysides,
parks, and recreation areas.
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 4
13. Ordinary High Water Level
An elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for
a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape. The ordinary
high water level is commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes
from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. In areas where the ordinary
high water level is not evident, setbacks shall be measured from the
stream bank of the following water bodies that have permanent flow or open
water: the main channel, adjoining side channels, backwaters, and sloughs.
14. Primitive Campsites
An area that consists of individual remote campsites accessible only by foot or
water.
15. Public Waters
Any waters as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.005, Subdivisions
15 and 18.
16. Riparian Lot
A lot adjacent to the bank of a natural watercourse (as a river).
17. Scenic Easement
An interest in land, less than the fee title, which limits the use of the land for the
purpose of protecting the scenic, recreational, or natural characteristics of wild,
scenic, or recreational river areas.
18. Selective Cutting
The removal of single scattered trees.
19. Sewage Treatment System
Any system for the collection, treatment, and dispersion of sewage, including,
but not limited to, septic tanks, soil absorption systems, and drain fields.
20. Structure
Any building, sign, or appurtenance thereto, except aerial or underground utility
lines, such as sewer, electric, telephone, telegraph, or gas lines, including towers,
poles, and other supporting appurtenances, and fences used to control
livestock or delineate boundaries.
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 5
21. Wetland
Land which is annually subject to periodic or continual inundation by water and
commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh.
A. Designation of Districts
1. In order to preserve and protect the Rum River and its adjacent lands which
possess outstanding scenic, recreational, natural, historical, scientific and similar
values, the Rum River in the City of Princeton has been given the Scenic
River classification and the uses and classification of this river and its adjacent
lands are hereby designated by land use zoning district, the boundaries of
which are based on the Rum River rule, Minnesota Rules, Parts
6105.1400-.1500.
2. The boundaries of the Rum River Scenic land use district are shown on the
map designed as the City of Princeton official zoning map. In case of conflict
between the map and the property descriptions in the Rum River rule, the latter
shall prevail.
3. In accordance with Minnesota Rules, Part 6105.1440, Subd. 1B, if land is annexed,
incorporated, or in any other way transferred to the City of Princeton, a
moratorium shall exist on all construction, grading and filling, and vegetative
cutting until this zoning ordinance is amended. The amended zoning shall meet
the provisions of the plan which applied to the land before the transfer.
B. Permitted and Conditional Uses
Certain of the following uses are subject to the zoning dimension provisions and sanitary
provisions of Sections 6 and 7 of this chapter. All of the following uses are subject
to the vegetative cutting and grading and filling provisions of Section 8 of this
chapter. All uses not listed as permitted or conditional uses shall not be allowed within
the applicable land use districts.
1. Permitted Uses
In the WS-1 District, no building or land shall be used or divided and no building
shall be erected, unless otherwise provided herein, except for one or more of
the following, as well as similar uses:
* Agriculture
* Essential Services
5. Land Use District Provisions
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 6
* Accessory Uses
* Public and Parochial Schools
* Single-Family Dwellings
* Two-Family Dwellings
* Hiking Trails1
* Public Buildings
* Existing Commercial Buildings
* Governmental Campgrounds
* Public Accesses, Road Access Type with Boat Launching Facilities1
* Public Accesses, Trail Access Type1
* Other Governmental Open Space Recreational Uses1
2. Conditional Uses
The following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use
permit:
* Home Occupations
* Water Recreation and Storage
* Public Utility Buildings
* Multi-Family Dwellings
* Hotels, Motels, Country Clubs
* Parks, Waysides, Golf Courses1
* Public Roads
* Public Utility Lines and Crossings
* Private Campgrounds1
* Other Private Open Space Recreational Uses1
Subject to management plan specifications and approval by the Commissioner.
3. The following criteria will be used to review conditional use permits:
a. It shall be based upon the technical evaluation of a designated engineer
or expert.
b. The proposed utilities.
c. The requirements of the facility for its location.
d. The availability of alternate locations.
e. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and anticipated
development in the future.
f. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for the
area.
g. Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this ordinance.
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 7
A. Minimum District Dimensional Requirements
1. The following chart sets forth the minimum lot size and width, setbacks, and
other requirements of each district:
Unsewered
Lots
Unsewered
Riparian
Lots
Sewered
Riparian
Lots
a. Minimum lot size above ordinary high
water level (square feet)
108,900
108,900
15,000
b. Lot width at building line
150'
75'
75'
c. Lot width at ordinary high water level
150'
75'
75'
d. Structure setback from ordinary high
water level of Rum River and designated
tributaries
100'
75'
75'
e. Structure setback from federal, state,
or county trunk highway rights-of-way
50'
50'
50'
f. Structure setback from other road and
public street rights-of-way
20'
20'
20'
g. On-site sewage treatment system setback
from ordinary high water level of
Rum River and designated tributaries
75'
75'
NA
h. Maximum structure height
35'
35'
35'
i. Controlled vegetative cutting area (see
Section 8.1 from ordinary high water
level of Rum River and designated
tributaries
100'
75'
75'
j. Impervious surface setback for roads
and parking areas from ordinary high
water level
50'
50'
50'
k. Maximum total area of all impervious
surfaces on each lot
30%
30%
30%
2. No structures shall be placed in any designated floodway district of the Rum
River. Structures proposed within a floodplain shall be consistent with the
Floodplain Management Chapter of this ordinance and/or statewide Standards
and Criteria for Management of Floodplain Areas of Minnesota (MN Rules,
Parts 6120.5100-.6200).
6. Zoning Dimensions
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 8
3. Exceptions to the placement of structures on lots shall be as follows:
a. Boathouses may be located landward of the ordinary high water level as a
conditional use provided they are not used for habitation and they do not
contain sanitary facilities.
b. Location of piers and docks shall be controlled by applicable state and local
regulations.
c. In areas where development exists on both sides of a proposed building
site, structural setbacks may be allowed to conform to that pattern. This
provision shall apply only to lots which do not meet the minimum lot width
restrictions of this ordinance.
d. Commercial, industrial, or permitted open space uses requiring location on
public waters may be allowed as conditional uses closer to such waters
than the setbacks specified in Subd. A (1) of this section.
B. Substandard Lots
Lots of record in the office of the Mille Lacs County Recorder on the effective day of
enactment of this ordinance which do not meet the dimensional requirements of this
ordinance shall be allowed as building sites, provided: the proposed use is permitted
in the land use district, the lot was in separate ownership on the date of enactment of
this ordinance, and all sanitary and dimensional requirements are complied with to
the greatest extent practicable.
A. Water Supply
Any public or private supply of water for domestic purposes must meet or exceed
standards for water quality of the Minnesota Department of Health and the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency and administrative procedures of the appropriate sections
within this ordinance. Private wells must be located, constructed, maintained, and
sealed in accordance with or in a more thorough manner than the Water Well Construction
Code of the Minnesota Department of Health.
B. Sewage Treatment
1. Sewage Treatment
Any premises intended for human occupancy must be provided with an adequate
method of sewage treatment. Publicly owned sewer systems must be
7. Sanitary Provisions
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 9
used where available. Where public systems are not available, all private sewage
treatment systems must meet or exceed applicable rules of the Minnesota
Department of Health; the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, specifically
Chapter 7080 for individual sewage treatment systems; Section 6, Subd. A
(1)(g) of this chapter; and any other applicable local government standards.
2. Nonconforming Sewage Treatment Systems
A nonconforming sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of
Subd. B (1) of this section must be upgraded, at a minimum, whenever a permit
or variance of any type is required for any improvement on, or use of, the property.
For the purposes of this provision, a sewage treatment system shall not
be considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is the sewage treatment
system's improper setback from the ordinary high water level.
The governing body of the City of Princeton must by formal resolution notify the
Commissioner of its program to identify and upgrade nonconforming sewage
treatment systems.
A. Vegetative Cutting
1. The vegetative cutting provisions in Subd. A (2) of this section shall apply to
those areas specified in Section 6, Subd. A (1)(i) of this chapter.
2. General provisions, within designated setback areas:
a. Clear cutting, except for any authorized public services such as roads and
utilities, shall not be permitted.
b. Selective cutting of trees in excess of four inches (4") in diameter at breast
height is permitted provided cutting is spaced in several cutting operations
and a continuous tree cover is maintained, uninterrupted by large openings.
c. The cutting provisions of #3 following shall not be deemed to prevent:
1) The removal of diseased or insect-infested trees, or of rotten or
damaged trees that present safety hazards.
2) Pruning of understory vegetation, shrubs, plants, bushes, grasses,
or from harvesting crops, or cutting suppressed trees or trees less
than four inches (4") in diameter at breast height.
8. Landscape Alterations
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 10
3. Clear Cutting
Clear cutting anywhere else in the designated land use district on the Rum River
is subject to the following standards and criteria:
a. Clear cutting shall not be used as a cutting method where soil, slope, or
other watershed conditions are determined by the Zoning Administrator
to be fragile and subject to the severe erosion and/or sedimentation.
b. Clear cutting shall be conducted only where clear-cut blocks, patches, or
strips are, in all cases, shaped and blended with the natural terrain.
c. The size of clear-cut blocks, patches, or strips shall be kept at the minimum
necessary.
d. Where feasible, all clear cuts shall be conducted between September 15
and May 15. If natural regeneration will not result in adequate vegetative
cover, areas in which clear cutting is conducted shall be replanted to prevent
erosion and to maintain the aesthetic quality of the area. Where feasible,
replanting shall be performed in the same spring, or the following
spring.
B. Grading, Filling, Alterations of the Beds of Public Waters
1. Any grading and filling work done within the designated land use district of this
ordinance shall require a permit and shall comply with the following:
a. Grading and filling of the natural topography which is not accessory to a
permitted or conditional use shall not be permitted in the land use district.
b. Grading and filling of the natural topography which is accessory to a permitted
or conditional use shall not be conducted without a grading and filling
permit from the Zoning Administrator. A grading and filling permit may
be issued only if the conditions of (c) and (d) following are properly satisfied.
c. Grading and filling of the natural topography which is accessory to a permitted
or conditional use shall be performed in a manner which minimizes
earthmoving, erosion, tree clearing, and the destruction of natural amenities.
d. Grading and filling in of the natural topography shall also meet the following
standards:
1) The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a time
as feasible.
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 11
2) Temporary ground cover, such as mulch, is used and permanent
ground cover, such as sod, is planted.
3) Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment are employed.
4) Fill is stabilized to accepted engineering standards.
2. Any change in the course, current, or cross-section of the Rum River or designated
tributary is prohibited unless authorized by a permit from the Commissioner
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.245. Excavation where
the intended purpose is connected to a public water, such as boat slips, canals,
lagoons, and harbors, must be controlled by local controls. Permission for excavations
may be given only after the Commissioner has approved the proposed
connection to public waters.
3. Drainage or filling in of wetlands is not allowed within the land use district designated
by this ordinance.
C. Utility Transmission Crossings
1. All utility crossing of the Rum River or state lands within the Rum River land use
district requires a license from the Commissioner pursuant to Minnesota Statutes,
Section 84.415.
D. Public Roads and Parking Areas
1. In addition to such permits as may be required by Minnesota Statutes, Section
103G.245, a conditional use permit shall be required for any construction or reconstruction
of public roads within the Rum River land use district. Such construction
or reconstruction shall be subject to Minnesota Rules, Part 6105.0200.
2. Public roads include township, county, and municipal roads, streets, and highways
which serve or are designed to serve flows of traffic between communities
or other traffic generating areas. A conditional use permit is not required for
minor public streets which are streets intended to serve primarily as an access
to abutting properties.
3. Where feasible and practical, all roads and parking areas shall meet the setback
requirements established for structures in Section 6, Subd. A (1)(d).
4. Natural vegetation or other natural materials shall be used in order to screen
parking areas when viewed from the water.
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 12
A. Land Suitability
1. No land shall be subdivided which is determined by the City of Princeton to be
unsuitable because of flooding, inadequate drainage, soil, and rock formations
with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable
topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment, capabilities, or any
other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the future
residents of the proposed subdivision or the community.
2. No plat or subdivision shall be approved by the City of Princeton until the applicant
has proven that every newly platted lot found within the land use district
has adequate area and a suitable location for the installation of a conforming
sewage treatment system.
3. The provisions otherwise set forth in this ordinance and in the City of Princeton
Subdivision Ordinance shall apply to all plats except planned cluster developments.
B. Planned Unit Developments
Altered zoning standards may be allowed as exceptions to this ordinance for planned
unit developments provided:
1. Preliminary plans are approved by the Commissioner prior to their enactment by
the City Council for the City of Princeton.
2. Central sewage facilities are installed which meet the standards, criteria, rules
or regulations of the Minnesota Department of Health and the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency, or the planned unit development is connected to a municipal
sanitary sewer.
3. Open space is preserved through the use of restrictive deed covenants, public
dedications, or other equally effective and permanent methods.
4. There are centralized shoreline recreation facilities.
5. That the following factors are carefully evaluated to ensure that the increased
density of development is consistent with the resource limitations of the public
water:
a. Suitability of the site for the proposed use;
b. Physical and aesthetic impact of increased density;
c. Level of current development;
d. Amount and ownership of undeveloped shoreland;
9. Subdivisions
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 13
e. Levels and types of water surface use and public access; and
f. Possible effects on overall public use.
6. Any commercial, recreational, community, or religious facility allowed as part of
the planned unit development shall conform to all applicable federal and state
regulations including, but not limited to, the following:
a. Licensing provisions or procedures;
b. Waste treatment and disposal regulations;
c. Water supply regulations;
d. Building codes;
e. Safety regulations;
f. Regulations concerning the appropriation and use of public waters as defined
in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 103G; and
g. Applicable regulations of the Minnesota Environmental Quality Board.
7. The final plan for a planned unit development shall not be modified, amended,
repealed, or otherwise altered unless approved in writing by the developer, the
municipality, and the Commissioner.
A. Organization Provisions
1. The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered by the City of Princeton
Zoning Administrator.
2. The Board of Adjustment of the City of Princeton shall act upon all questions as
they arise in the administration of this ordinance; hear and decide appeals; and
review any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning
Administrator who is charged with enforcing this ordinance as provided by Minnesota
Statutes.
3. Permit fees, processing fees, and inspection fees as may be established by the
City Council shall be collected by the Zoning Administrator.
B. Nonconforming Uses, Substandard Uses
1. Nonconforming Uses
Uses which are prohibited by this ordinance but which were in existence prior to
the effective date of this ordinance shall be nonconforming uses. Such uses
shall not be intensified, enlarged, or expanded beyond the permitted or delineated
boundaries of the use or activity as stipulated in the most current permit
10. Administration
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 14
issued prior to the adoption of this ordinance.
2. Nonconforming Sanitary Systems
All sanitary facilities inconsistent with the performance standards Section 7,
Subd. B (1) of this chapter shall be brought into conformity or discontinued within
five years of the date of enactment of this or other applicable ordinances.
3. Substandard Uses
All uses in existence prior to the effective date of enactment or amendment of
this ordinance which are permitted uses within the Rum River land use district,
but do not meet the minimum lot area, setbacks, or other dimensional requirements
of this ordinance are substandard uses. All substandard uses, except for
substandard signs, shall be allowed to continue subject to the following conditions
and exceptions:
a. Any structural alteration or addition to a substandard use which will increase
the substandard dimensions shall not be allowed.
b. Substandard signs shall be gradually eliminated over a period of time not
to exceed five years from the date of enactment or amendment of this ordinance.
C. Variances
1. The grant of a variance from a provision which relates to the zoning dimension
provisions requires the presence of the following conditions:
a. The strict enforcement of the land use controls will result in unnecessary
hardship.
b. Granting of the variance is not contrary to the purpose and intent of this
ordinance and is consistent with the Rum River rule, Minnesota Rules,
Parts 6105.1400-.1500.
c. There are exceptional circumstances unique to the subject property
which were not created by the landowner.
d. Granting of the variance will not allow any use which is neither a permitted
or conditional use in the land use district in which the subject property is
located.
e. Granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the locality.
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 15
2. All variances to the requirements of this chapter must be certified in accordance
with Subd.G of this section.
D. Plats
1. Copies of all plats within the Rum River land use district shall be forwarded to
the Commissioner within ten (10) days of approval by the City Council.
2. Approval of a plat which is inconsistent with this ordinance is permissible only if
the detrimental impact of the inconsistency is more than overcome by other protective
characteristics of the proposal.
3. All inconsistent plats approved by the City Council must be certified in accordance
with Subd. G of this section.
E. Amendments
1. Requests for amendments of this chapter may be initiated by a petition of affected
property owners, the Planning Commission, or by action of the City
Council. An amendment not initiated by the Planning Commission shall be referred
to the Planning Commission for study and recommendation prior to action
by the City Council.
2. An application for an amendment shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator.
3. Upon receipt in proper form of the application and other requested materials, a
public hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by Minnesota Statutes.
Following the public hearing by the Planning Commission and upon receiving
a recommendation by the Planning Commission, the City Council may
adopt the amendment in the manner prescribed by Minnesota Statutes.
4. Certification from the Commissioner must be obtained as specified in Subd. G
of this section before the proposed amendment becomes effective. The Commissioner
must certify that the amendment complies with the Minnesota Wild
and Scenic Rivers Act, the statewide standards and criteria, and the Rum River
rule.
F. Conditional Use Permit Application Review
1. A copy of all notices of any public hearing, or where a public hearing is not required,
a copy of the application to consider issuance of a conditional use permit
shall be sent so as to be received by the Commissioner at least 30 days prior
to such a hearing or meeting to consider issuance of a conditional use permit.
A copy of the decision shall be forwarded to the Commissioner within ten
days of such action.
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 16
2. Any conditional use permit Section 5, Subd. B (1) (a)-(f) requires approval of the
Commissioner in accordance with procedures in Subd. G of this section.
G. Certification
1. Certain land use decisions which directly affect the use of land within the designated
land use districts and involve any of the following actions must be certified
by the Commissioner as complying with the Minnesota Wild and Scenic
Rivers Act, the statewide Standards and Criteria, and the Rum River rule, as
described in Subd. G (2) of this section:
a. Adopting or amending an ordinance regulating the use of land including
rezoning of particular tracts or land.
b. Granting a variance from a provision of this chapter which relates to the
zoning dimension provisions of Section 6 of this chapter and any other
zoning dimension provisions established in Minnesota Rules, Parts
6105.1400-.1500.
c. Approving a plat which is inconsistent with this ordinance.
2. Certification Procedure
a. A copy of all notices of any public hearings, or where a public hearing is
not required, a copy of the application to consider zoning amendments,
variances, or inconsistent plats under this ordinance shall be sent so as to
be received by the Commissioner at least 30 days prior to such hearings
or meetings to consider such actions. The notice or application shall include
a copy of the proposed ordinance or amendment, or a copy of the
proposed inconsistent plat, or a description of the requested variance.
b. The City Council shall notify the Commissioner of its final decision on the
proposed action within ten days of the decision.
c. The Commissioner shall, no later than 30 days from the time he receives
notice of the final decision, communicate either certification of approval,
with or without conditions, or notice of non-approval.
d. The action becomes effective when and only when either:
1) The final decision taken by the City Council has previously received
certification of approval from the Commissioner; or
2) The City Council receives certification of approval after its final decision;
or
3) 30 days have elapsed from the day the Commissioner received noChapter
IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 17
tice of the final decision, and the City of Princeton has not received
from the Commissioner either certification of approval or notice of
non-approval; or
4) The Commissioner certifies his approval after conducting a public
hearing.
e. In case the Commissioner gives notice of non-approval of an ordinance,
amendment, variance, or inconsistent plat, either the applicant or the Zoning
Administrator may within 30 days of said notice, file with the Commissioner
a demand for hearing. If the demand for hearing is not made within
30 days, the notice of non-approval becomes final.
1) The hearing will be held in an appropriate local community building
within 60 days of the demand and after at least two weeks' published
notice.
2) The hearing will be conducted in accordance with Minnesota Statutes,
Section 103G.311, Subd. B, f, and g.
3) The Commissioner shall either certify his approval or deny the proposed
action within 30 days of the hearing.
H. Procedures Summary
The following table summarizes permit, review, and certifications procedures within
the land use districts designated by this chapter.
Types of Activities
Procedures
Types of Activities
Procedures
Building Permits
LP
Amendments to Ordinance
PH - FD - CC
Sign Construction Permits
LP
Variances
PH - FD - CC
Water Supply Permits
LP
Inconsistent Plats
PH - FD - CC
Sewage Supply Permits
LP
Planned Cluster Developments
PH - PA - FD
Grading, Filling Permits
LP
Plats
FD
Conditional Use Permits
PH - FD
LP Permit issued by the local authority in accordance with this ordinance and all other local ordinances.
PH Copy of public hearing notice or application sent so as to be received by the commissioner at
least 30 days prior to hearing or meeting.
FD Local authority forwards decision to the Commissioner within ten days after taking final action.
CC Action becomes effective only when Commissioner certifies its compliance with the Act,
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 18
statewide standards and criteria, and the Rum River rule.
PA Preliminary plans approved by Commissioner prior to their enactment by local authority.
I. Enforcement
1. It is declared unlawful for any person to violate any of the terms and provisions
of this ordinance. Violation thereof shall be a misdemeanor. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
2. In the event of a violation or a threatened violation of this ordinance, the City
Council, in addition to other remedies, may institute appropriate actions or proceedings
to prevent, restrain, or abate such violations or threatened violations.
3. Any taxpayer of the City of Princeton may institute mandamus proceedings in
the District Court to compel specific performance by the proper official or officials
of any duty required by this chapter.
11. Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area for Newly Annexed Properties
Rev. 07-14-16; Ord. 736
A. Intent
The intent of Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area for Newly Annexed Properties
is to establish the permitted and conditional uses, as well as the lot standards and
requirements for land that is newly annexed into the city.
B. Nonconforming Uses
All uses in existence prior to the effective dates of enactment or amendment of the
Ordinance which do not conform to the use restrictions of the newly established land
use district are nonconforming uses. Under the authority permitted by law, local
authorities may adopt provisions to regulate and control, reduce the number or extent
of, or gradually eliminate nonconforming uses. Local authorities shall provide for the
gradual elimination of sanitary facilities inconsistent with part 6120.1300, subpart 3,
items B, C, and E over a period of time not to exceed five years from the date of
enactment of the local Ordinance.
C. Substandard Uses
All uses in existence prior to the effective date of enactment or amendment of the
Ordinance which are permitted uses within the newly established land use district, but
do not meet the minimum lot area, setbacks, or other dimensional requirements of the
Ordinance are substandard uses. All substandard uses, except for substandard signs,
shall be allowed to continue subject to the following conditions and exceptions:
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 19
a. Any structural alteration or addition to a substandard use which will increase
the substandard dimensions shall not be allowed.
b. Each local authority shall provide for the gradual amortization of substandard
signs over a period of time not to exceed five years from the enactment or
amendment of the Ordinance.
D. Permitted and Conditional Uses
In the following table of uses P means permitted use, C means conditional use, and
N means non-permitted use.
Certain of the following uses are subject to the zoning dimension provisions and
sanitary provisions in parts 6105.0110 and 6105.0120. All of the following uses are
subject to the vegetative cutting provisions and the grading and filling provisions in
parts 6105.0150 and 6105.0160.
Land Use Districts
Wild Scenic
River River
A. Governmental campground, subject to management
plan specifications. N P
B. Private campground, subject to management plan
specifications. N C
C. Public accesses, road access type with boat
launching facilities subject to management plan
specifications. N P
D. Public accesses, trail access type, subject to
management plan specifications. P P
E. Temporary docks. C C
F. Other governmental open space recreational uses,
subject to management plan specifications. P P
G. Other private open space recreational uses, subject
to management plan specifications. C C
H. Agricultural uses. P P
I. Single family residential uses. P P
J. Forestry uses. P P
K. Essential services. P P
L. Sewage disposal systems P P
M. Private roads and minor public streets. P P
N. Signs approved by federal, state, or local
government which are necessary for public health
and safety and signs indicating areas that are
available, or not available, for public use. P P
O. Signs not visible from the river that are not
Chapter IX - Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
1
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 07-14-16 Princeton, Minnesota IX - 20
specified in N. P P
P. Governmental resource management for improving
fish and wildlife habitat; wildlife management areas;
nature areas; accessory roads. P P
Q. Underground mining that does not involve surface
excavation in the land use district. C C
R. Utility transmission power lines and pipeline,
subject to the provisions of parts 6105.0170 and
6105.0180. C C
S. Public roads, subject to the provisions in parts
6105.0190 and 6105.0200 C C
E. Lot Standards
The following are the minimum standards which must be adopted for the annexation area:
Standard Requirement Rule Reference
Min Lot Size Four acres 6105.0110 Subp.2.B.
Min Lot Width 250 feet 6105.0110 Subp.2.B.
Min Structure Setbacks
OHWL
Bluff line
Designated tributaries
150 feet
30 feet
100 feet
6105.0110.Subp.3
Min septic tank and soil
Absorption system setbacks:
OHWL
Designated tributaries
100 feet
75 feet
6105.0210
Max dwelling units per lot One 6105.0110 Subp.3A.
Max building height 35 feet
F. Additional Requirements
? No structure placement on slopes exceeding 13% unless the structures can be
screened (6105.0110 Subp. 3.C.)
? Planned Unit Development (PUD) must not have more than one centralized boat
launching facility for each cluster (6105.0140 Subp. 3.B.)
SECTION 2: EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall take effect upon its summary publication in the City’s official
newspaper. Said publication shall read as follows:
Ordinance #736 is enacted to establish rules and regulations for the use of and
behavior in City of Princeton Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area for
Newly Annexed Properties.
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, Minnesota X - 1
Chapter X
HOUSING STANDARDS
A. The purpose of this Chapter is to maintain the City’s attractiveness, protect the safety
of the people, and to promote the general welfare by legislation which shall be
systematically enforced upon all residential, rental, and commercial property and act
as a public service to residents who are home owners. These general objectives
include, among others, the following:
1. To protect the character and stability of the residential and commercial areas.
2. To correct and prevent conditions that adversely affect and are likely to
adversely affect the safety, general welfare, and health of persons owning or
renting residential and commercial facilities.
3. To provide basic standards for the maintenance of existing residential and
commercial structures and to prevent deterioration and blight.
4. To preserve the value of land and structures throughout the City.
The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated. Whenever the
words “dwelling,” “dwelling unit,” “premises,” or “structure” are used in this section, they
shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”
A. “Approved” means approved as to construction, installation, and maintenance in
accordance with applicable statutes of the State and the provisions of the City Code.
B. “Clean” means the absence of rubbish, garbage, vermin, and other unsightly,
offensive, or extraneous matter.
1. Purpose
2. Definitions
CHAPTER X – HOUSING STANDARDS
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, Minnesota X - 2
C. “Easily cleanable” means readily accessible and of such material and finish and so
fabricated and placed that residue which may accumulate can be completely
removed by normal cleaning methods.
D. “Exit” means a continuous and unobstructed means of egress to a public or private
way and shall include intervening doors, doorways, corridors, ramps, stairways,
smoke-proof enclosures, horizontal exits, exit passageways, and exit court yards.
E. “Functioning” means in such physical condition as to safely perform the service or
services for which an item is designed or intended.
F. “Garbage” includes all putrescible animal, vegetable, or other matter that attends the
preparation, consumption, display, dealing in, or storage of meat, fish, fowl, birds,
fruit, or vegetables, including the cans, containers, or wrappers wasted along with
such materials.
G. “Habitable room” means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes; excluding bathrooms, water closet
compartments, laundries, furnace rooms unfinished basements, pantries, utility
rooms, foyers, communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces, and
attics.
H. “Infestation” means the presence around a dwelling of any insect, rodent, or other
pest.
I. “Kitchen” means a habitable room intended to be used for the cooking of food or the
preparation of meals.
J. “Maintenance” means to keep in a good state of repair; to preserve from
deterioration.
K. “Non-combustible” means any material or combination of materials which will not
ignite or support combustion during a five (5) minute exposure. (Refer to 1973 UBC,
Section 415, or appropriate section of alter edition.)
L. “Occupancy” means the purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or
intended to be used.
M. “Occupant” means any person residing in a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
N. “Operator” means the owners or their agents who have charge, care, control, or
management of a building or part thereof.
O. “Owner” means any person, group, partnership, corporation, or other entity who,
either alone, jointly, or severally with others, shall be in actual possession of or have
charge, care, or control of any building or a portion thereof within the City as owner,
employee, agent of the owner, or as trustee or guardian of the estate or person of the
CHAPTER X – HOUSING STANDARDS
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, Minnesota X - 3
title holder. Any such person representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply
with the provisions of this section to the same extent as the owner.
P. “Reasonable Time” means an approximate time frame of within ten (10) to thirty (30)
days.
Q. “Refuse” means all solid waste products or those having the character of solids rather
than liquids in that they will not flow readily without additional liquid and which are
composed wholly or partly of such materials as garbage, swill, sweepings, cleanings,
trash, rubbish, litter, industrial solid wastes or domestic solid wastes, organic wastes
or residue of animals sold as meat, fruit or other vegetable, or animal matter from
kitchen, dining room, market, food establishments, or any place dealing in or handling
meat, fowl, fruit, grain, or vegetables; offal, animal excreta, or the carcass of animals;
trees or shrub trimmings, or other waste matter resulting from the demolition,
alteration, or construction of buildings or structures; ashes, tires, junk, or other such
substance which may become a nuisance.
R. “Repair” means to restore to a sound and acceptable state of operation,
serviceability, or appearance in the determination of the Building Official.
S. “Sewer System” means a functioning sewer connection free from defects, leaks, or
obstructions with sufficient capacity to drain all fixtures or appliances which feed into
it. The sewer system, be it municipal or private, must be capable of disposing of
sewage in a safe, sanitary, and adequate manner.
T. “Unsafe,” as applied to a structure, means a condition or combination of conditions
which is dangerous or hazardous to persons or property.
U. “Unsanitary,” as applied to a structure, means conditions which are dangerous or
hazardous to the health of persons.
V. “Water closet” means a toilet, with a bowl and trap made in one piece which is
connected to an approved water supply and sewer system.
W. “Water supply” means a functioning plumbing connection free from defects, leaks, or
obstructions providing a potable, controllable flow of water.
A. Responsibility of Owners
The owner of a dwelling shall be responsible for the maintenance of that structure
and for meeting the provisions of this section. Those responsibilities may not be
abrogated by a private agreement.
3. General Provisions
CHAPTER X – HOUSING STANDARDS
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, Minnesota X - 4
B. Public Health Requirements for Services and Utilities
1. Facilities for Storage and Disposal of Rubbish and Garbage
Every owner of a commercial or multiple family dwelling shall be responsible for
providing and maintaining facilities for the storage and disposal of rubbish and
garbage, and for arranging for the collection of this material. In the case of
single or two family dwellings, these responsibilities shall be those of the
occupants. All storage and disposal of rubbish and garbage shall meet the
needs of the dwelling as well as comply with any other City code provisions.
C. Basic Safety Requirements for Interior and Exterior Maintenance
1. Windows, Doors, and Screens.
Every window, doorway, and hatchway shall be kept in sound condition and
repair. Every window, doorway, and hatchway other than a fixed window or
storm window shall be capable of being easily opened.
2. Exterior Stairways, Porches, and Balconies.
Every stairway outside of a dwelling or commercial unit and every porch or
balcony shall be kept in a safe condition and sound repair.
3. Snow Removal.
The owner of a dwelling or commercial building shall be responsible for cleaning
and maintaining all walks, drives, and steps free of any ice or any snow
accumulation of two or more inches within twenty-four hours of the storm’s
completion.
4. Immediate Health and Safety Hazards.
The following are considered immediate hazards to health and safety for human
occupancy:
a) Structural systems, walls, chimneys, ceilings, roofs, foundations, and floor
systems that will not safely carry imposed loads.
b) Rubbish, garbage, human waste, decaying vermin or dead animals,
animal waste, and other materials rendering it unsanitary for human
occupancy.
CHAPTER X – HOUSING STANDARDS
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, Minnesota X - 5
D. Basic Requirements Pertaining to the Maintenance of Residential or
Commercial Properties
1. Fire Alarms or Fire Exits.
Fire alarms and/or fire exits shall not be placed in any dwelling or commercial
unit in such condition or location so as to be deemed not accessible, unsafe, or
dangerous and not fit for the purpose as determined by the Fire Marshall.
E. Unfit for Human Habitation
1. Declaration
Any dwelling or commercial unit which is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, or
unsafe to the extent that the defects create a hazard to the health, safety, or
welfare of the occupants or of the public may be declared unfit for human
habitation. Whenever any dwelling unit has been declared unfit for human
habitation, the County Health Department or Building Official shall order same
vacated within a reasonable time and shall post a placard on same indicating
that it is unfit for human habitation.
2. Vacated Building.
It is unlawful for a vacant building unit which has been declared unfit for human
habitation as provided in this section to be used for human habitation until the
defective conditions have been corrected and a certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the Building Official. It is unlawful for any person to deface or
remove the placard from such building unit.
3. Secure Unfit and Vacated Building Units.
The owner of any building unit which has been declared unfit for human
habitation or which is otherwise vacant for a period of sixty (60) days or more
shall make same safe and secure so that it is not hazardous to the health,
safety, and welfare of the public and does not constitute a public nuisance. Any
vacant building open at doors or windows, if unguarded, shall be deemed to be
a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a public nuisance
within the meaning of this chapter.
4. Hazardous Building Declaration.
In the event that a building has been declared unfit for human habitation and
the owner has not remedied the defects within a reasonable time, the building
may be declared a hazardous building and treated consistent with the
provisions of Section 463.15 of the Minnesota Statutes.
CHAPTER X – HOUSING STANDARDS
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, Minnesota X - 6
The Building Official shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
A. Inspection of Building Units and Premises
1) The Building Official or County Health Department is hereby authorized and
directed to enter and make such inspections as are necessary to determine the
condition of any building unit and premises for compliance with this chapter.
The owner or occupant of every building unit, or the person in charge thereof,
shall give the Building Official free access to such building unit and its premises
at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination, and
survey.
2) Every occupant of a building unit shall give the owner or operator thereof, or
their agents or employees, access to any part of such building unit or its
premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting or effecting such
maintenance, repairs, or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with
the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any
lawful notice or order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Compliance
Whenever the Building Official determines or has reasonable grounds to believe that
there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, she/he shall give notice of
such alleged violation to the person responsible therefore. Such notice shall:
1) Be in writing.
2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
3) Describe in sufficient detail each violation.
4) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
5) Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, for the performance of
any act it requires.
6) Be served upon the owner, agent, operator, or occupant; such notice shall be
deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
a) Served upon said owner, agent, operator, or occupant;
b) Sent by mail to the last known address; or
4. Administration and Enforcement
CHAPTER X – HOUSING STANDARDS
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 03-04 Princeton, Minnesota X - 7
c) Upon failure to effect the compliance order through (a) or (b) above, said
order will be posted at a conspicuous place in or about the affected
building unit.
C. Appeal
When it is alleged by any person to whom a compliance order is directed that such
compliance order is based upon erroneous interpretations of this chapter, such
person may appeal the compliance order as set forth in the zoning provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance. The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings unless such a
stay would cause imminent peril to life, health, safety, or property.
D. Penalties for Violation
Any person, firm, corporation, or voluntary association which violates or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
except those violations specifically subject to administrative fines under this
ordinance. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
In addition, upon failure to comply with a compliance order within the time set and no
appeal having been taken, the Council may, by resolution, cause the cited deficiency
to be remedied as set forth in the compliance order. The cost of such remedy shall be
placed against the subject property and may be levied and collected as a special
assessment in the manner provided by Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 429.
E. Emergency Cases
When a violation of this chapter constitutes an imminent peril to life, health, safety, or
property, the City may require immediate compliance and, if necessary, take
appropriate action to correct the violation.
Chapter XI – Solar Energy
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota XI - 1
Chapter XI
SOLAR ENERGY FARMS AND
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
Rev. 06-07-17; Ord. 752
A. The purpose of this Chapter is to maintain the City’s attractiveness, protect the
safety of the people, and to promote the general welfare by providing legislation by
which solar facilities can be located within the City of Princeton. These general
objectives include, among others, the following:
1. Set forth standards for Solar Energy Farms and Solar Energy Systems for
the City of Princeton.
2. To correct and prevent conditions that adversely affect and are likely to
adversely affect the safety, general welfare, and health of nearby property
owners.
3. To preserve the value of land and structures throughout the City.
The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated.
A. “Community Solar Garden” – means a community solar energy system that
generates electricity by means of a ground-mounted or building-integrated solar
system and that is supplied to multiple community members or businesses
residing or located off-site from the location of the solar energy system under the
provisions of Minnesota statutes 216B.1641 or successor statute.
1. Purpose
2. Definitions
Chapter XI – Solar Energy
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota XI - 2
B. “Solar Collector” – means a device, structure or a part of a device or structure for
which the primary purpose is to capture sunlight and transform it into thermal,
mechanical, chemical or electrical energy.
C. “Solar Energy” – means radiant energy received from the sun that can be
collected in the form of heat or light by a solar collector.
D. “Solar Energy System (Building-Integrated)” – means a solar energy system that
is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, replacing or substituting for
an architectural or structural component of the building. Building integrated
systems include, but are not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water solar energy
systems that are contained within or substitute for roofing materials, windows,
skylights, awnings and shade devices.
E. “Solar Energy System (Ground-Mounted)” – means a freestanding solar system
mounted directly to the ground using a rack or pole rather than being mounted on
a building.
F. “Solar Energy System (Passive)” – means a system that captures solar light or
heat without transforming it to another form of energy or transferring the energy
via a heat exchanger.
G. “Solar Farm” - means a commercial facility that converts sunlight into electricity,
whether by photovoltaic (PV), concentrating solar thermal devices (CST), or
other conversion technology, for the principal purpose of wholesale sales of
generated energy.
H. “Solar Energy Farms” – means a solar array composed of multiple solar panels
on ground-mounted rack or poles which are the primary land use for the parcel
on which it is located and is greater than 100 kilowatts direct current (DC) rated
capacity.
A. Solar Energy Farms - Solar Energy Farms shall be subject to the following
performance standards:
1. Solar Energy Farms are composed of multiple solar panels on multiple
mounting systems (poles or racks), and generally have a direct current (DC)
rated capacity greater than one hundred (100) kilowatts. Solar Energy
Farms greater than one hundred (100) kilowatts in all zones and Solar
Energy Systems greater than ten (10) kilowatts in all zones except for
3. Requirements and Standards
Chapter XI – Solar Energy
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota XI - 3
General Agriculture (AG) require a Conditional Use Permit. Solar Energy
Farms are not allowed in shoreland or residential districts. Solar Energy
Farms are allowed up to ten (10) megawatts.
2. Solar Energy Farms in agricultural, commercial, and industrial zoning
districts may be up to twenty (20) feet in height at maximum design tilt.
3. Location within Lot: Solar Energy Farms must meet the primary structure
setbacks for the zoning district and will be measured from the closest point at
maximum orientation.
4. Storm water management shall meet the requirements of the City of
Princeton and the State of Minnesota.
5. Erosion and sediment control shall meet the requirements of the City of
Princeton and the State of Minnesota.
6. Foundations: The manufacturer’s engineer or another qualified engineer
shall certify that the foundation and design of the solar panels is within
accepted professional standards, given local soil and climate conditions.
7. Other standards and codes: All Solar Energy Farms shall be in compliance
with any applicable local, state and federal regulatory standards, including
the State of Minnesota Uniform Building Code, as amended; and the
National Electric Code, and National Electric Safety Code as amended.
8. Power and communication lines: Power and communication lines running
between banks of solar panels and to the point of interconnection of
distribution utility or interconnections with buildings shall be buried
underground as much as practical. Exemptions may be granted by the
Commission in instances where shallow bedrock, water courses, or other
elements of the natural landscape interfere with the ability to bury lines.
9. Application requirements: The following information shall be provided to the
City of Princeton’s Zoning Administrator for application of a Conditional Use
Permit required in MN-1, MN-2, and B-3. (This is an allowed use in A-1 and
A-2)
10. A site plan of existing applicable conditions showing the following:
a. Existing property lines and property lines extending one hundred (100)
feet from the exterior boundaries.
b. Existing public and private roads and any easements.
Chapter XI – Solar Energy
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota XI - 4
c. Location and size of any abandoned wells and sewage treatment
systems.
d. Existing buildings and any impervious surface.
e. Topography at two (2) foot intervals and source of contour interval,
unless determined otherwise by the Princeton Planning and Zoning
Department.
f. Existing vegetation.
g. Waterways, watercourses, lakes and wetlands.
h. The one hundred (100) year flood elevation and Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation, if available.
i. Floodway, flood fringe and/or Flood Plain (FP) district boundary, if
applicable.
j. The shoreland district boundary, if any portion of the project is located
in a shoreland district.
k. In the shoreland district, the ordinary high water level.
l. In the shoreland district, the toe and top of a bluff within the project
boundaries.
m. Surface water drainage patterns.
11. Site Plan of Proposed Conditions:
a. Planned location and spacing of solar panels.
b. Planned location of access roads.
c. Planned location of underground or overhead electric lines connecting
the Solar Energy Farm or Solar Energy System to the building,
substation or other electric load.
d. Planned new electrical equipment other than at the existing building or
substation that is the connection point for the Solar Energy Farm.
e. Proposed erosion and sediment control measures as required in
Chapter XI – Solar Energy
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota XI - 5
elsewhere in the City of Princeton Zoning Ordinance. If required, the
Planning Commission may review the associated land alteration for a
Solar Energy Farm or Solar Energy System and issue a Conditional
Use Permit for that land alteration as part of the request for the Solar
Energy Farm or Solar Energy System Conditional Use Permit.
f. Proposed storm water management measures.
g. Sketch elevation of the premises accurately depicting the proposed
h. Solar Energy Farm or Solar Energy System and its relationship to
structures on adjacent lots (if any) unless determined otherwise by the
City of Princeton Planning and Zoning Department.
12. Specifications and proposed installation methods for all planned major
equipment including solar panels, mounting systems and foundations for
poles or racks.
13. The planned number of panels to be installed.
14. A description of the method of connecting the array to a building or
substation.
15. A copy of the submitted interconnection application with the local electric
utility or a written explanation outlining why an interconnection application
is not necessary.
16. A decommissioning plan may be required to ensure that facilities are
properly removed after their useful life. Decommissioning of solar panels
must occur in the event they are not in use for twelve (12) consecutive
months. The plan shall include provisions for removal of all structures and
foundations, restoration of soil and vegetation and a plan describing the
financial resources that will be available to fully decommission the site.
The Commission may require the posting of a bond, letter of credit or the
establishment of an escrow during some point of the life of the project to
ensure proper decommissioning.
17. The Conditional Use Permit for Solar Energy Farms shall expire at the
same time that the Solar Energy Farm lease expires, but in no case shall
exceed thirty years. A new Conditional Use Permit can be applied for and
the City may issue a new Conditional Use Permit for an existing Solar
Energy Farm under the terms the City of Princeton Zoning Ordinance.
The Commission may waive the expiration requirement for Solar Energy
Farms located on property owned by the City or the PUC and other unique
Chapter XI – Solar Energy
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota XI - 6
owner operated facilities. Conditional Use Permits for Solar Energy
Systems do not expire unless the Solar Energy System is removed.
18. The Commission may require a buffer between Solar Energy Farms or
Solar Energy Systems and adjoining properties.
19. The Commission may require a greater setback between adjoining
properties if conditions warrant.
20. Payment In Lieu of Taxes. Notwithstanding that Minnesota Statutes
Section 272.02, Subdivision 24 (or its successor) classifies real property
upon which a solar energy generating system is located that is used
primarily for solar energy production (subject to the production tax under
Minnesota Statutes Section 272.0295) as class 3a, the City may require
the applicant to enter into a Payment In Lieu of Taxes Agreement to
compensate the City for any prospective tax revenue that may be lost due
to such reclassification.
B. Solar Energy Systems - Solar Energy Systems ten (10) kilowatts and under are a
permitted accessory use in all zoning districts. Solar Energy Systems over ten
(10) kilowatts and not exceeding hundred (100) kilowatts require a Conditional Use
Permit.
Solar Energy Systems one hundred (100) kilowatts and under are a permitted
accessory use in the General Agricultural (AG) zoning district.
1. Accessory Building Limit: Solar Energy Systems, either roof or groundmounted,
do not count as an accessory building for the purpose of limits on
accessory buildings.
2. Height: Solar Energy Systems are subject to the following height
requirements:
a. Building or roof- mounted Solar Energy Systems shall not exceed the
maximum allowed height in any zoning district.
b. Ground or pole-mounted Solar Energy Systems shall not exceed fifteen
(15) feet in height when oriented at maximum tilt in residential zones and
may be allowed up to twenty (20) feet in other zones.
3. Location within Lot: Solar Energy Systems must meet the accessory
structure setback for the zoning district and will be measured from the
closest point at maximum orientation. If attached to the primary structure the
Solar Energy Systems must meet the setbacks for the primary structure.
Chapter XI – Solar Energy
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 06-07-17 Princeton, Minnesota XI - 7
4. Approved Solar Components: Electric Solar Energy System components
must have an Underwriters Laboratory (UL) listing.
5. Compliance with State Electric Code: All Solar Energy Systems shall comply
with the Minnesota State Electric Code.
6. Utility Notification: No Solar Energy System shall be installed until evidence
has been given to the Department that the owner has notified the utility
company of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customerowned
generator. Off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement.
C. Passive Solar Energy Systems - Passive solar energy systems are exempt
from the requirements of this section and shall be regulated as any other building
element.
D. Ground Mounted/Building Integrated Solar Energy Systems - Groundmounted
solar energy systems shall not exceed fifteen feet (15’) in height.
Building-integrated solar energy systems shall not exceed the maximum height
permitted in the zoning district.
E. Solar Panel Glare - All solar farm and community solar garden facilities shall be
designed and located in order to prevent reflective glare toward any inhabited
buildings on adjacent properties, as well as adjacent street rights-of-way. Steps
to control glare nuisance may include selective placement of the system,
screening on the side of the solar array facing the reflectors, reducing use of the
reflector system, or other remedies that limit glare.
F. Safety Measures - A clearly-visible warning sign concerning voltage must be
placed at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations. All
mechanical equipment, including any structure for batteries or storage cells, shall
be completely enclosed by a minimum eight (8) foot high fence with a self-locking
gate, and provided with screening in accordance with the landscaping provisions
of Princeton’s Code.
Zoning Ordinance
Rev.06-07-2017 Princeton, Minnesota XII - 1
CHAPTER XII
ADOPTION OF
ORDINANCE
Ordinance #438 and its amendments are hereby repealed in their entirety.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its adoption and publication.
ADOPTED by the Princeton City Council on this 25th day of March, 2004.
Brian Humphrey, Mayor
ATTEST:
Mark Karnowski, City Administrator
Repeal
Effective Date
Zoning Ordinance
Rev.06-07-2017 Princeton, Minnesota XII - 2
Ord. # Pertaining to: Sections Amended: Adopted: Pub: Ord
Binder:
Elect
Copy:
446 Adult Uses Chapter II & VI 10-26-95 ?
448
Res Setbacks, Fences, Utility
Easements, Signs & Parking
Chapter V, VI, VII,
05-09-96
?
451
Signs: Awnings & Canopies
Chapter VII
08-22-96
?
453
Residential Setbacks
Chapter V
09-26-96
?
454
Temporary Signs
Chapter VII
10-24-96
?
458
Industrial District: Prohibited
Uses, Bldg regs, setbacks
Chapter V
01-09-97
?
464
Fences
Chapter VI
08-14-97
?
469
Antenna Tower Overlay District
Chapter II, III
04-09-98
?
472
Freestanding Monument Signs
Chapter VII
09-24-98
?
473 Twinhome Regs in R-2;
Bulk Storage in B-3
Chapter V
11-19-98
?
477
Freestanding Signage
Chapter VII
04-22-99
?
478
Residential use in B-1
Chapter V
04-22-99
?
501
Mini-storage as CUP in B-3
Chapter V
06-28-01
?
503
Townhouse & Twinhome Regs
Chapter II & V
09-13-01
?
506
Allowing churches as CUP in B-
1, B-2, B-3, & MN-1 10-25-01
?
508
Amending Subd Ord (#439) 11-29-01
?
521
Essential Services & Bldgs 02-27-03
?
538
Entire Zoning Ordinance 03-25-04
555
Planned Unit Development
Chapter II, Chapter IV (2) (Y)
07-08-04
? ?
573
Temporary Dwellings
Chapter VI, 2
06-06-05
? ?
599
Interim Uses
Chapters II, IV, V
03-08-07
597
Parking
Chapter VI, P, P1, P2
02-22-07
? ?
601
Signage
Chapter VII, All
05-10-07
? ?
604
Height Restriction
Chapter V, 6, R-3
07-12-07
? ?
605
Emergency Services
Chapter II, V
09-27-07
? ?
608
Internal Illumination
Chapter VII
11-08-07
? ?
609
Greenhouses in R-3
Chapter V
12-13-07
? ?
611
Parking Lot Surface Definition
Chapter II
01-10-08
? ?
Amendments
Zoning Ordinance
Rev.06-07-2017 Princeton, Minnesota XII - 3
612
B-3 Highway Commercial
Chapter V
01-10-08
? ?
618
Add Defs (Landfill, mixed waste,
recycling center; recycle centers
as CUP in A-1
Chapter II & V
06-26-08
? ?
629
Signs
Chapter VII
03-26-09
? ?
637
MOR, Medical Office Residential
District Chapter V, 20 10-08-09
10-15-09
? ?
658
Non-conforming structures,
Administration, Zoning Districts,
Performance Standards Chapter III, IV, V, & VI 11-18-10
06-30-11
? ?
659 Rural Taxing District 03-10-11
? ?
671 Floodplain Management Chapter VIII 09-08-11
09-15-11
? ?
672
Variance Regulations Chapter II, IV 09-08-11
09-15-11
? ?
674
Outdoor Storage of Material as
IUP in B-3 District Chapter V, 10.D. 10-13-11
10-20-11
? ?
675
Flagpoles in Business or
Industrial District Chapter VI, G 11-22-11
12-01-11
? ?
676 Temporary Signage Chapter VII, 3 & 5 12-22-11
12-29-11
? ?
678
No Living in Accessory Bldgs Chapter III 01-26-12
02-02-12
? ?
681
CUP Regulations Chapter IV 03-08-12
03-15-12
? ?
683 Residential Building Materials Chapter V 05-10-12
05-24-12
? ?
687
Industrial District Permitted,
CUPs, Interim & Prohibited Uses Chapter V 06-14-12
06-21-12
?
?
689
Auction Business as CUP in MN-
1 & MN-2 Chapter V 09-13-12
09-20-12
? ?
691
Chickens as IUP in R-1, R-2, &
R-3
Chapter II, Chapter V, Sec
4, 5, & 6; Chapter VI, Sec.
2.AA 10-11-12
10-18-12
? ?
692
Automobile & Recreational
Sales and Service in the B-2
District as a CUP Chapter V, Sec 9 10-11-12
10-18-12
? ?
694 Floodplain Management Chapter VIII 01-10-13
01-17-13
? ?
696
Automobile Sales Lot Hard
Surfacing
Chapter V, Sec 9 &10;
Chapter VI., P.1 02-28-13
03-07-13
?
?
8TH AVE N
12TH AVE N
14TH AVE N
RUM RIVER DR
17TH ST N
16TH ST N
15TH ST N
17TH AVE N
16TH AVE N
14TH LN N
15TH AVE N
14TH AVE N
13TH ST N
1ST ST
1ST ST
MEADOW VIEW DR
2ND ST
3RD ST S
16TH ST N
11TH AVE N
17TH ST N
18TH ST N 33RD AVE
12TH ST N 12TH ST N
CSAH 29
7TH AVE N CSAH 4
3RD ST N
2ND ST N
1ST ST
11TH AVE N
12TH AVE N
13TH AVE N
14TH AVE N
14TH AVE S
13TH AVE S
15TH AV S
318TH AVE NW
4TH AVE N
Woodland Ct
WOODLAND CR
WOODLAND DR
11TH AVE N
PINE LA
MAPLE LA
OAK LA
OAK CR
12TH ST N
14TH ST N
SHADY LA
11TH ST N
10TH ST N
9TH ST N
8TH ST N
7TH ST N
6T H ST N
5TH ST N
10TH AVE N
9TH AVE N
8TH AVE N
TRIANGLE CT
RUM RIVER DR
7TH AVE N
6TH AVE N
5TH AVE N
96TH AVE
21ST AVE N
2ND ST N
19TH AVE N
5TH ST N
CSAH 31
CSAH 31 CSAH 3
21ST AVE S
AIRPORT RD
OLD CO RD 18
VERTI-FLO LA
4TH AVE S
7TH AVE S
8TH AVE S
RUM RIVER DR
8TH AVE S
9TH AVE S
7TH AVE S
6TH AVE S
4TH AVE S
RUM RIVER DR
4TH AVE S
8TH AVE S
SMITH SYSTEMS RD
320-1/2 AVE NW
126TH ST NW
319T H AVE NW
9TH CIRCLE
14TH ST S
2ND ST S
4TH ST S
5TH ST S
6TH ST S
10TH AVE S
10TH AVE S
11TH AVE S
3RD AVE S
GOLF CLUB RD
6TH AVE N
323RD AVE NW
US HWY 169
123RD ST NW
7TH AVE N
10TH AVE N
14TH AVE S
5TH ST S
3RD ST S
4TH ST N
5TH ST N
13TH AVE N
7TH ST N
16TH AVE N
WEST BRANCH ST
WEST BRANCH ST
MN HWY 95
CSAH 1
CSAH 1
97TH AVE
4TH ST S
122ND ST NW
127TH ST NW
125-1/2 ST NW
125TH STREET NW
316TH AVE NW
317TH AVE NW
316-1/2 AVE NW
316TH AVE NW
320TH AVE NW
CSAH 2
14TH AVE S
320TH AVE NW
FAIRWAY DR
NORTHLAND DR
US HWY 169
CSAH 2
124TH ST NW
CSAH 2
CSAH 29
CSAH 2
CSAH 2
16TH AVE S
17TH AVE S
CO HWY 45
12TH ST S
10TH ST S
19TH AVE S
18TH AVE S
128TH ST NW
CO HWY 45
130TH ST NW
131ST ST NW
128TH ST NW
119TH ST NW
317TH AVE NW
120TH ST NW
321ST ST NW
136TH ST NW 136TH ST NW 136-TH ST. NW
CO HWY 45
US HWY 169
City of Princeton
Zoning Map
0 625 1,250 2,500
Feet ±
Legend
County Line
Existing Zone A
Existing Zone B
Existing Zone C
Future Crosswind Runway
Existing Runway
Princeton City Limits
Wild_SDistrict
Wild & Scenic District
A-1 Agricultural
A-2 Agricultural 2
C-1 Conservation
R-1 Residential
R-2 Residential
R-3 Multiple Family Residential
RM-1 Residential Manufactured Housing
B-1 Central Business
B-2 Neighborhood Business District
B-3 General Commercial District
HC-1 Health Care District
MOR Medical Office Residential
MN-1 Industrial
MN-2 Industrial 2
D-1 Airport
F-1 Floodplain
AT Antenna Overlay
ES Essential Services Overlay District
Wild & Scenic District
Source: City of Princeton, Sherburne County,
Mille Lacs County, DNR, and SEH Inc.
Map Date: January 10, 2018 By: M. DeWitt

City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
I-1
GENERAL INFORMATION
Princeton is a city covering an area of approximately 4 square miles located on the border
of Mille Lacs and Sherburne Counties. Current population is approximately 4,200
persons. Located at the intersection of T.H. 169 and T. H. 95, the City expects a strong
single family and multiple family market to continue.
A progressive community, Princeton offers the right combination of a free standing, yet
metropolitan accessible community. In the central part of the City, the Rum River
shoreland and rolling topography creates a unique natural setting. A comprehensive
trail plan has been proposed and redevelopment of commercial areas initiated. Coupled
with the unique natural environment, it is the City’s desire to build a quality community.
The Planning Commission and City Council have amended ordinances and adopted
plans and policies to assure this will happen. Access to transportation, coupled with
proximity to the metro area and a progressive development attitude have resulted in a
proportionately strong industrial employment and tax base.
The result of this has been continued acceleration of housing values. Princeton is a developing,
high-amenity community where investments will be protected with rigid development
standards and strong and practical community goals.
If you want to live and work in a progressive community, in a city with increasing property
values, and in an atmosphere promoting quality, then welcome to Princeton.
Princeton City Hall
705 2nd Street North
Princeton MN 55371
763-389-2040
Mark Karnowski - City Administrator
Carie Fuhrman - Community Development Planner
Steve Jackson - Finance Director
Bob Gerold - Public Works Director
Lynn Paulson - Building Official
Dave Thompson - Public Utilities General Manager
General Information
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
I-2
City Engineer:
WSB & Associates, Inc.
606 25th Avenue South, Suite 101
St. Cloud MN 56301
Attn: Mike Nielson
320-252-4900
Meeting Dates
The City’s zoning and subdivision ordinances require that persons subdividing land or
seeking approval to construct any building other than a single family residence or accessory
building may be required to appear before the Planning Commission and City
Council. Meeting dates are as follows:
Planning Commission*
Third Monday of each month
7:00 p.m.
City Hall Council Chambers
City Council
Second and fourth Thursdays of each month
7:00 p.m.
City Hall Council Chambers
Park and Recreation Advisory Board
Fourth Monday of each month
6:30 p.m.
City Hall Council Chambers
*Submittals for the Planning Commission must be submitted 28 days prior to the commission’s
meeting. There are no exceptions.
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
II-1
ZONING
DISTRICTS’ DESCRIPTIONS
Princeton has established several zoning districts to control the use of land and to direct
the City’s development according to its comprehensive plan. The City of Princeton is
divided into various districts shown on the maps accompanying this ordinance and
which are entitled “Zoning Map of Princeton.” Such maps and any amendments are hereby
made a part of this ordinance.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts established
in this ordinance as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall be applied:
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center line of
streets or highways, street lines, highway right-of-way lines, or railroad right-of-way
lines, such center lines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed
to be said boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot
lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be boundaries.
C. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to
the center lines of streets, or the center lines of right-of-way lines of highways or railroads,
such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at
such distances therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map. If no such distance is
given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the
Zoning Map.
D. Where the boundaries of a district follows a stream, river, lake, or other body of water,
the boundary line shall be deemed to be at the limit of the jurisdiction of the city
unless otherwise indicted.
E. Where the boundary of a district follows a subdivision boundary line, the boundary
line shall be construed to be the district boundary line.
F. Where unzoned property may exist or where, due to eh scale, lack of detail, or illegibility
of the Zoning Map, there is uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the intended
location of any district boundaries shown thereon, interpretation concerning
the exact location of the district boundary lines shall be determined by the City
Council upon written application by any person or upon the Council’s own motion
following the Council referral to the City Planning commission for review and recommendation.
Zoning
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
II-2
DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
For the purposes of this ordinance, the City of Princeton is hereby divided into the following
districts:
A-1 Agriculture
A-2 Agriculture
R-1 Residential
R-2 Residential
R-3 Multi-family Residential
RM-1 Residential Manufactured Housing
B-1 Central Business
B-2 General Business
B-3 Highway Commercial
HC-1 Health Care District
ES Essential Services Overlay
MN-1 Industrial
MN-2 Industrial
C-1 Conservation
D-1 Airport
F-1 Floodplain
WS-1 Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area
AT Antenna Tower Overlay
Refer to City’s zoning ordinance documents for descriptions.
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
III-1
REZONING PROCEDURES
City of Princeton
In the past, the Princeton Planning Commission and City Council have occasionally rezoned
land and have amended the City’s Comprehensive Plan in response to developers’
requests. If a developer has a plan for a project, contact should be made with the
Planner/Zoning Administrator.
A. The Applicant or an authorized representative is responsible to do the following:
1. Submit all filing requirements (listed below as B) to the Planner/Zoning Administrator
at least 28 days prior to the regular Planning Commission meeting,
at which the public hearing will be held.
All required information must be received before the application will be
placed on a Planning Commission meeting agenda.
B. Filing Requirements
1. Completed application for Rezoning.
2. Cash fee of $ .
3. Legal description of property to be rezoned.
4. Acknowledgement of Responsibility form completed.
5. Affirmation of Sufficient Interest form completed.
6. Dependent on the proposed use of the property, one of the following will be
required:
a. Single Family – Preliminary Plat Application
b. Planned Unit Development – Planned Unit Development Application
c. Multi-Family Residential, Commercial, Industrial, or Institutional Buildings:
Conceptual plans/drawings of all information listed on the sheet
entitled “Site Plan Review Requirements.”
Rezoning Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
III-2
C. City Staff is responsible to do the following:
1. Publish public hearing notice at least ten (10) days before the Planning
Commission meeting at which time the item will be heard.
2. Mail notice at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing to area residents
within a radius of at least 350 feet.
3. Place rezoning petition on Planning Commission agenda with a staff recommendation
of either approval or denial.
4. Forward staff report to the Planning Commission and applicant at least three
(3) days prior to hearing.
5. Planning Commission holds public hearing and recommends either approval
or denial to the City Council.
6. Place rezoning petition on City Council agenda with staff report and Planning
Commission recommendations noted.
7. Council acts on petition either approving, denying, or referring it back to
Planning Commission.
8. Written notice is sent to the applicant informing him/her of approval or denial.
If the request is denied, reasons must be given.
9. If approved, Council directs staff to draft ordinance amendment.
10. Place ordinance amendment on City Council agenda (approximately two
weeks after initial Council approval).
11. City Council adopts ordinance.
12. Upon adoption by City Council, amendment is published in official newspaper.
The publication date becomes the effective date of the ordinance.
D. Public Hearing
The applicant or an authorized representative must be present at the public hearing.
A decision on the rezoning can be made after the public hearing and must be given
by the City council within 60 days after the public hearing.
Rezoning Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
III-3
No application for rezoning that has been denied shall be resubmitted for a period
of twelve months unless all the reasons for the denial have been rectified.
E. Planning Commission Meeting Dates
The third Monday of each month, but if it falls on a holiday, the fourth Monday of
the month.
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
IV-1
SUBDIVISION REVIEW
PRELIMINARY PLAT
City of Princeton
Definition
A subdivision is a division of property into two or more parcels. Subdivisions which contain
more than three (3) lots or which include construction of a street must file both a
preliminary plat application and, if approved, a final plat application in accordance with
City procedures.
Divisions resulting in two or three lots, and which include no new streets, will be
processed as “Short Plats.” These procedures will entail only one review by the Planning
Commission and City Council, and submission must include all required information
for both preliminary and final approval.
* Concept Plan – It is not required to submit a concept plan to the Planning Commission
as a preliminary step, but many developers still choose to do so. The concept
plan – or sketch plan as it is known in some cities – shows only general
layouts of streets and lots, not the requirements for the actual preliminary plat.
Historically, many developers have chosen to submit a concept plan so any
changes the Board members might require do not ruin an expensive preliminary
plat. It takes more time but saves money. Concept plans also require approval by
the City Council. Twenty two (22) copies of the plan should be given to the Planner/
Zoning Administrator. There is no fee for concept plan review.
The preliminary plat must be reviewed and approved by both the Planning Commission
and the City Council. A public hearing is scheduled by the Planning Commission.
Final plat approval is a two-step process requiring first approval of the final plat by the
Planning Commission and City Council, and second fulfillment of various administrative
requirements after City Council approval.
More detailed information is contained in the following sections.
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
IV-2
PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURES
City of Princeton
The Preliminary Plat must be reviewed and approved by both the Planning Commission
and the City Council. A pubic hearing is scheduled by the Planning Commission.
A. The Applicant or an authorized representative is responsible to do the following:
1. Submit all filing requirements (listed below as B) to the Planner/Zoning Administrator
at least 28 days prior to the regular Planning Commission meeting,
at which the public hearing will be held.
All required information must be received before the application will be
placed on a Planning Commission meeting agenda.
NOTE: Applicants are advised to check with the City Engineer to see if
sewer and water must be extended into the proposed subdivision.
Ask for an estimate as to when these utilities can be scheduled.
Also, check with the Finance Director to obtain an estimate of the
additional assessments for these improvements and to see if
there will be any additional charges when building permits are issued
on the new lots.
B. Filing Requirements
1. Completed application Subdivision.
2. Complete Preliminary Plat check list.
3. Cash fee of $ .
4. Legal description of property to be divided.
5. Acknowledgement of Responsibility form completed.
6. Affirmation of Sufficient Interest form completed.
7. Completed Application and appropriate fees for permits required by the
State Pollution Control Agency (sewer extensions) and Minnesota Department
of Health (water extensions).
Preliminary Plat Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
IV-3
8. Completed Application to DNR (as necessary).
9. Seven (7) 2’ x 3’ and fifteen (15) 11” x 17” blueline copies of the proposed
plat.
10. Rezoning petition if appropriate.
NOTE: Applicant or an authorized representative must be present at Planning
Commission’s review of plat and public hearing.
NOTE: Applicant must meet with Park Board and resolve issue of park dedication
prior to submittal of preliminary plat.
C. City Staff is responsible to do the following:
1. Publish public hearing notice at least ten (10) days before the Planning
Commission meeting at which time the item will be heard.
2. Mail notice at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing to area residents
within a radius of at least 350 feet.
3. Place preliminary plat on Planning Commission agenda for a public hearing
with a staff recommendation of either approval or denial.
4. Forward staff report to the Planning Commission and applicant at least three
(3) days prior to hearing.
5. Planning Commission holds public hearing and recommends either approval
or denial to the City Council.
6. Place preliminary plat on City Council agenda with staff report and Planning
Commission recommendations noted.
7. Council acts on preliminary plat, either approving or denying.
8. Written notice is sent to the applicant informing him/her of approval or denial.
If the request is denied, grounds for denial shall be set forth in proceedings
and reported to the applicant.
Preliminary Plat Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
IV-4
DATA REQUIRED FOR SUBDIVISION PRELIMINARY PLAT
The following information is required on the survey. This survey will include all information
listed below for the specific property being divided and all lands within one hundred
(100) feet of the specified property. All plans shall utilize an Engineer’s scale.
A. Identification and Description
1. Proposed name of subdivision, which shall not duplicate or be similar in pronunciation
to the name of any plat recorded in the county.
2. Location by section, township, range, or by other legal descriptions.
3. Names, addresses, and phone numbers of the Owner and any agent having
control of the lands included in said preliminary plat, the surveyor, the designer
of the engineering proposals, and the attorney.
4. Graphic scale not less than one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet.
5. North point designated as true north.
6. Date of preparation.
B. Existing Conditions
1. Legal descriptions of all property in the preliminary plat (subject property only)
indicating if property is torrens or abstract.
2. Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land within one hundred
feet (100’) of proposed plat.
3. Existing zoning classification.
4. Total acreage in the plat.
5. Topographical data, including contours at vertical intervals of not more than
two feet (2’), (except that contour lines shall be no more than one hundred
feet (100’) apart horizontally), water courses, marshes, rock outcrops, and
other significant features are also shown.
6. Location, size, and species of individual mature trees; and location, size, and
species of the clusters of mature trees.
Preliminary Plat Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
IV-5
7. Current easements in effect and/or required; including, but not limited to,
drainage, utility, driveway, and right-of-way. Easements shall be a minimum
of 16’ in width.
8. Current roadways, driveways, sidewalks, buildings, foundations, or other
manmade features with appropriate dimensions, setbacks, and square footages.
9. Location, widths, and names of all existing or previously platted streets or
other public ways, showing types of improvement, if any, railroad and utility
rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and
structures, casements, and section and corporate lines within the tract and to
a distance of one hundred feet (100’) beyond the tract.
10. Location and size of existing sewers, watermains, culverts, or other underground
facilities within the tract and to a distance of one hundred feet (100’)
beyond the parcel. Such data as grades, invert elevations, and locations of
catch basins, manholes, and hydrants are to be given also.
11. Water elevations of adjoining lakes, streams, and wetlands at the date of
survey and approximate high and low water elevations.
12. If the proposed subdivision is a rearrangement or replat of any former plat,
the lot and block arrangement of the original plat, along with its original
name, shall be indicated by dotted or dashed lines. Also, any revised or vacated
roadways of the original plat shall be so indicated.
13. Buildings, roadways, or easements to be removed or vacated should be
noted.
C. Proposed Conditions (Subject Property Only)
1. Legal descriptions of all parcels to be created.
2. Boundary line dimensions and square footages of all parcels to be created.
3. Proposed easement: Drainage, utility, driveway, and right-of-way with appropriate
dimensions noted.
4. Indication of the proposed storm water runoff through use of arrows or notes.
5. Layout of proposed streets and sidewalks showing right-of-way widths, centerline
street grades, and approximate radii of all curbs and names of streets.
Street names will be provided by the City and the Planner/Zoning Administrator
should be contacted for them.
Preliminary Plat Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
IV-6
6. Minimum front and side-street building setback lines, indicating dimensions
of same.
7. Areas, other than streets and utility easements, intended to be dedicated or
reserved for public use, including the size of such area or areas in acres.
8. Proposed lot and block numbers.
9. Proposed protective covenants.
10. Source of water supply.
11. Provisions for sewage disposal, drainage, and flood control.
12. Proposed zoning changes.
13. Plan for re-subdivision of large lots if necessary as required.
14. Soil information as requested by the City.
15. Typical cross-section of street improvements and approximate centerline
gradients.
16. Proof of review by the following agencies as necessary: DNR, Corps of Engineers,
Sherburne and Mille Lacs County Highway Department, and the Princeton
Park Board.
17. Rectangular street pattern preferred.
D. Grading/Drainage Plans
1. Seven (7) 2’ x 3’ and fifteen (15) 11” x 17” complete sets of prints showing
location, size, and approximate gradient of sewer lines, drainage ditches,
catch basins, and culverts, as well as appropriate drainage computations
including 100 year storm elevations.
2. Topographical contours, at two foot intervals, of the site upon completion of
the proposed project, including any drainage facilities, retaining walls, etc., to
be created or constructed with appropriate dimensions, erosion control plans,
and vegetation/natural areas to remain undisturbed.
E. Landscaping
Complete landscaping, screening, and erosion control plans in the R-3, B-1, B-2,
B-3, HC-1, MN-1, and MN-2 districts and all PUDs shall be prepared and submitted
for approval.
Preliminary Plat Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
IV-7
1. Plans:
a. Detailed natural land analysis, including vegetation, soil types, and
slopes.
b. Manmade features.
c. Details of all proposed vegetative landscaping materials, including
placement, Latin name, common name, caliper/height, quantity.
d. Details of all proposed non-vegetative land landscaping and screening
materials.
e. Where landscape or manmade materials are used to provide required
screening from adjacent and neighboring properties, a cross-section
shall be provided at a legible scale illustrating the prospective of the site
from the neighboring property and property line elevation.
f. Planting and construction schedule for completion of landscaping and
screening plans. The final landscaping and screening plan must be approved
by the Planning Commission at the time of site plan review.
2. Copies: 22 prints (seven (7) 2’ x 3’ and fifteen (15) 11” x 17”) of site plan.
3. Number of plant materials required.
In order to achieve an appropriate and complete quality landscaping of a site,
the following minimum number of plant materials shall be provided as indicated
below:
a. One (1) overstory deciduous shade tree for every one thousand (1,000)
square feet of total building floor area, or one (1) tree for every one
hundred (100) feet of site perimeter, whichever is greater.
b. One (1) coniferous tree for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of
building or one (1) coniferous tree for every two hundred (200) feet of
site perimeter, whichever is greater.
c. One (1) understory shrub for every three hundred (300) square feet of
building or one (1) shrub for every thirty (30) feet of site perimeter, whichever
is greater.
d. One (1) ornamental tree for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of
building area or one (1) ornamental tree for every two hundred (200)
feet of site perimeter, whichever is greater.
Preliminary Plat Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
IV-8
4. Minimum size of plantings:
a. Overstory deciduous – 2 ½ inch caliper.
b. Coniferous – 6 feet in height.
c. Shrubs – 24-inch pot.
d. Ornamental trees – 2 inch caliper.
In the event a site plan layout does not have adequate open space to accommodate
plant quantities as per ordinance, such quantities per species
can be combined into less quantities per species, provided total required
height or caliper is maintained.
5. Method of Installation
All deciduous and coniferous trees shall be ball and burlap and staked and
guyed per National Nurseryman’s Standards. All shrubs shall be potted.
6. Sodding and Ground Cover
All open areas of any site not occupied by buildings, parking, or storage shall
be sodded over four (4) inches of topsoil. Exceptions are as follows:
a. Seeding over four (4) inches of topsoil of future expansion areas (areas
to be built upon within eighteen (18) months as shown on approved
plans).
b. Undisturbed areas containing existing natural vegetation which can be
maintained free of foreign and noxious materials.
c. Areas designated as open space for future expansion area properly
planted and maintained with grass.
7. Slopes and Berms:
a. Final slope grade steeper than the ratio 3:1 will not be permitted without
special approval of treatment, such as terracing or retaining walls.
b. Berming used to provide required screening of parking lots and other
open areas shall not have a slope to exceed 3:1.
Preliminary Plat Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
IV-9
8. Use of Landscaping for Screening.
Where natural materials, such as trees or hedges are approved in lieu of required
screening by means of walls or fences, density and species of planting
shall e such to achieve ninety percent (90%) opaqueness year round.
9. Maintenance Policy: It is the responsibility of the property owner to ensure
that the landscaping is maintained in an attractive condition. The owner shall
replace any damaged or dead trees, shrubs, ground covers, and sodding.
10. Erosion Control: All open disturbed areas of any site shall be seeded as an
erosion control measure.
11. Clear Cutting: No clear cutting of woodland areas shall be permitted. Shade
trees of six inches (6”) or more in caliper shall be saved unless it can be
demonstrated that there is no other way to develop the site.
12. Wetland, shoreland, and marsh areas: Land and vegetation within one hundred
feet (100’) of any shoreland or marsh area shall be preserved and not
altered in any way, shape, or form except seed or sod, except as otherwise
noted within the Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area Ordinance.
13. Landscaping may be permitted in utility and drainage easements or road
right-of-way with the approval of the Planner/Zoning Administrator.
14. No plantings that may interfere with traffic visibility shall be permitted within
the intersection sight distance triangle.
F. Partial Portions of Property
If the subdivision includes only a portion of the applicant’s property, a sketch plan
is required showing possible development (streets, lots, grading) for that portion
not included in the application.
Preliminary Plat Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
IV-10
YOU ARE HEREBY REQUIRED TO CONTACT, AS SOON AS POSSIBLE,
THE APPROPRIATE UTILITY COMPANIES SERVING
YOUR DEVELOPMENT AREA
TO INITIATE THE PROCESS TO PROVIDE THE NECESSARY UTILITIES
TO SERVE YOUR PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.
UTILITY COMPANY CONTACT INFORMATION
Utility Owner/Address Telephone
Gas CenterPoint Energy Minnegasco 1-877-295-8630
Shelly Houde
800 LaSalle Avenue
Minneapolis MN 55402
Electric Princeton Public Utilities Commission 763-389-2252
907 1st Street
Princeton MN 55371
Garbage Princeton Public Utilities Commission 763-389-2252
907 1st Street
Princeton MN 55371
Water Princeton Public Utilities Commission 763-389-2252
907 1st Street
Princeton MN 55371
Sewer City of Princeton 763-389-2040
705 2nd Street North
Princeton MN 55371
Telephone NorthStar Access 763-262-4722
Russell Vance
QWEST 1-800-526-3557
Cable T.V. U.S. Cable 1-800-783-2356
P.O. Box 496
Cold Spring MN 56320
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
V-1
FINAL PLAT PROCEDURES
City of Princeton
Final plat approval is a two-step process requiring first approval of the final plat by the
Planning Commission and City Council and second fulfillment of various administrative
requirements after City Council approval.
A. The Applicant or an authorized representative is responsible to do the following:
1. Scheduling a meeting with the Planner/Zoning Administrator prior to actual
submission of a final plat application in order to ensure that all appropriate
conditions of preliminary approval have been met and to ensure timely approval
of the final plat.
2. Submitting a final plat application within one (1) year of City Council approval
of the preliminary plat.
3. Obtaining two (2) hard copies and three (3) mylar copies of the plat for the
County.
4. Providing the City Engineer and Planner/Zoning Administrator each with one
(1) mylar copy of plat and the Planner/Zoning Administrator with one electronic
copy of the plat in the format directed by Planner.
5. Obtaining all necessary signatures on the plat.
6. Delivering hard and mylar copies to the City Engineer for final approval and
City officials’ signatures.
7. Providing the City Attorney and the City Engineer with an updated certified
Abstract of Title of registered property, a copy of the final plat, and all sureties
for their review.
8. Execution of the Developer’s Agreement (available from the Planner/Zoning
Administrator).
9. Providing the City Engineer with all required easement documents which
cannot be recorded on the plat itself and appropriate deeds.
Final Plat Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
V-2
10. Paying final platting fees as calculated by the City ordinance, including but
not limited to, attorney fees.
11. Submitting to the City Engineer and the Planner/Zoning Administrator the
document number assigned to the plat by the County. In addition, the date of
filing must be submitted.
12. Resolving the issue of sewer and road construction as follows:
a. If the City is to complete the utility and road work, the landowner is to
sign a petition for the improvements. After the City Engineer has prepared
a cost estimate for the project, a public hearing on the project will
be held. Upon approval, the Developer will be required to submit a letter
of credit for 25 percent (25%) of the estimated cost.
b. If the landowner is to complete the improvements, he must submit a letter
of credit for 150 percent (150%) of the project’s estimated cost. As
construction progress payments are made and lien waivers are received,
corresponding amounts can be withdrawn from this letter of
credit. Payment of area charges and connection charges for water and
sewer must also be made. Payment of aerial photo cost recovery and
administrative fees is due prior to final plat approval. Finally, an insurance
binder or policy must be provided to the City providing liability
coverage through a Minnesota licensed insurance firm only.
13. Permits required by the State Pollution Control Agency, Department of
Transportation, Department of Health, and the Mille Lacs and Sherburne
County Highway Departments must be obtained by the developer prior to plat
approval.
14. The Developer must enter into a Developer’s Agreement with the City or obtain
a waiver from the City. Here contact should be made with the City Planner
and City Engineer.
15. Dedication of land or payment of park fees must be completed prior to City
officials’ signing of plat.
16. The final grading plan and earthwork computations must be completed and
submitted to the City engineering consultant when this work is concluded. Final
plat approval will be placed on the City Council’s agenda. After the plat
has been approved and signed by the appropriate officials, it can be recorded
at the County Courthouse.
Final Plat Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
V-3
B. City Staff is responsible for:
1. Placing the request on a Planning Commission agenda for review.
2. Preparing a staff report recommending either approval or denial, and forwarding
it to the Planning Commission three (3) days prior to the meeting.
3. Planning Commission reviews the request and makes recommendations to
the City Council.
4. After changes are made to the plat to meet Planning Commission conditions,
and staff has had time to review these changes, the request is placed on the
next City Council agenda with staff report and recommendations and Planning
commission recommendations as noted.
5. City Council acts on request recommending either approval or denial.
6. Department notifies applicant in writing of City Council decision.
If approved by the City Council, the applicant must complete requirements listed on the
attached Data Required for Final Plat within two (2) years of Council approval. On completion
of these items, the City Administrator will release the plat for final registration
with the County.
Final Plat Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
V-4
DATA REQUIRED FOR FINAL PLATS
The final plat, prepared for recording purposes, shall be prepared in accordance with
provisions of Minnesota State Statutes and County regulations, and such final plat shall
contain the following information:
A. Name of subdivision, which shall not duplicate or too closely approximate the
name of any existing subdivision.
B. Location by section, township, range, county, and state, and including descriptive
boundaries of the subdivision, based on an accurate traverse, giving angular and
linear dimensions which must be mathematically close.
C. The location of monuments shall be shown and described on the final plat. Locations
of such monuments shall be shown in reference to existing official monuments
on the nearest established street lines, including true angles and distances
to such reference points or monuments.
D. Location of lots, streets, sidewalks, public highways, alleys, park, and other features,
with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet with the length of radii
and/or arcs of all curves and with all other information necessary to reproduce the
plat on the ground, shall be shown. Dimensions shall be shown from all angle
points of curve to lot lines.
E. Lots shall be numbered clearly. Blocks are to be numbered, with numbers shown
clearly in the center of the block.
F. The exact locations, widths, and names of all streets to be dedicated.
G. Location and width of all easements to be dedicated. Easements shall be a minimum
of 16’ in width.
H. Name and address of surveyor making the plat.
I. Scale of plat (the scale to be shown graphically on a bar scale), date, and northpoint.
J. Statement dedicating all easements as follows: “Easement for installation and
maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities are reserved over, under, and along
the strips marked “utility easements”.”
Final Plat Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
V-5
K. Statement dedicating all streets, alleys, and other public areas not previously dedicated
as follows: “Streets, alleys, and other public areas shown on this plat and
not heretofore dedicated to public use are hereby so dedicated.”
L. Landscaping, Screening, and/or Erosion Control Plan
Complete landscaping, screening, and erosion control plans in the R-3, B-1, B-2,
B-3, HC-1, MN-1, and MN-2 districts and all PUDs shall be prepared and submitted
for approval.
1. Plans
a. Detailed natural land analysis, including vegetation, soil types, and
slopes.
b. Manmade features.
c. Details of all proposed vegetative landscaping materials, including
placement, Latin name, common name, caliper/height, quantity.
d. Details of all proposed non-vegetative landscaping and screening materials.
e. Where landscape or manmade materials are used to provide required
screening from adjacent and neighboring properties, a cross-section
shall be provided at a legible scale illustrating the prospective of the site
from the neighboring property and property line elevation.
f. Planting and construction schedule for completion of landscaping and
screening plans. The final landscaping and screening plan must be approved
by the Planning Commission at the time of site plan review.
2. Copies: 22 prints (seven (7) 2’ x 3’ and fifteen (15) 11” x 17”) of site plan.
3. Number of plant materials required.
In order to achieve an appropriate and complete quality landscaping of a site,
the following minimum number of plant materials shall be provided as indicated
below:
a. One (1) overstory deciduous shade tree for every one thousand (1,000)
square feet of total building floor area, or one (1) tree for every one
hundred (100) feet of site perimeter, whichever is greater.
Final Plat Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
V-6
b. One (1) coniferous tree for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of
building or one (1) coniferous tree for every two hundred (200) feet of
site perimeter, whichever is greater.
c. One (1) understory shrub for every three hundred (300) square feet of
building or one (1) shrub for every thirty (30) feet of site perimeter, whichever
is greater.
d. One (1) ornamental tree for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of
building area or one (1) ornamental tree for every two hundred (200)
feet of site perimeter, whichever is greater.
4. Minimum size of plantings:
a. Overstory deciduous – 2 ½ inch caliper.
b. Coniferous – 6 feet in height.
c. Shrubs – 24-inch pot.
d. Ornamental trees – 2 inch caliper.
In the event a site plan layout does not have adequate open space to accommodate
plant quantities as per ordinance, such quantities per species
can be combined into less quantities per species, provided total required
height or caliper is maintained.
5. Method of Installation
All deciduous and coniferous trees shall be ball and burlap and staked and
guyed per National Nurseryman’s Standards. All shrubs shall be potted.
6. Sodding and Ground Cover
All open areas of any site not occupied by buildings, parking, or storage shall
be sodded over four (4) inches of topsoil. Exceptions are as follows:
a. Seeding over four (4) inches of topsoil of future expansion areas (areas
to be built upon within eighteen (18) months as shown on approved
plans).
b. Undisturbed areas containing existing natural vegetation which can be
maintained free of foreign and noxious materials.
Final Plat Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
V-7
c. Areas designated as open space for future expansion area properly
planted and maintained with grass.
7. Slopes and Berms:
a. Final slope grade steeper than the ratio 3:1 will not be permitted without
special approval of treatment, such as terracing or retaining walls.
b. Berming used to provide required screening of parking lots and other
open areas shall not have a slope to exceed 3:1.
8. Use of Landscaping for Screening.
Where natural materials, such as trees or hedges are approved in lieu of required
screening by means of walls or fences, density and species of planting
shall e such to achieve ninety percent (90%) opaqueness year round.
9. Maintenance Policy: It is the responsibility of the property owner to ensure
that the landscaping is maintained in an attractive condition. The owner shall
replace any damaged or dead trees, shrubs, ground covers, and sodding.
10. Erosion Control: All open disturbed areas of any site shall be seeded as an
erosion control measure and comply with State and City erosion control ordinances.
11. Clear Cutting: No clear cutting of woodland areas shall be permitted. Shade
trees of six inches (6”) or more in caliper shall be saved unless it can be
demonstrated that there is no other way to develop the site.
12. Wetland, shoreland, and marsh areas: Land and vegetation within one hundred
feet (100’) of any shoreland or marsh area shall be preserved and not
altered in any way, shape, or form except seed or sod, except as otherwise
noted within the Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area Ordinance.
13. Landscaping may be permitted in utility and drainage easements or road
right-of-way with the approval of the Planner/Zoning Administrator.
14. No plantings that may interfere with traffic visibility shall be permitted within
the intersection sight distance triangle.
M. Address Map
The address map shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of all applicable
City ordinances, and shall in clued all addresses of lots as platted.
Final Plat Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
V-8
N. Certification Required
On the final plat shall appear the following:
1. Certification by a registered surveyor in the form required by Section 505.03,
Minnesota Statutes, as amended.
2. Execution, by all owners of any interest in the land and holders of a mortgage
thereon, of the certificate(s) required by Section 505.03, Minnesota Statutes,
as amended, which certificate(s) shall include a dedication of the utility
easements and other public areas in such form as approved by the City
Council.
3. Space for certification of review and approval to be filled in by the signatures
of the Chairperson of the City Planning Commission and the Mayor and City
Clerk/Administrator. The form of certification is as follows:
Reviewed by the Planning Commission of the City of Princeton this
day of , 20 .
Chairperson’s Signature
Approved by the City of Princeton, Minnesota, this day of ,
20 .
Mayor’s Signature
ATTEST:
City Administrator’s Signature
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 12-04 763-389-2040
VI-1
PARK DEDICATION
REQUIREMENTS
City of Princeton
I. GENERAL
When you subdivide land in Princeton, you are required to dedicate a minimum of
seven percent (7%) of the developed property to the City for park purposes. The
City Council, at its sole discretion and upon the recommendation of the Park Board,
may accept or require cash in lieu of the land.
Some of the criteria used by the City in determining the park needs for a particular
subdivision include:
A. The proposed development density.
B. The proximity of development to existing parks.
C. The amount and location of proposed open space within the development.
D. The park needs as outlined in the city’s Comprehensive Plan.
If a cash contribution is agreed to for the development, the amounts required will be
according to a formula adopted by Resolution of the City Council.
In all instances, the final park dedication requirement will be clearly defined in the
Developer’s Agreement prior to the signing of the final plat.
To determine the park dedication fee for re-subdivided land, the city shall subtract
the number of old lots from the number of new lots and multiply that difference by
the appropriate PDF.
II. PARK BOARD PROCEDURES
Prior to the submittal of a subdivision’s preliminary plat, the person subdividing the
land shall provide a written proposal outlining their proposal to meet the park dedication
criteria required by the city. Those plans may include a cash contribution,
land contribution, in-kind contribution or a combination thereof.
The proposal shall be reviewed by the Park Board. The Park Board meets monthly.
The written proposals are to be submitted to the City’s Planner/Zoning Administrator
one week prior to that meeting. Park proposals should include the following:
Park Dedication Requirements
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 12-04 763-389-2040
VI-2
A. The proposed layout should include 2’ contour topographic information showing
both existing and final grades. The scale must be one inch (1”) to 100 feet
(100’).
B. If any structures or field layouts are suggested, they must be drawn to a one
inch (1”) to 50 foot (50’) scale.
C. Photographs of the proposed park property must be submitted. A minimum of
four photos are required for each park site. A photo taken from the four corners
of the site and directed towards the center is required. The location and direction
of each photo shall be described (ex. Southwest corner looking northeast).
The city’s Plat Review Team shall include representation from the Park Board.
III. GUIDELINES
Guidelines to help you work with the Park Board as they review your plans are as
follows:
A. There are several park space types that may be employed within the city of
Princeton. They include:
1. Tot Lot/Mini-park – A small park, generally under 1 acre in size, that feature
playground equipment designed for use by the residents of the immediate
neighborhood.
2. Neighborhood Park – A larger park for use of a larger neighborhood that
may include playground equipment and neighborhood ball fields for use by
the residents of the general neighborhood.
3. Community Park – A larger park designed for use by the residents of the
entire city. A Community Park will have various general use facilities including
playground equipment, picnic areas and shelters, ball fields, special
use facilities
4. Hike & Bike Trails – A network of paths providing access to, through and in
some cases between park and open space areas. Trails can be used for
active and passive recreation (walking, biking, running, scenic observation,
etc.).
B. There are other open space land use types that may be employed within the
city of Princeton but do not qualify for park dedication credit. They include:
1. Open Space – Open space should be provided to preserve and protect
drainageways, wetlands, lakes, stormwater retention areas and provide
development breaks
Park Dedication Requirements
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 12-04 763-389-2040
VI-3
2. Greenbelts – Greenbelts define creeks, rivers, drainageways, wetlands,
etc. which form the edges of various neighborhoods within the city.
C. Land dedicated to the city under this section must be suitable for park and
recreation uses. The following characteristics of a proposed area are generally
unsuitable:
1. Any area primarily located in the 100-year flood plain.
2. Any areas of unusual topography or slope which renders same unusable
for organized recreational activities.
The above characteristics of a park land dedication area may be grounds for
refusal of any preliminary plat.
D. The area required by this section shall equal the greater of:
1. Two acres for each 100 proposed dwelling units*, or
2. Seven percent (7%) of the developed land area (not counting the area encumbered
by streets, stormwater ponds and/or wetlands.)
*The city’s minimum R-1 lot size is 12,500 ft2. Seven percent of 100 lots equals
seven lots @ 12,500 ft2 or 87,500 ft2 , which is just over two acres.
E. Each park must have ready access to a public street, and sidewalks shall be
continued and constructed throughout any dedicated park site.
F. Subdivisions consisting of less than ten lots will probably be subject to a cash
payment rather than land dedication.
G. Land used for park purposes does not have to be within your subdivision. You
may be able to purchase land elsewhere in the near vicinity to use for park dedication
land. Of course, this must be approved by the City.
1. With larger developments (more than 100 lots), the Board members are
most responsive to proposals where the developer dedicates some land for
park purposes and agrees to complete improvements to that land. This
usually works to the developer’s benefit as park facilities become available
as the land is being marketed.
Park Dedication Requirements
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 12-04 763-389-2040
VI-4
2. The City’s Public Works Director will give locations at the property’s periphery
for trail locations. Trail locations within the area to be subdivided are
dependent on the street design of the plat. The trails must, however, enter
and leave the property at the locations given by the City. The developer is
required to grade the trail. (See City Engineer for dimensions on trails.)
3. Buffer any active-play areas from adjacent residential lots.
IV. SPECIAL FUND CREATED
A. All funds collected by this dedication process will be deposited in the city's park
development fund and used solely for the purchase or leasing of park land and
development of same. All expenditures from this fund will be reviewed by the
park board and approved by the city council.
B. The city shall account for all sums paid in lieu of land dedication under this section
with reference to the individual plats involved. Any funds paid for such purposes
must be expended by the city within 5 years from the date received by
the city for acquisition or development of a neighborhood park as defined herein.
Such funds shall be considered to be spent on a first in, first out basis in a
particular park area.
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VII-1
SITE PLAN REVIEW
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL PROJECTS
City of Princeton
City ordinance requires Site Plan Review of the following:
1. Multi-family,
2. Commercial,
3. Institutional, and
4. Industrial developments.
Site Plan Review by Staff
A. The Applicant or an authorized representative is responsible for:
1. Meeting with Building Official and Planner/Zoning Administrator to discuss
the proposal to ensure compliance with appropriate ordinances and procedures.
B. In some instances with commercial/industrial development that meets all zoning
and development requirements, the Planner/Zoning Administrator may determine
that staff review is sufficient.
Site Plan Review by Planning Commission
A. The Applicant is responsible for:
1. Meeting with Building Official and Planner/Zoning Administrator to discuss
the proposal to ensure compliance with appropriate ordinances and procedures.
2. Submitting all filing requirements to the Planner/Zoning Administrator at least
ten (10) days prior to the regular Planning Commission meeting at which the
review is to be held. All required information must be received before
the application will be scheduled for a Planning Commission meeting.
Applicants should attend the Planning Commission meeting.
Site Plan Review
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VII-2
3. After Planning Commission approval, you must:
a) Provide surety to the City in an amount of $0.50 per square foot of the
site footprint for landscaping/screening site improvements. The surety is
refundable upon completion of the site work to the satisfaction of the
Building Official and/or Planner/Zoning Administrator.
b) Arrange a pre-construction meeting with City staff prior to any work being
performed on the site.
c) File an application for a building permit.
B. City staff is responsible for:
1. Placing this item on a Planning Commission agenda for review.
2. Preparing a staff report, recommending either approval with stipulations or
denial, and forwarding to the Planning Commission three (3) days prior to the
meeting. An owner’s copy will be available at City Hall.
3. The Planning Commission reviews the application and makes recommendations
and decision.
4. Notifying Applicant in writing of Planning Commission decision, sending
along copies of the Performance Agreement for execution.
All site plan approvals are valid for one year from date of approval by the Building Official
and Planner/Zoning Administrator.
Site Plan Review
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VII-3
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS
The following information is required when requesting site plan review approval:
Note: When possible, all drawings should utilize an engineer’s scale and a sheet
size of 24” x 36”.
A. Map
The map indicates existing conditions on the site and all property within 200 feet.
This scaled drawing should show:
1. Property boundaries and dimensions.
2. Adjacent roadways, roadway right-of-way, and access points.
3. Existing topographical contours (minimum interval 2 feet).
4. Existing structures.
5. Existing parking area and other manmade features.
6. Existing significant vegetation and trees 4” caliper or larger, by size and species
(subject property only).
7. Name of project/development.
8. Name and mailing address of Developer/Owner.
9. Name and mailing address of Engineer/Architect.
10. North arrow.
11. Date of preparation.
B. Site Plan – This should be a scaled drawing indicating the following:
1. Building footprints, size, and dimensions.
2. Parking areas indicating location of handicapped and compact spaces.
3. Setback lines.
Site Plan Review
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VII-4
4. Wetlands or floodplains (100-year high water mark and DNR classification).
5. Wetland alteration.
6. Ingress and egress points.
7. Sign locations and details.
8. Light Fixture details and placement.
9. Staging plan for any project involving more than one construction season
which sets forth chronological order of construction and estimated completion
dates.
10. Listing of all Federal, State, and City permits and status.
11. Location of trash containers and of hearing and air conditioning equipment.
12. Description of all site improvements including fences, walls, lighting, walkways,
patios, decks, and barriers.
13. On this plan a summary should be provided indicating building square footage,
lot areas, parking spaces (indicating number of handicapped and compact
spaces), lot coverage, sign details, type and height of light fixtures,
dwelling unit density, and green space percentage.
14. Property line locations.
C. Landscape Plan
Complete landscaping, screening, and erosion control plans in the R-3, B-1, B-2,
B-3, DD, HC-1, MN-1, and MN-2 districts and all PUDs shall be prepared and
submitted for approval.
1. Plans:
a. Detailed natural land analysis, including vegetation, soil types, and
slopes.
b. Manmade features.
c. Details of all proposed vegetative landscaping materials, including
placement, Latin name, common name, caliper/height, quantity.
d. Details of all proposed non-vegetative landscaping and screening materials.
Site Plan Review
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VII-5
e. Where landscaping or manmade materials are used to provide required
screening from adjacent and neighboring properties, a cross-section
shall be provided at a legible scale illustrating the prospective of the site
from the neighboring property and property line elevation.
f. Planting and construction schedule for completion of landscaping and
screening plans. The final landscaping and screening plan must be approved
by the Planning Commission at the time of site plan review.
2. Copies: 22 prints (seven (7) 2’ x 3’ and fifteen (15) 11” x 17”) of site plan.
3. Number of plant materials required.
In order to achieve an appropriate and complete quality landscaping of a site,
the following minimum number of plant materials shall be provided as indicated
below:
a. One (1) overstory deciduous shade tree for every one thousand (1,000)
square feet of total building floor area, or one (1) overstory deciduous
tree for every one hundred (100) feet of site perimeter, whichever is
greater.
b. One (1) coniferous tree for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of
total building floor area, or one (1) coniferous tree for every one hundred
(100) feet of site perimeter, whichever is greater.
c. One (1) understory shrub for every three hundred (300) square feet of
total building floor area, or one (1) understory shrub or every thirty (30)
feet of site perimeter, whichever is greater.
d. One (1) ornamental tree for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of
total building floor area, or one (1) ornamental tree for every two hundred
(200) feet of site perimeter, whichever is greater.
4. Minimum size of plantings:
a. Overstory deciduous – 2½ inch caliper.
b. Coniferous – 6 feet in height.
c. Shrubs – 24-inch pot.
d. Ornamental trees – 2 inch caliper.
Site Plan Review
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VII-6
5. Method of installation.
All deciduous and coniferous trees shall be ball and burlap and staked and
guyed per National Nurseryman’s Standards. All shrubs shall be potted.
6. Sodding and ground cover.
All open areas of any site not occupied by buildings, parking, or storage shall
be sodded over four (4) inches of topsoil. Exceptions are as follows:
a. Seeding over four (4) inches of topsoil of future expansion areas (areas
to be built upon within eighteen (18) months as shown on approved
plans.
b. Undisturbed areas containing existing natural vegetation which can be
maintained free of foreign and noxious materials.
c. Areas designated as open space for future expansion area properly
planted and maintained with grass.
7. Slopes and berms:
a. Final slope grade steeper than the ratio of 3:1 will not be permitted
without special approval of treatment, such as terracing or retaining
walls.
b. Berming used to provide required screening of parking lots and other
open areas shall not have a slope to exceed 3:1.
8. Use of Landscaping for Screening.
Where natural materials, such as trees or hedges are approved in lieu of required
screening by means of walls or fences, density and species of planting
shall be such to achieve ninety percent (90%) opaqueness year round.
9. Maintenance Policy: It is the responsibility of the property owner to ensure
that the landscaping is maintained in an attractive condition. The owner shall
replace any damaged or dead trees, shrubs, ground covers, and sodding.
10. Erosion Control: All open disturbed areas of any site shall be seeded as an
erosion control measure.
11. Clear Cutting: No clear cutting of woodland areas shall be permitted. Shade
trees of six (6) inches or more in caliper shall be saved unless it can be demonstrated
that there is no other way to develop the site.
Site Plan Review
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VII-7
12. Wetland, Shoreland, and Marsh areas: Land and vegetation within one hundred
(100) feet of any shoreland or marsh area shall be preserved and not altered
in any way, shape, or form except seed or sod, except as otherwise
noted within the Wild and Scenic Rum River Protection Area Ordinance.
13. Landscaping may be permitted in utility and drainage easements or road
right-of-way with the approval of the Planner/Zoning Administrator.
14. No plantings that may interfere with traffic visibility shall be permitted with the
intersection sight distance triangle.
D. Grading/Drainage Plans
This plan can be combined with landscape plan, indicating the following:
1. Existing contours and final land contours.
2. Method of drainage proposed (catch basins, culverts, and ponding areas)
and design calculations.
E. Utility Plan
This plan can be combined with the Drainage Plan, indicating the following:
1. Sanitary sewer.
2. Water.
3. Hydrant location.
4. Miscellaneous external mechanical.
5. Utilities and utility right-of-way easements (electric, gas, telephone, water,
and sewer).
F. Building Elevations
These elevations indicating the following:
1. Building heights.
2. Building materials of roof and façade.
3. The relationship of the building to the site and surrounding area.
4. Renderings of elevations and perspective drawings.
Site Plan Review
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VII-8
G. Written Narrative
This explains type of use, operational information, design parameters, development
concept, and time schedule of the facility being proposed.
E. Transparencies
This includes A through F (the above).
Site Plan Review
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VII-9
SPECIFICATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND
INSTITUTIONAL SITE IMPROVEMENTS
A. Streets and Parking Lots
All rooftop mechanicals shall be screened with materials that are architecturally
compatible with the building. All ground level mechanicals (air conditioning units,
electrical boxes, etc.) shall be screened with shrubs or an approved fence.
B. Trash Containers
All exterior trash containers shall be screened by an enclosure as approved by the
Planning Commission.
C. Landscaping
Detailed landscape plans shall be included and approved by the Planning Commission.
D. Lighting
Off-street parking shall be illuminated to a minimum level of one (1) foot candle at
ground level over the entire surface of the parking area. Wall packs are not permitted.
E. Signage
All signage shall be in conformity with the Princeton Sign Ordinance.
F. Performance Agreement
Upon City Council approval of a site plan and prior to the issuance of building
permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvement or development, the developer
shall execute a Performance Agreement setting out site improvement
items and terms of completion of said items.
Site Plan Review
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VII-10
G. Surety
1. The posting of surety shall be required at the time a certificate of occupancy
is to be issued. The owner shall provide the City with cash, corporate surety
bond, approved letter of credit, or other surety satisfactory to the City in the
amount equal to 110% of the estimated cost for completion of any uncompleted
site improvements if the surety submitted is in the form of cash or letter,
or 150% of such estimated cost if the surety submitted is in the form of a
bond.
2. The City shall hold the surety for such period of time as set forth in the Performance
Agreement.
a. The surety may only be released by the City Council.
b. Periodically, the amount of the surety may be reduced by the City
Council.
c. Reductions and release actions will only be initiated after proper request
has been made by the developer.
d. Failure to comply with the conditions of the site plan approval, the Performance
Agreement or the Ordinances of the City shall result in forfeiture
of the surety to the extent necessary to achieve the project’s total
compliance with the approved site plan.
3. Surety posted to guarantee the proper installation and vigorous growth of all
landscape elements and screening required herein shall remain in effect for a
full growing season, unless otherwise waived by Council action.
a. A growing season shall include the period of May 1 through October 31.
b. The one-year guarantee period for plant material installed after June 1
shall commence the following year.
c. Lots provided with an irrigation system covering one hundred percent
(100%) of the area improved with landscaping need only provide a surety
for one (1) growing season.
H. Required Inspections
1. After site is graded but prior to laying bituminous.
2. After first lift of bituminous is laid.
Site Plan Review
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VII-11
3. While pouring concrete curbs and gutters.
4. Call for a final site inspection two (2) weeks before you wish to occupy the
building. A final calculation of uncompleted site improvements must be made
and wording on the surety (bond or letter of credit) must be reviewed and approved
by the City Attorney.
I. Construction of Berms
1. The construction of earth berms as buffers or screens has become popular to
screen parking lots and to soften the “interface” between residential and
commercial or industrial uses.
2. When berms are constructed on privately owned land, details can be resolved
with the help of the Princeton City Engineer. The location and elevations
of the berms can be shown on the final grading plan of a subdivision or
on the grading plan that must accompany a site and building plan.
3. In some instances, however, it may be desirable to locate berms adjacent to
major roadways. In this case, there are certain guidelines that must be followed.
If the berm is to be partially located on right-of-way:
a. Berms are permitted only where a minimum of 60 feet of right-of-way
exists as measured from the centerline of the road.
b. A maximum of one-half of the berm can extend into the right-of-way.
c. A berm can extend no more than 10 feet into the right-of-way.
d. The maximum slope of the berm within the right-of-way is three to one.
e. No trees are permitted in the right-of-way.
f. No special or additional maintenance will be performed by local government
regarding the upkeep of the berm.
g. The property owner/developer is responsible for construction of the
berm and any permit required for that construction.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 1 Princeton, Minnesota
Chapter VIII
Floodplain
Management
A. Statutory Authorization
The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in Minnesota Statutes, chapters
103F and 462, delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt
regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of the
City of Princeton, Minnesota does ordain as follows:
B. Findings of Fact
1. The flood hazard areas of the City of Princeton, Minnesota are subject to
periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures or flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
2. Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards. This Ordinance is based upon a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the
standards established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
3. National Flood Insurance Program Compliance. This Ordinance is adopted to
comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance
Program codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 59 -78, as
amended, so as to maintain the community’s eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
C. Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare and to minimize those losses described in Section 1, Subd. B.1 by
provisions contained herein.
1. Statutory Authorization,
Findings of Fact, and Purpose
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 2 Princeton, Minnesota
This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the City of Princeton Floodplain
Management Ordinance; except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as “this
chapter.”
A. Lands to Which Ordinance Applies
This Ordinance shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of
Princeton, Minnesota shown on the Official Zoning Map and/or the attachments
thereto as being located within the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe, or
General Flood Plain Districts.
B. Establishment of Official Zoning Map
The Official Zoning Map together with all materials attached thereto is hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The attached
material shall include: 1) Flood Insurance Study, City of Princeton, Minnesota, Mille
Lacs and Sherburne Counties, dated December 15, 1980, and the Flood Insurance
Rate Map and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map therein, both of these maps
being dated June 15, 1981; 2) Flood Insurance Study, Sherburne County,
Minnesota And Incorporated Areas and Flood Insurance Rate Map number
27141C0140F therein, both of these documents being dated November 16, 2011;
and 3) Flood Insurance Rate Map panel number 270624 0225 B for Mille Lacs
County, Minnesota (Unincorporated Areas) dated September 27, 1985. All of the
aforementioned flood insurance study texts, flood insurance rate maps and flood
boundary and floodway map have been prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The Official Zoning Map shall be on file in the Office of the
Zoning Administrator.
C. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation
The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one
foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation
caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a
floodway.
2. Title
3. General Provisions
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 3 Princeton, Minnesota
D. Interpretation
1. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be
held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of
the City Council and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other
powers granted by state statutes.
2. The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling
distances on the Official Zoning Map. Where interpretation is needed as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the Official Zoning
Map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions and there is a formal appeal of the
decision of the Zoning Administrator, the Board of Adjustment shall make the
necessary interpretation. All decisions will be based on elevations on the
regional (100-year) flood profile, the ground elevations that existed on the site
at the time the Community adopted its initial floodplain ordinance or on the
date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map showing the area
within the 100-year floodplain if earlier, and other available technical data.
Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Board of Adjustment and to
submit technical evidence.
E. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other
ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
F. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
This chapter does not imply that areas outside the flood plain districts or land uses
permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Princeton, Minnesota or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
G. Severability
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this
chapter shall not be affected thereby.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 4 Princeton, Minnesota
H. Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be
interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage
and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
1. Basement - means any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its
floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of
the depth of excavation below ground level. (This definition shall only apply in
the Floodplain District).
2. Equal Degree of Encroachment - a method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
3. Flood - a temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of
a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
4. Flood Frequency - the frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood
stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
5. Flood Fringe - that portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. Flood
fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the flood
insurance studies adopted in Section 3, Subd. B.
6. Flood Plain - the beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional
flood.
7. Flood Proofing - a combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the
reduction or elimination of flood damages.
8. Floodway - the bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to
carry or store the regional flood discharge.
9. Lowest Floor - the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement
area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor.
10. Manufactured Home - a structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 5 Princeton, Minnesota
“manufactured home” does not include the term “recreational vehicle.” (This
definition shall only apply in the Floodplain District).
11. Obstruction - any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into
any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood plain which may impede, retard,
or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or
collecting debris carried by such water.
12. Reach - a hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge
crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
13. Recreational Vehicle - a vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400 square
feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to
be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the
purposes of this chapter, the term recreational vehicle shall be synonymous
with the term travel trailer/travel vehicle. (This definition shall only apply in
the Floodplain District).
14. Regional Flood - a flood which is representative of large floods known to have
occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be
expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood"
used in a flood insurance study.
15. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation - The regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of
the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway.
16. Structure - anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories,
sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles
not meeting the exemption criteria specified in Section 10, Subd. C.1 of this
chapter and other similar items. (This definition shall only apply in the
Floodplain District).
17. Substantial Damage - means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 6 Princeton, Minnesota
18. Substantial Improvement - within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes
structures that have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
b. Any alteration of an “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an “historic
structure.” For the purpose of this chapter, “historic structure” shall be
as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1.
19. Variance - means a modification of a specific permitted development standard
required in an official control including this chapter to allow an alternative
development standard not stated as acceptable in the official control, but only
as applied to a particular property for the purpose of alleviating practical
difficulty or unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in a
community's respective planning and zoning enabling legislation.
I. Annexations
The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference into Section 3, Subd.
B above may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate boundaries
of the City of Princeton, Minnesota at the time of adoption of this chapter. If any of
these floodplain land areas are annexed into the City of Princeton, Minnesota after
the date of adoption of this chapter, the newly annexed floodplain lands shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter immediately upon the date of annexation
into the City of Princeton, Minnesota.
A. Districts
1. Floodway District. The Floodway District shall include those areas
designated as floodway on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map adopted
in Section 3, Subd. B of this chapter.
4. Establishment of Zoning Districts
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 7 Princeton, Minnesota
2. Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District shall include those areas
designated as floodway fringe on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map
adopted in Section 3, Subd. B of this chapter.
3. General Flood Plain District. The General Flood Plain District shall include
those areas designated as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps
adopted in Section 3, Subd. B of this chapter.
B. Compliance
No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which
apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter. Within the Floodway, Flood
Fringe and General Flood Plain Districts, all uses not listed as permitted uses or
conditional uses in Sections 5, 6, and 7 that follow, respectively, shall be
prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here that:
1. New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain
travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of this
chapter and specifically Section 10.
2. Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal maintenance and
repair, or repair after damage to existing nonconforming structures and
nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the general
provisions of this chapter and specifically Section 12.
3. As-built elevations for elevated or flood proofed structures must be certified
by ground surveys and flood proofing techniques must be designed and
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as specified in the
general provisions of this chapter and specifically as stated in Section 11 of
this chapter.
A. Permitted Uses:
1. General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck
farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
2. Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport landing strips.
3. Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges,
picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and
5. Floodway District (FW)
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 8 Princeton, Minnesota
nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target
ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or
multiple purpose recreational trails.
4. Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
B. Standards for Floodway Permitted Uses:
1. The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
2. The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if one exists.
3. The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations and shall
not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of materials or
equipment.
C. Conditional Uses:
1. Structures accessory to the uses listed in Subd. A above and the uses listed
in Subd. C.2 – C.8 below.
2. Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.
3. Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control structures.
4. Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines.
5. Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
6. Placement of fill or construction of fences.
7. Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of record or in existing or new
subdivisions or commercial or condominium type campgrounds, subject to the
exemptions and provisions of Section 10, Subd. C of this chapter.
8. Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes, and floodwalls
constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual structures
and levees or dikes, where the intent is to protect agricultural crops for a
frequency flood event equal to or less than the 10-year frequency flood event.
D. Standards for Floodway Conditional Uses:
1. All Uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for roads
and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment, or other
uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause any increase in the
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 9 Princeton, Minnesota
stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages
in the reach or reaches affected.
2. All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the procedures and
standards contained in Section 11, Subd. D of this chapter.
3. The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if one
exists.
4. Fill:
a. Fill, dredge spoil, and all other similar materials deposited or stored in
the flood plain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
b. Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be allowed
in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted
which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan.
c. As an alternative, and consistent with Subsection (b) immediately above,
dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow
temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials which would have
caused an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional flood but
only after the City Council has received an appropriate plan which
assures the removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the
flood warning time available. The conditional use permit must be title
registered with the property in the Office of the County Recorder.
5. Accessory Structures:
a. Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
b. Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on
the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of
flood waters:
1) Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and
2) So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on
the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
c. Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry flood
proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an
accessory structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 10 Princeton, Minnesota
proofing classification in the State Building Code provided the accessory
structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square
feet in size at its largest projection, and for a detached garage, the
detached garage must be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited
storage. All flood proofed accessory structures must meet the following
additional standards:
1) The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed
to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;
2) Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be
elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or
properly flood proofed; and
3) To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be
a minimum of two “automatic” openings in the outside walls of the
structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must
be openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of
all openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest
adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open
a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for
automatic openings.
6. Storage of Materials and Equipment:
a. The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant
life is prohibited.
b. Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning
and in accordance with a plan approved by the City Council.
7. Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross
section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be subject to the
provisions of Minnesota Statute, Chapter 103G. Community-wide structural
works for flood control intended to remove areas from the regulatory flood
plain shall not be allowed in the floodway.
8. A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not cause an
increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis must
assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 11 Princeton, Minnesota
A. Permitted Uses
Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or structures listed as permitted uses in
the underlying zoning use district(s). If no pre-existing, underlying zoning use
districts exist, then any residential or non residential structure or use of a structure
or land shall be a permitted use in the Flood Fringe District provided such use does
not constitute a public nuisance. All permitted uses shall comply with the
“Standards for Flood Fringe District Permitted Uses” listed in Section 6, Subd. B
and the "Standards for all Flood Fringe Uses" listed in Section 6, Subd. E.
B. Standards for Flood Fringe Permitted Uses:
1. All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on fill so that
the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures shall be no lower
than one (1) foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation and the fill
shall extend at such elevation at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the outside
limits of the structure erected thereon.
2. As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that constitute a
minimal investment and that do not exceed 500 square feet at its largest
projection may be internally flood proofed in accordance with Section 5, Subd.
D.5.c.
3. The cumulative placement of fill, where at any one time in excess of onethousand
(1,000) cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel, shall be allowable
only as a conditional use, unless said fill is specifically intended to elevate a
structure in accordance with Section 6, Subd. B.1 of this chapter.
4. The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill to the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
5. The provisions of Section 6, Subd. E of this chapter shall apply.
C. Conditional Uses
Any structure that is not elevated on fill or flood proofed in accordance with Section
6, Subd. B.1 – B.2 or any use of land that does not comply with the standards in
Section 6, Subd. B.3 –B.4 shall only be allowable as a conditional use. An
application for a conditional use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and
evaluation procedures specified in Sections 6, Subd. D – E and Section 11, Subd.
C of this chapter.
6. Flood Fringe District (FF)
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 12 Princeton, Minnesota
D. Standards for Flood Fringe Conditional Uses
1. Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be utilized to
elevate a structure's lowest floor above the regulatory flood protection
elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of stilts, pilings,
parallel walls, etc., or above-grade, enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or
tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be
considered above-grade and not a structure's basement or lowest floor if: 1)
the enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the structure; 2) it is
designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood resistant materials;
and 3) it is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage.
The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the following
additional standards:
a. Design and Certification - The structure's design and as-built condition
must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as
being in compliance with the general design standards of the State
Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities must
be at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or be designed to
prevent flood water from entering or accumulating within these
components during times of flooding.
b. Specific Standards for Above-grade, Enclosed Areas - Above-grade,
fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must
be designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:
1) A minimum area of openings in the walls where internal flooding is
to be used as a flood proofing technique. There shall be a
minimum of two openings on at least two sides of the structure and
the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot above
grade. The automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding unless a registered professional engineer
or architect certifies that a smaller net area would suffice. The
automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves,
or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters without any form of human
intervention; and
2) That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials
in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State
Building Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking
of vehicles or storage.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 13 Princeton, Minnesota
2. Basements, as defined by Section 3, Subd. H.1 of this chapter, shall be
subject to the following:
a. Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
b. Non-residential basements may be allowed below the regulatory flood
protection elevation provided the basement is structurally dry flood
proofed in accordance with Section 6, Subd. D.3 of this chapter.
3. All areas of non-residential structures, including basements to be placed
below the regulatory flood protection elevation, shall be flood proofed in
accordance with the structurally dry flood proofing classifications in the State
Building Code. Structurally dry flood proofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-2
flood proofing classification in the State Building Code and this shall require
making the structure watertight with the walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
Structures flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not be
permitted.
4. When at any one time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other similar
material is located on a parcel for such activities as on-site storage,
landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge spoil
disposal or construction of flood control works, an erosion/sedimentation
control plan must be submitted, unless the community is enforcing a state
approved shoreland management ordinance. In the absence of a state
approved shoreland ordinance, the plan must clearly specify methods to be
used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the 100-year
or regional flood event. The plan must be prepared and certified by a
registered professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the
City Council. The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of
the material from the flood plain if adequate flood warning time exists.
5. Storage of Materials and Equipment:
a. The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant
life is prohibited.
b. Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning
and in accordance with a plan approved by the City Council.
6. The provisions of Section 6, Subd. E of this chapter shall also apply.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 14 Princeton, Minnesota
E. Standards for All Flood Fringe Uses
1. All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an
elevation not more than two (2) feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Planning
Commission must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the
structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate flood
warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.
2. Commercial Uses - accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks, and
parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood protection
elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the employees
or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood warning
system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be
inundated to a depth and velocity such that when multiplying the depth (in
feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the product number exceeds four (4)
upon occurrence of the regional flood.
3. Manufacturing and Industrial Uses - measures shall be taken to minimize
interference with normal plant operations especially along streams having
protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses, such as yards and
parking lots, may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in
Section 6, Subd. E.2 above. In considering permit applications, due
consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires
that it be located in flood plain areas.
4. Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected by
the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures
properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's
requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection
standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards
should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
5. Flood plain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of
the channel and adjoining flood plain of any tributary watercourse or drainage
system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not been specified
on the Official Zoning Map.
6. Standards for recreational vehicles are contained in Section 10, Subd. C.
7. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to,
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 15 Princeton, Minnesota
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
A. Permitted Uses
1. The uses listed in Section 5, Subd. A of this chapter shall be permitted uses.
2. All other uses shall be subject to the floodway/flood fringe evaluation criteria
pursuant to Section 7, Subd. B below. Section 5.0 shall apply if the proposed
use is in the Floodway District and Section 6.0 shall apply if the proposed use
is in the Flood Fringe District.
B. Procedures for Floodway and Flood Fringe Determinations Within the
General Flood Plain District
1. Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval within the
General Flood Plain District, the applicant shall be required to furnish such of
the following information as is deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator
for the determination of the regulatory flood protection elevation and whether
the proposed use is within the Floodway or Flood Fringe District.
a. A typical valley cross-section(s) showing the channel of the stream,
elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, crosssectional
areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high
water information.
b. Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground,
pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations, the size, location, and
spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site,
and the location and elevations of streets.
c. Photographs showing existing land uses, vegetation upstream and
downstream, and soil types.
d. Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the
stream for at least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed
development.
2. The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the above
information to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for
technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in the
7. General Flood Plain District
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 16 Princeton, Minnesota
Floodway or Flood Fringe District and to determine the regulatory flood
protection elevation. Procedures consistent with Minnesota Regulations
1983, Parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200 and 44 Code of Federal Regulations Part
65 shall be followed in this expert evaluation. The designated engineer or
expert is strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed technical evaluation
methodology with the respective Department of Natural Resources' Area
Hydrologist prior to commencing the analysis. The designated engineer or
expert shall:
a. Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.
b. Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based upon a
hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas.
c. Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional flood
without increasing flood stages more than 0.5 foot. A lesser stage
increase than .5' shall be required if, as a result of the additional stage
increase, increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of
encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach shall be
assumed in computing floodway boundaries.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall present the technical evaluation and findings
of the designated engineer or expert to the City Council. The City Council
must formally accept the technical evaluation and the recommended
Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District boundary or deny the permit
application. The City Council, prior to official action, may submit the
application and all supporting data and analyses to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, the Department of Natural Resources or the Planning
Commission for review and comment. Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe
District Boundaries have been determined, the City Council shall refer the
matter back to the Zoning Administrator who shall process the permit
application consistent with the applicable provisions of Section 5 and 6 of this
chapter.
A. Review Criteria
No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason of flooding,
inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. All lots within
the flood plain districts shall be able to contain a building site outside of the
Floodway District at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All
subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the
provisions of this chapter and have road access both to the subdivision and to the
8. Subdivisions
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 17 Princeton, Minnesota
individual building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation. For all subdivisions in the flood plain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe
District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required
elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision
drawings and platting documents.
B. Floodway/Flood Fringe Determinations in the General Flood Plain District
In the General Flood Plain District, applicants shall provide the information required
in Section 7, Subd. B of this chapter to determine the 100-year flood elevation, the
Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries and the regulatory flood protection
elevation for the subdivision site.
C. Removal of Special Flood Hazard Area Designation
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for
removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly
elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements
incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multistructure
or multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior
to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area
designation will be requested.
A. Public Utilities
All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply
systems to be located in the flood plain shall be flood proofed in accordance with
the State Building Code or elevated to above the regulatory flood protection
elevation.
B. Public Transportation Facilities
Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the flood plain shall comply
with Sections 5 and 6 of this chapter. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation
facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such
facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary
roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or
interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or
safety.
9. Public Utilities, Railroads,
Roads, and Bridges
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 18 Princeton, Minnesota
C. On-site Sewage Treatment and Water Supply Systems
Where public utilities are not provided: 1) On-site water supply systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
2) New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject to impairment or
contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed in
accordance with the State's current statewide standards for on-site sewage
treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this Section.
A. New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured home
parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by Section 8 of this
chapter.
B. The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing
manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in flood
plain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only if elevated
in compliance with Section 6 of this chapter. If vehicular road access for preexisting
manufactured home parks is not provided in accordance with Section 6,
Subd. E.1, then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the
property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the City
Council.
1. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
C. Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria specified in Section
10, Subd. C.1 below shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and as
specifically spelled out in Section 10, Subd. C3 – C.4 below.
1. Exemption - Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter if they are placed in any of the areas listed in Section 10, Subd. C.2
below and further they meet the following criteria:
a. Have current licenses required for highway use.
10. Manufactured Homes and
Manufactured Parks and Placement of
Recreational Vehicles
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 19 Princeton, Minnesota
b. Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system,
are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly
used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks and the recreational
vehicle has no permanent structural type additions attached to it.
c. The recreational vehicle and associated use must be permissible in any
pre-existing, underlying zoning use district.
2. Areas Exempted For Placement of Recreational Vehicles:
a. Individual lots or parcels of record.
b. Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds.
c. Existing condominium type associations.
3. Recreational vehicles exempted in Section 10, Subd. C.1 lose this exemption
when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500 for a structural
addition to the recreational vehicle or exceeding $500 for an accessory
structure such as a garage or storage building. The recreational vehicle and
all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a new structure
and shall be subject to the elevation/flood proofing requirements and the use
of land restrictions specified in Sections 5 and 6 of this chapter. There shall
be no development or improvement on the parcel or attachment to the
recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of the recreational vehicle to a
flood free location should flooding occur.
4. New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and new
residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the
expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five (5) units or dwelling sites
shall be subject to the following:
a. Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will be allowed in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts provided said recreational vehicle
and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood protection
elevation and proper elevated road access to the site exists in
accordance with Section 6, Subd. E.1 of this chapter. No fill placed in
the floodway to meet the requirements of this Section shall increase
flood stages of the 100-year or regional flood.
b. All new or replacement recreational vehicles not meeting the criteria of
(a) above may, as an alternative, be allowed as a conditional use if in
accordance with the following provisions and the provisions of Section
11, Subd. C of this chapter. The applicant must submit an emergency
plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 20 Princeton, Minnesota
year flood. Said plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or
other qualified individual, shall demonstrate that adequate time and
personnel exist to carry out the evacuation, and shall demonstrate the
provisions of Section 10, Subd. C.1 (a) and (b) of this chapter will be
met. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement
recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not be
impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with
Section 9, Subd. C of this chapter.
A. Zoning Administrator
A Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the City Council shall administer
and enforce this chapter. If the Zoning Administrator finds a violation of the provisions
of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the person responsible for such
violation in accordance with the procedures stated in Section 13 of this chapter.
B. Permit Requirements
1. Permit Required
A Permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter shall be secured prior to the erection, addition, modification,
rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), or alteration of any
building, structure, or portion thereof; prior to the use or change of use of a
building, structure, or land; prior to the construction of a dam, fence, or on-site
septic system; prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use; prior
to the repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or
any other source; and prior to the placement of fill, excavation of materials, or
the storage of materials or equipment within the flood plain.
2. Application for Permit
Application for a permit shall be made in duplicate to the Zoning Administrator
on forms furnished by the Zoning Administrator and shall include the following
where applicable: plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot; existing or proposed
structures, fill, or storage of materials; and the location of the foregoing in
relation to the stream channel.
3. State and Federal Permits
11. Administration
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 21 Princeton, Minnesota
Prior to granting a permit or processing an application for a conditional use
permit or variance, the Zoning Administrator shall determine that the applicant
has obtained all necessary state and federal permits.
4. Certificate of Zoning Compliance for a New, Altered, or Nonconforming Use
It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed,
converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator stating
that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
5. Construction and Use to be as Provided on Applications, Plans, Permits,
Variances and Certificates of Zoning Compliance
Permits, conditional use permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued
on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use,
arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and
applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use,
arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter, and punishable as provided by Section 13
of this chapter.
6. Certification
The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a registered
professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that
the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. Flood proofing measures shall be certified by a
registered professional engineer or registered architect.
7. Record of First Floor Elevation
The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of the elevation of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all new structures and alterations or
additions to existing structures in the flood plain. The Zoning Administrator
shall also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures or alterations
and additions to structures are flood proofed.
8. Notifications for Watercourse Alterations
The Zoning Administrator shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent
communities and the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources
prior to the community authorizing any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work in the beds of
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 22 Princeton, Minnesota
public waters pursuant to Minnesota Statute, chapter 103G, this shall suffice
as adequate notice to the Commissioner of Natural Resources. A copy of
said notification shall also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
9. Notification to FEMA When Physical Changes Increase or Decrease the 100-
year Flood Elevation
As soon as is practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such
supporting information becomes available, the Zoning Administrator shall
notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a
copy of said technical or scientific data.
C. Conditional Uses
1. Procedure
a. Application for Conditional Use Permit
1) The provisions of Chapter IV, Section 3, Subd. A.1 of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be followed.
2) In addition, the following information shall be required to be
submitted by the applicant:
a) Plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, flood proofing measures,
and the relationship of the above to the location of the stream
channel; and
b) Specifications for building construction and materials, flood
proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement,
storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
c) Additional Information as deemed necessary by the Planning
Commission for designating the suitability of the particular site
for the proposed use.
3) The information described above shall be transmitted to a
designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical
assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in
relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood
damage to the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection, and
other technical matters.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 23 Princeton, Minnesota
4) Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or
expert, the Planning Commission shall determine the specific flood
hazard at the site and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in
relation to the flood hazard.
b. Public Hearing
The provisions of Chapter IV, Section 3, Subd. A.2 of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be followed.
In addition, the Zoning Administrator shall submit by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for
proposed conditional use sufficiently in advance so that the
Commissioner will receive at least ten days notice of the hearing.
c. Appeal
The provisions of Chapter IV, Section 3, Subd. A.3 of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be followed.
2. Standards
a. The review standards listed in Chapter IV, Section 3, Subd.B shall be
applied in the review of a conditional use permit.
b. In addition, the Planning Commission shall consider the following factors
in review of a conditional use permit located in the flood way, flood
fringe, or general flood plain districts:
1) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
2) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges,
culverts or other hydraulic structures.
3) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary
conditions.
4) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
5) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 24 Princeton, Minnesota
6) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
7) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
8) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
9) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and flood plain management program for the area.
10) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
12) Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
chapter.
3. Decision
a. If the Planning Commission denies or subsequently revokes a
Conditional Use Permit, it shall include in its determination findings as to
the ways in which the proposed use does not comply with the standards
required by this ordinance.
b. A copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits shall be
forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten
(10) days of such action.
4. Conditions
a. In approving any conditional use permit, the Planning Commission may
impose conditions which it considered necessary to meet the standards
of this ordinance and to protect the best interests of the surrounding area
or the City as a whole.
b. These conditions may include, but are not limited to those listed in
Chapter IV, Section 3, Subd. D.
c. Other such conditions may include, but are not limited to the following:
1) Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
2) Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 25 Princeton, Minnesota
3) Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
4) Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective
measures.
5) Flood proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building
Code and this chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan or
document certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the flood proofing measures are consistent with the
regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors
for the particular area.
5. Violation
Violations of any conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the conditional use permit is granted, shall be deemed a violation
of this chapter punishable under Section 13.
6. Expiration
The provisions of Chapter IV, Section 3, Subd. E of the Zoning Ordinance
shall be followed.
D. Variances
1. Procedure
The provisions of Chapter IV, Section 2 of the Zoning Ordinance shall be
applied.
a. Application for Variance
The provisions of Chapter IV, Section 2, Subd. A.1 of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be followed.
b. Public Hearing
The provisions of Chapter IV, Section 2, Subd. A.2 of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be followed.
In addition, the Zoning Administrator shall submit by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for the
proposed variance sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will
receive at least ten days notice of the hearing.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 26 Princeton, Minnesota
c. Appeal
The provisions of Chapter IV, Section 2, Subd. A.3 of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be followed.
2. Standards
a. The review standards listed in Chapter IV, Section 2, Subd.
B of the Zoning Ordinance shall be applied in the review of a variance.
b. In addition, the Planning Commission shall consider the following factors
in review of a variance in any flood plain district:
1) No variance shall have the effect of permitting a lower degree of
flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for
that particular area or permit standards lower than those required
by state law.
2) Variances shall not be issued by a community within any
designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge would result.
3) Variances shall only be issued by a community upon (i) a showing
of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant
the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant,
and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
chapters.
4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
3. Decision
a. If the Planning Commission denies a variance, it shall include in its
determination findings as to the ways in which the proposed use does
not comply with the standards required by this ordinance.
b. A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail to
the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such
action.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 27 Princeton, Minnesota
4. Conditions
a. Conditions may be imposed on granting of variances if those conditions
are directly related to and bear a rough proportionality to the impact
created by the variance.
5. Flood Insurance Notice and Record Keeping
The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant for a variance, and such
notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions, that:
a. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and
b. Such construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases
risks to life and property.
c. A community shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its
annual or biennial report submitted to the Administrator of the National
Flood Insurance Program.
C. Appeals
1. The appeal process shall follow those procedures outlined in Chapter IV,
Section 5 of the Zoning Ordinance.
2. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by
an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
A. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the
passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following conditions.
Historic structures, as defined in Section 3, Subd. H.18 (b) of this chapter, shall be
subject to the provisions of Section 12, Subd. A.1 – A.5 of this chapter.
1. No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that
increases its nonconformity.
12. Nonconformities
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 28 Princeton, Minnesota
2. Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage
potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood
proofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 thru FP-4 floodproofing classifications)
allowable in the State Building Code, except as further restricted in Section
12, Subd. A.3 and A.6 below.
3. The cost of all structural alterations or additions to any nonconforming
structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50 percent of the
market value of the structure unless the conditions of this Section are
satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions must include all
costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all
manpower or labor. If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations and
additions exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure, then the
structure must meet the standards of Section 5 or 6 of this chapter for new
structures depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood
Fringe District, respectively.
4. If any nonconforming use is discontinued for l2 consecutive months, any
future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter. The
Assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses that have been discontinued for a period of l2 months.
5. If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as defined in
Section 3, Subd. H.17 of this chapter, it shall not be reconstructed except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The applicable provisions for
establishing new uses or new structures in Sections 5, 6 , or 7 will apply
depending upon whether the use or structure is in the Floodway, Flood Fringe
or General Flood Plain District, respectively.
6. If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in Section 3, Subd. H.18 of
this chapter, from any combination of a building addition to the outside
dimensions of the existing building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction,
alteration, or other improvement to the inside dimensions of an existing
nonconforming building, then the building addition and the existing
nonconforming building must meet the requirements of Section 5 or 6 of this
chapter for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
A. Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
13. Penalties for Violation
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 29 Princeton, Minnesota
connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law.
B. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Princeton, Minnesota from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Such
actions may include but are not limited to:
1. In responding to a suspected Ordinance violation, the Zoning Administrator
and Local Government may utilize the full array of enforcement actions
available to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions,
after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a request to the
National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to
the guilty party. The Community must act in good faith to enforce these
official controls and to correct Ordinance violations to the extent possible so
as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
2. When an Ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought to the
attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall
immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of
the violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this
information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural
Resources' and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office
along with the Community's plan of action to correct the violation to the
degree possible.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the requirements
of this chapter and all other official controls and the nature and extent of the
suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/or use is under
construction or development, the Zoning Administrator may order the
construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or
approval is granted by the Community. If the construction or development is
already completed, then the Zoning Administrator may either: (1) issue an
order identifying the corrective actions that must be made within a specified
time period to bring the use or structure into compliance with the official
controls; or (2) notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact
permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed
30-days.
4. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the Zoning
Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that
lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter and shall be
prosecuted accordingly. The Zoning Administrator shall also upon the lapse
of the specified response period notify the landowner to restore the land to
the condition which existed prior to the violation of this chapter.
Chapter VIII – Floodplain Management
Zoning Ordinance
Rev 09-08-2011; Ord. 671 VIII - 30 Princeton, Minnesota
The flood plain designation on the Official Zoning Map shall not be removed from flood
plain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area has
been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is
contiguous to lands outside the flood plain. Special exceptions to this rule may be
permitted by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if he determines that, through
other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
All amendments to this chapter, including amendments to the Official Zoning Map, must
be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to
adoption. Changes in the Official Zoning Map must meet the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's (FEMA) Technical Conditions and Criteria and must receive
prior FEMA approval before adoption. The Commissioner of Natural Resources must
be given 10-days written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this
Ordinance and said notice shall include a draft of the Ordinance amendment or
technical study under consideration.
14. Amendments
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
IX-1
STREET, ALLEY, EASEMENT
VACATION PROCEDURES
City of Princeton
VACATING STREETS, ALLEYS, AND EASEMENTS
With larger scale projects, it is not uncommon to find a street, alley, or easement in “the
wrong location.” Drainage easements or road right-of-way may be dividing property in a
way that makes use of the land difficult. To rectify these and similar situations, the City
may vacate street and alley right-of-ways and easements. This assumes that reasonable
alternatives are provided.
A. The Applicant or an authorized representative is responsible to do the following:
1. Submit all filing requirements (listed below as B) to the Planner/Zoning Administrator
at least 28 days prior to the regular Planning Commission meeting,
at which the public hearing will be held.
All required information must be received before the application will be
placed on a Planning Commission meeting agenda.
2. the Applicant or Applicant’s representative should attend the public hearing.
B. Filing Requirements
1. Completed application or petition for Street/Alley/Easement Vacation.
2. Cash fee of $ .
3. Legal description of property to be rezoned.
4. Acknowledgement of Responsibility form completed.
5. Affirmation of Sufficient Interest form completed.
Vacation Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
IX-2
C. City Staff is responsible to do the following:
1. Publish public hearing notice at least ten (10) days before the Planning
Commission meeting at which time the item will be heard.
2. Mail notice at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing to area residents
within a radius of at least 350 feet.
3. Place Vacation request/petition on Planning Commission agenda with a staff
recommendation of either approval or denial.
4. Forward staff report to the Planning Commission and applicant at least three
(3) days prior to hearing.
5. Planning Commission holds public hearing and recommends either approval
or denial to the City Council.
6. Place vacation petition on City Council agenda with staff report and Planning
Commission recommendations noted.
7. Council acts on petition either approving or denying.
8. Written notice is sent to the applicant informing him/her of approval or denial.
If the request is denied, reasons must be given.
9. If approved, the Council shall adopt the appropriate resolution granting the
street or alley vacation.
10. The date of adoption by the City Council becomes the effective date of the
vacation.
11. A certified copy of the resolution is forwarded to the County Recorder for recording.
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
X-1
VARIANCE PROCEDURES
City of Princeton
A. The Applicant is responsible for:
1. Submitting all filing requirements (listed below as B) to the Planner/Zoning
Administrator at least 28 days prior to the regular Planning Commission
meeting, at which the review is to be held.
All required information must be received before the application will be
placed on a Planning Commission meeting agenda.
B. General Filing Requirements
1. Completed application for Variance.
2. Cash fee of $ .
3. Legal description of property.
4. Acknowledgement of Responsibility form completed.
5. Affirmation of Sufficient Interest form completed.
6. Dependent on the variance requested, the following may be required:
a. Seven (7) 2’ x 3’ and fifteen (15) 11” x 17” copies of a Site Plan indicating
all information as listed on the attached “Variance Requirements.”
b. Twenty two (22) copies of the Sign plan (minimum size – 11” x 17”).
c. Seven (7) 2’ x 3’ and fifteen 11” x 17” copies of any other appropriate
plans or drawings.
7. A narrative explaining the purpose of the request, the exact nature of the variance,
and the justification for the request.
Variance Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
X-2
C. City Staff is responsible for:
1. Public hearing notice published at least ten (10) days before the Planning
Commission meeting at which time the item will be heard.
2. Notice sent at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing to area residents
within a radius of at least 350 feet.
3. Variance request placed on Planning Commission agenda for review.
4. Staff report prepared recommending either approval or denial and forwarded
to Planning Commission three (3) days prior to hearing; copy sent to applicant.
5. Planning Commission holds public hearing and acts on request, either approving,
approving with stipulations, or denying.
6. If approved, the Planning Commission shall adopt the appropriate resolution
granting the variance.
7. Department notifies applicant in writing of the Planning Commission decision.
If the request is denied, reasons must be given.
8. The date of adoption by the Planning Commission becomes the effective
date of the variance.
Variance Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
X-3
VARIANCE REQUIREMENTS
Depending on the type of variance requested, some or all of the following information is
requested. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide all appropriate
information. It is strongly recommended that the applicant discuss the specifics of the
request with the Planner/Zoning Administrator prior to submission of any application.
A. Map indicating existing conditions on the site and all property within 200 feet. This
scaled drawing should show:
1. Property boundaries and dimensions.
2. Adjacent roadways and access points.
3. Existing topographical contours.
4. Existing structures.
5. Existing parking areas and other manmade features.
6. Existing significant vegetation and trees 4” caliber or larger, by size and species
(subject property only).
B. Site Plan (as requested by City staff). This should be a scaled drawing.
1. Building footprints, size, and dimensions.
2. Parking areas and access points.
3. Building and parking setback lines.
4. Delineation of location and ex tent of variance.
5. Building elevations and height (if appropriate).
6. Landscaping or other measures proposed to mitigate effects of variance.
7. Property line location.
C. Sign Plan indicating:
1. Size, height, and details of sign proposed.
2. Scaled drawing indicating sign location.
D. Other appropriate plans/drawings pertinent to the analysis of the request.
Variance Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
X-4
E. Written narrative explaining the purpose of the request, the exact nature of the
variance, the justification for the request, and any measures proposed to mitigate
the effects of the variance.
NOTE: When possible, all drawing should utilize an Engineer’s scale.
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XI-1
PROCEDURES FOR
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT
INSTALLED BY THE CITY OF PRINCETON
This section set forth the methods and policies relating to local improvements and special
assessments practiced in the City of Princeton. It is emphasized that the following
summarization is general in nature and that certain circumstances may justify deviations
from stated policy as determined by the City Council.
A local improvement involves one or more of the following types of improvements:
1. Roadway grading and base.
2. Bituminous surfacing.
3. Curb and gutter.
4. Sidewalks and driveways.
5. Water trunks and laterals.
6. Sanitary sewer trunks and laterals.
7. Service connections.
8. Storm sewer trunks and laterals.
9. All appropriate appurtenances associated with the above.
Improvements are classified as follows:
1. New Developments – The construction of improvements related to newly developed
areas, normally made in conjunction with the plat approval process.
2. Rehabilitation – Complete or partial reconstruction of the above mentioned improvements
including bituminous overlays. Rehabilitation does not include routine
maintenance which does not improve the structural integrity of a roadway, such as
sealcoating and crack sealing.
Procedures for Public Improvements
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XI-2
3. Extensions – Construction of improvements generally made to extend services to a
certain area. Extensions normally pertain to water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer
trunks.
The following are general principles, policies, and procedures applicable to all types of
improvement:
1. Project costs shall include the cost of all necessary construction work required to
accomplish the improvement, plus engineering, legal, financing, and contingent
costs.
2. Assessable costs are project costs minus the City share, County share, and/or other
credits.
3. Special assessments will be levied as soon as practical. Normally this will be within
one year after completion of the project.
4. Pursuant to M.S. Chapter 429.051, the City does not defer assessments to benefited
areas outside of the City, but rather assumes any non-assessable cost as the
City share. When property is annexed and served by the original improvement, the
city can create a new assessment to be reimbursed for all or any portion of the prior
assumed municipal costs, including interest, related to the improvement.
5. Publicly owned properties, including municipal building sites, schools, parks, State
and Federal building sites, but not including public streets and alleys, are regarded
as being assessable on the same basis as if such property were privately owned.
PROJECT INITIATION AND HEARING PROCESS
This section intends to describe the initiation of improvement projects and the administration
required to final County action, pursuant to the requirements of MSA 429.
A. Project Initiation
1. By Petition: Petitions for initiating improvements will be prepared by City staff
upon request. Such petitions, circulated by the affected owners, should bear
the signatures of the property owners of at least 35% of the benefited property.
Petitions may be requested and submitted at any time. The normal time required
for receiving, processing, scheduling hearing, and preparing construction
documents is six months. Projects for petitions received after February 1
will not be scheduled until the construction season of the following year.
2. By council Action: If the Council determines that an improvement is in the
best interest of the City, it can, without petition, initiate the improvement.
Procedures for Public Improvements
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XI-3
3. By 100% Signed Petition: When a petition is signed by 100% of the property
owners benefited by the improvement, and there is no City cost participation,
the Council may order the improvement without holding an improvement hearing.
4. By Developer’s Agreement: Improvement projects for new development will
be considered upon execution of a Developer’s Agreement signed by 100% of
the benefited property owners. The Council may order the project without a
public hearing.
B. Hearing Process
1. Improvement Hearing: After a petition is filed and its adequacy determined,
or the Council initiates the project, the city engineer is directed to study and report
as to the feasibility of the improvement. If after reviewing the report, the
Council feels the project has merit, a public hearing is scheduled, notice published
twice, and all persons benefited by the project notified in writing.
When an improvement project is to be financed by the sale of improvement
bonds, there is a statutory requirement that at least 20% of the total costs of the
project be assessed against the benefited property.
If after the improvement hearing, at which all persons are heard, the Council
feels that the project still has merit, then the Council will authorize the preparation
of necessary plans and specifications, and upon receipt and acceptance of
those plans, will authorize by resolution the advertisement for bids.
C. Final Hearing (Assessment
After the improvement is ordered and plans received, or the improvement is completed
or nearing completion, a roll will be prepared and the affected property owners
will be mailed a Notice of Assessment Hearing stating the time and date that an
assessment hearing will be held. An assessment roll will be prepared and will be
posted at the City Administrator’s office for review prior to the assessment hearing.
All interested parties shall have an opportunity to be heard regarding the assessment.
Necessary and proper adjustment to the assessment roll can be made by Council
at the time the hearing is being held. If an appeal is to be made regarding the
amount of the special assessment, written notice must be filed with the Council
prior to or at the assessment hearing.
After the hearing, the assessment roll is adopted by the Council. The property owners
have a 30-day period in which to pay their assessment in part or in full at the
City Hall, interest free. After this period, the assessment begins to accumulate inProcedures
for Public Improvements
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XI-4
terest from the date of approval of the assessment by the council. On or about October
10th of each year, the assessment roll is certified to the County Auditor’s office
where it is added to the tax roll for the following year.
The assessment shall be levied over a period to be established by the City Council,
in equal annual installments on the principal with interest on the declining balance.
The annual interest fate shall also be established by the City council upon the sale
of the improvement bonds.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS IN NEW DEVELOPMENTS
A. General Procedures and Policies
City code requires execution of a Developer’s Agreement at the time of land platting
whether City installed or developer installed improvements (see Appendix for sample).
The Developer’s Agreement normally references means and methods of providing
for public improvement construction.
As a standard, the City of Princeton has pursued policies by which all costs of the
improvement are directly attributed to and fully paid by cost allocation or assessments
against the development, developer, or properties requiring and benefiting by
the improvement. The policies are established with the intent that no developmental
costs are incurred by existing lots or parcels, by the existing residents, or by the
City in general. The exception is for improvements which are determined to have an
area-wide benefit which exceeds the scope of the development.
At the time of platting, the cost responsibilities for any development for trunk improvements
shall be defined. This responsibility includes trunk sanitary sewer facilities,
trunk water facilities (including source, supply, storage, and distribution components),
storm water drainage and control facilities, arterial street, park dedication,
pedestrian walkway systems, and other public improvements, existing or proposed,
of any area-wide benefit. Normally the City will require a cash payment by the developer
for the development’s share of improvements of an area-wide benefit. The
amount to be determined by the City Council.
At the time of platting, the Development Agreement may provide details on construction
and timing of local or lateral improvements of various nature for the benefit
and improvement of the individual properties as required by the City Subdivision
Ordinance.
Procedures for Public Improvements
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XI-5
B. City Improvement Financing and Construction
As a general policy, the City of Princeton will assist developers in the financing and
construction of public improvements through authority granted to the City by Chapter
429 of Minnesota Statutes. Such assistance is granted by specific Council action
for each development proposal based on perception by the Council of the project,
viability, and development benefit to the City. The City may elect to sell bonds for
such improvement and assess the costs of bond retirement against individual benefited
land parcels for a period of repayment as seen appropriate.
Typically, the total project costs for improvements benefiting the development will
be assessed on an equal basis against all buildable lots in the development.
For such City assessed developments and improvements, the City, through the Development
Agreement, requires a 25% down payment, a bond, or letter of credit, to
protect the City from potential project default, and requires assessment payment
concurrent with building permit issuance. For such City assisted projects, the City
Engineer provides design, construction supervision, and assessment certification
services and other City staff provides legal, fiscal, and administrative input.
C. Public Improvement Work by Private Developers
No public improvements may take place before a Developer’s Agreement has been
executed.
A private developer may have this project designed and constructed by other than
City forces under the following conditions:
1. All plans, drawings, specifications, and related documents required shall be
prepared by the City engineer, in accordance with the laws of the State of Minnesota.
2. The developer must keep the City informed as to the timetable or development
and design, the letting date of a construction contract, and the starting date of
construction work.
3. In order to guarantee the construction, the City will require full-time inspection
of all phases of construction by the City engineer and/or City maintenance staff.
4. The City of Princeton may perform construction surveys, staking, and other engineering
services when requested, prearranged, and financed by the contractor
or developer. The City will also assist the contractor in interpretation of the
Developer’s Agreement, City’s Engineering Design Standards, ordinances,
codes, and other items necessary to meet the criteria as established by the City
of Princeton.
Procedures for Public Improvements
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XI-6
5. No public improvement work shall be performed by any developer or other private
party in City right-of-way or easement unless a Developer’s Agreement
has been executed.
6. The City will require a surety deposit of 12 5% of the estimated project costs in
the form of cash, escrow deposit, certified check, or irrevocable letter of credit.
As construction progress payments are made and lien waivers are received,
corresponding amounts can be withdrawn from this letter of credit.
The City and its representatives shall at all times have access to the work in order
to complete the services as herein provided, and the developer shall give the City
timely notice of his/her readiness for inspections or other work to be rendered.
Permits, licenses, and easements for permanent changes in existing facilities shall
be secured and paid for by the developer.
The developer shall be charged for these services, and the value of the services
shall be determined by the City’s most current hourly rate schedule. The fee for
plan review, City administration, design, and inspections costs will be billed on an
hourly basis.
Upon proper completion of sanitary sewers, storm sewers, watermains, curb and
gutter, roadway base, surfacing, and sidewalk by the developer, the City will accept
by resolution said improvements.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS IN EXISTING DEVELOPMENTS
A. Initiation
Improvements may be initiated by petition or by Council.
B. Computation of Assessable Costs
1. If improvements were originally constructed to minimum design standards,
costs may have the assessable amount prorated at the discretion of the City
Council according to the life of the previous improvement and other circumstances
involved in the current improvement.
2. If improvements were not originally constructed to design standards, the Council
may prorate, but under no circumstances shall it be less than 50% assessed.
Procedures for Public Improvements
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XI-7
PETITION FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
WITH 100% OF PROPERTY OWNERS
Date:
To the City Council of Princeton, Minnesota:
We, all owners of real property benefiting or abutting the improvement area as described
below, hereby petition that this area be improved by (detailed description of improvement
desired)
pursuant to the Princeton Subdivision Ordinance and Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 429.
Description of improvement area:
PROPERTY LEGAL
OWNER ADDRESS DESCRIPTION
Examined, checked, and found to be in proper form and to be signed by the required
number of owners of property affected by the making of the improvement petitioned for.
Date:
City Clerk
Procedures for Public Improvements
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XI-8
PETITION FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
WITH LESS THAN 100% OF PROPERTY OWNERS
Date:
To the City Council of Princeton, Minnesota:
We, the undersigned, owners of not less than 35 percent in frontage of real property
benefiting or abutting the improvement area as described below, hereby petition that
this area be improved by (detailed description of improvement desired)
pursuant to the Princeton Subdivision Ordinance and Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 429.
Description of improvement area:
PROPERTY LEGAL
OWNER ADDRESS DESCRIPTION
Examined, checked, and found to be in proper form and to be signed by the required
number of owners of property affected by the making of the improvement petitioned for.
Date:
City Clerk
Procedures for Public Improvements
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XI-9
PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS SUMMARY
IMPROVEMENT
STEP
PROCEDURE
APPROXIMATE
TIME REQUIRED
Initiation of
Feasibility Study
Petitioned by at least 35% in number of
the benefited property owners (one signature
per owner, not parcel), followed by a
majority vote of the City Council, or
Where no adequate petition is received a
4/5 vote of the City Council.
Developers or owners of proposed developments
are required to escrow funds to
cover City costs associated with preparation
of the feasibility study.
2 weeks to 1
month to verify
adequacy of petition
and to receive
Council action.
Preparation of
Feasibility Report
City Council resolution designates nature
and scope of proposed improvement; report
prepared by the designated City
consultant or staff member.
1 to 2 months
Receipt of Feasibility
Study; Set Public
Hearing Date;
City Council establishes public hearing by
resolution, publishes resolution at least 2
weeks prior to public hearing.
1 month
Public Hearing;
Order
Improvement
City presents project, assessment formula,
and assessment income projections;
testimony taken; project can be ordered
after a 30-day wait for petition against
project by majority of the owners proposed
to be benefited, or more owners
than the number of petitioners if it was a
petitioned project, either of which can
prohibit the Council from ordering the improvement;
30-day wait can be decreased
to 10 days by petition of 100% of
the benefited property owners if the
project was initiated by a petition signed
by 100% of the benefited property own-
2 weeks to
4 months
Procedures for Public Improvements
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XI-10
ers.
Public Hearing;
Order
Improvement
(Continued)
If General City funds are proposed to
finance more than 80% of the cost, an
election shall be held and if a majority
votes against the proposed use of City
funds, the project cannot proceed as proposed.
Developers are required to have a
final plat prepared and Developer’s
Agreement executed (with letter of credit
or cash escrow deposit for 25% of the estimated
plat improvement costs) prior to
City Council ordering improvement.
2 weeks to
4 months
Improvement
Preparation of
Plans and Specifications
Project can be ordered 30 (or 10) days
after hearing and up to one year after
hearing; plan preparation and easement
acquisition time dependent upon project
complexity.
1 to 5 months
Plans and Specifications
Complete;
Easement/Rightof-
Entry Acquired;
Bids Received
When all is in order, City Council authorizes
Advertisement for Bids.
1 month
Bids Received;
Order Project;
Construction
Begins
If the bid cost exceeds the estimate presented
by the engineer at the public hearing
by more than 10%, the Council has
the right to reject all bids and the project
may be rebid once. If the project is disallowed
due to high cost or a reversed petition,
the project cannot be voted on by
the Council for at least one year after the
public hearing date.
1 to 12 months
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XII-1
METHOD OF
ASSESSMENT
A. Basic Assessment Data
1. Area (used for sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water trunks)
Area used is the gross area of the parcel as it is benefited by each separate
improvement. All property within district boundaries is to be included as determined
by the City Engineer. In general, all property will be assessed except lots
or areas which are not able to be developed.
Area shall include square footage within property lines, excluding public road
easements, natural waterways, swamps, or other wetlands designated by the
DNR.
2. Units
Generally used for sewer and water services in residential developments. May
be used for sewer and water laterals in existing residential developments.
The number of potential units possible by subdividing based on minimum lot
requirements. If the street in which sanitary sewer or water lines are to be installed
is to be improved, all services will be installed to service the maximum
number of potential lots.
3. Adjusted Front Footage
Generally used for all improvements except for the above.
Method for determining adjusted front footage (see Exhibit A). The following
formulas will be used to determine adjusted front footage:
a) Odd Shaped or Pie Shaped Lots – Area of the lot up to a maximum depth
of 150’ divided by 150 (e.g., 15,000 square foot lot on a cul-de-sac =
15,000 divided by 150 = 100’ [adjusted]).
b) Approximate Rectangular Lot – Average of the front and back lot line.
Method of Assessment
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XII-2
c) Rectangular Lot – Actual front footage.
d) Shallow Lot (less than 150’) – Area of lot divided by 150.
e) Corner Lot – Same as rectangular lot except credit against long side equal
to 75% of the short side. Credit will be assessed against short side and lots
adjacent to short side to the midpoint of the block.
f) Double Frontage Lots – For double frontage lots 150’ or less in depth, a
single adjusted front footage is computed by using method 1, 2, 3, or 4.
If more than 150’ in depth, the area within the first 150’ of depth abutting
the primary access is divided by 150 to arrive at the first adjusted front footage.
The balance of the lot is then sued in computing the second frontage
by using method 1, 2, 3, or 4.
If the second frontage abuts a major arterial street where restricted access
is desired by the City, an exemption for the first 150’ of such second frontage
may be granted upon receipt by the City of a formal access restriction
executed by the Property Owner. Such formal access restriction shall be in
the form of a deed for planter easement, running to the City of Princeton,
with a minimum width of 10’.
See example 6 on page 7.
g) Neck Lots – For lots or parcels which have a small frontage on a street,
with a narrow strip running back 130’ or more, an adjusted frontage of 100
feet is assigned.
See example 7 on page 7.
h) Areas Partially Served by Utilities – For any tract or parcel only partially
served by water or sewer lateral, only that part so served will be assessed
and computed as adjusted front footage for the particular project for which
the assessment is figured. A parcel or lot may be wholly served even
though the improvement may not run entirely past.
See examples 4 and 5 on page 7.
B. Typical Method of Assessment
1. Streets – Adjusted front footage.
2. Curb and Gutter – Adjusted front footage.
Method of Assessment
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XII-3
3. Sanitary Sewer Lateral – Adjusted front footage.
4. Sanitary Sewer Service – Per unit.
5. Watermain Lateral – Adjusted front footage.
6. Watermain Service – Per unit.
7. Sidewalks – Adjusted front footage.
8. Driveways – Actual cost.
9. Storm Sewer – Area basis.
10. Sanitary Sewer Trunk – The adjusted front footage of abutting property shall
pay a lateral benefit equal to the Engineer’s estimated cost of installing 8” lateral
at all depths of 12’. The oversizing cost of the project shall be assessed on
an area basis to benefited property.
11. Watermain Trunk – Same as sanitary sewer trunk.
C. Specific Assessment Procedures
1. Sanitary Sewer Trunk Lines
Trunk sewers are partially financed by assessing abutting property on a front
footage basis commensurate to an assessment had the property been served
by a sewer lateral.
Trunk sewers are also partially financed by sanitary sewer connection charges
and/or improvement bonds.
2. Watermain Trunk Lines
Trunk watermains are partially financed by assessing abutting property on a
front footage basis commensurate to an assessment had the property been
served by a water lateral.
Trunk watermains are also partially financed by water connection charges
and/or improvement bonds.
3. Sanitary Sewer Lateral, Water Lateral
Sanitary sewer laterals and water laterals are assessed on the adjusted front
footage basis.
Method of Assessment
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XII-4
Only that property within 150’ of the street right-of-way is considered served by
and assessed for water and sanitary sewer laterals. All other property more distant
than 150’ from the street right-of-way may be subject to “connection
charges” or future assessments.
All water and sewer lines, regardless of size or designation, are considered as
laterals to adjacent property, and will be assessed if they provide service to the
adjacent property.
A corner lot which has a water or sewer line on its side line from which the lot
may be served, but not in front of the lot, shall be assessed for the improvement
based on lot frontage.
4. Sidewalk
Adjusted front footage method is used.
5. Street Construction
a) Newly Platted Areas or New Construction on Existing Platted Right-of-Way
1) Developer shall pay all costs. (See Subdivision Regulations)
2) Property Owner shall pay all costs of street grading and base construction
for new construction on existing platted right-of-way.
b) Street Reconstruction
1) Property Owner shall pay costs of street grading and base construction
at percentage identified by Council, but in no case shall assessment
be less than 50% (to be determined by Council) of costs.
2) Property Owner shall pay all costs of concrete curb and gutter.
6. Minor Arterials or Collectors
Properties lying on minor arterials or collectors shall be assessed on an equivalent
34’ wide curb to curb roadway in residential areas and 41’ wide roadway in
commercial areas.
7. Connection Charges to Property more than 150’ from Street Right-of-Way
Only that property lying within 150’ of the street right-of-way where utilities are
installed is considered to be served by and assessed for the water and sewer
lines. Property lying more distant than 150’ from the street right-of-way will be
Method of Assessment
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XII-5
assessed when it is developed and is connected to the water and/or sewer utilities.
This deferred charge or assessment will be levied as a connection charge
and may be paid in cash or may be spread on the assessment rolls by submission
of waivers of hearing from affected Property Owners.
These connection charges (deferred assessments) are computed by dividing
the areas of the property subject to assessment by 150 and multiplying by 50%
of the average assessment rate over the most recent five years.
Records are kept and when assessments are processed, strips of property 150’
deep are recorded as levied. Future street construction in the area so designated
would be subject to assessment for utilities, but would receive full credit
(without interest) for assessments previously paid.
Assessments for any property lying within 150’ of an existing street which has
utilities installed but which has not bee previously assessed for utility construction
will be calculated on the most recent assessment rate for the type of construction
made. This assessment will be spread or connection charge paid
upon connection to the utility system.
8. Storm Sewer
The City Engineer shall determine the drainage area to be served by the new
storm sewer construction, the square feet subject to assessment, and the “runoff
factor” contributed by each parcel.
The project cost is then divided by the sum of the “run-off factor” to establish
the cost per square foot.
Property will be assessed its square feet times the cost per square foot times
the “run-off factor”.
The Council reserves the right to adjust the assessment for certain properties
depending on the circumstances without invalidating the above described method.
9. Method of Payment
Interest on the assessments will begin accruing from the date of the adoption of
the assessment roll.
The Owner may pay the entire amount of assessment within 30 days of adoption
of the assessment roll without interest. Otherwise, the assessment shall be
paid in equal annual installments (typically 10 years) plus interest as determined
by the Council (typically 1% above the net interest rate of the bond issue).
Annual payments will be remitted with the property taxes. An Owner may
Method of Assessment
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XII-6
pay off the assessments in full at any time, but will be charged the entire year’s
interest.
10. Summary
This assessment policy is intended to provide general guidelines for assessing
improvements. To meet extreme or very unusual circumstances, the City reserves
the right to levy an assessment in a manner not outlined in the policy
without affecting or negating any portion of this policy for use in normal conditions.
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-1
ENGINEERING DESIGN STANDARDS
For planning design purposes, design standards are helpful, if not necessary. Here are
the standards for Princeton.
A. Street Design Standards
1. Proposed streets shall conform to all State road and County highway plans as
have been prepared, adopted, and/or filed as prescribed by law.
2. Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce usable lots
and reasonable grades.
3. Access shall be given to all lots and portions of the tract in the subdivision and
to adjacent unsubdivided parcels unless the topography clearly indicates that
such connection is not feasible. Reserved strips and landlocked areas shall not
be created.
4. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the
appropriate continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas.
5. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided but may be subdivided, the arrangement
of streets in a new subdivision shall make provision for the proper
projection of streets into adjoining areas by carrying the new street to the
boundaries of the new subdivision at appropriate locations.
6. Minor streets shall be laid out to discourage their use by through traffic. Thoroughfares
shall be reserved for through traffic by providing marginal access
streets, interior streets for serving lots, or other means.
7. Half or partial streets will not be permitted, except where essential to reasonable
subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other requirements and standards
of these regulations and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for
dedication of the remaining part of the street can be secured.
8. Wherever a tract to be subdivided adjoins an existing half or partial street, the
part of the street within such tract shall be platted.
9. Dead end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit future street extension
into adjoining tracts, or when designated as cul-de-sac streets.
10. Private streets and reserve strips shall be prohibited and no public improvements
shall be approved for any private street. All streets shall be dedicated for
public use.
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-2
11. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or planned major thoroughfare
of a railroad right-of-way, a street approximately paralleled to and on each
side of such thoroughfare and right-of-way may be required for adequate protection
of residential properties and separation of through and local traffic. Such
service streets shall be located to a distance from the major thoroughfare or
railroad right-of-way suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as
for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial and industrial purposes
in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due
regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
12. The street arrangement shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners or
adjoining property in platting their own land and providing convenient access to
it.
13. Cul-de-sac Streets
Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall be discouraged. If allowed
by Council action, such cul-de-sac shall not exceed six hundred (600)
feet in length, except as variances are permitted. Such a variance may be
granted if it can be clearly shown that by reason of unfavorable land form, or
the irregular shape of the land from which the subdivision is being made, a
normal street pattern cannot be established, or that land would be wasted by
not granting such a variance.
Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the turnaround
right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to a property line and a right-of-way of the
same width as the street shall be carried to said property line in such a way as
to permit future extension of the street into the adjoining tract. At such time as
such a street is extended, the acreage covered by the turnaround outside the
boundaries of the extended street shall revert in ownership to the property
owner fronting on the temporary turnaround.
14. Street Design
Minimum right-of-way widths and pavement widths (face to face of curb) for
each type of public street or road shall be as follows:
Type of Street Right-of-Way Width Roadway Width
Thoroughfare 120 feet As determined by
(e.g. T.H. 169) traffic needs
Collector Street 80 feet 44 feet
(e.g. T.H. 95)
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-3
Commercial/Industrial 66 feet 32 feet
Service Street
Minor Street 66 feet 32 feet
Alley 16 feet 16 feet
Cul-de-sac Turnaround 60 feet 45 foot radius
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate width,
sufficient additional width shall be provided to meet the above standards. Additional
right-of-way and roadway widths may be required to promote public safety
and convenience when special conditions require it or to provide parking
space in areas of intensive use. Extensions of existing street with lesser rightof-
way than prescribed above may be permitted by variance in special cases.
15 Street Pavement
The design of street pavement for all streets covered by this regulation shall be
in accordance with the most current State of Minnesota Highway Department
Road Design Manual for flexible and rigid pavements. The designed thickness
of the surfacing elements shall be in accordance with the flexible or rigid pavement
design standard for road classifications as follows:
Classification Pavement Design; Axle Loan
Thoroughfare, Collector As determined by traffic needs per
Streets, and Commercial City Engineer
or Industrial Service Streets
Minor and Service Streets 7 ton minimum (minimum 3” bituminous
Wearing course)
16. Curb and Gutter
All new or improved street construction shall incorporate concrete curb and gutter
of design B618 as defined by MN DOT Standard Plate Manual.
17. Restriction of Access
Access of minor streets onto State and County State Aid Highways (C.S.A.H.)
shall be discouraged at intervals of less than 500 feet.
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-4
18. Street Jog
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall
not be allowed.
19. Deflection
When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more
than ten (10) degrees, they shall be connected by a curb with a radius of not
less than one hundred (100) feet.
20. Grades
Centerline gradients shall be at least 0.5% and shall not exceed the following:
Cross slope gradient minimum 2.0%, maximum 5%.
Gradient
Classification (In Percent)
Thoroughfares and Collector Streets 5
Minor and Service Streets 6
Cul-de-sac Circumference 0.5
21. Vertical Curves
Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical curves.
Minimum length, in feet, of these curves shall be twenty (20) times the algebraic
difference in the percent of grade of the two adjacent slopes. Maximum
slope of approach grades at street intersections of 3.0%. Minimum 30 miles per
hour design speed.
22. Angle of Intersection
The angle formed by an intersecting of streets shall be 90 degrees unless otherwise
approved by the City engineer.
23. Size of Intersection
Intersections of more than four corners shall be prohibited.
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-5
24. Corner Radii for Roadways
Roadways of street intersections shall be rounded by a radius of not less than
fifteen (15) feet. Roadways of alley-street intersections shall be rounded by a
radius of not less than six (6) feet. Corners at the entrances to the turnaround
portions of cul-de-sacs shall be rounded by a radius of not less than twenty (20)
feet.
Except in the case of a planned shopping center development, either a public
or private alley shall be provided in a block where commercially zoned property
abuts a major thoroughfare or major street.
25. Sidewalk Design
a) Sidewalks shall be required in all new subdivisions on at least one side of
every street. Sidewalks in all existing subdivisions (prior to 01-01-95) shall
be replaced when maintenance warrants it and shall be installed when the
requirements of MN Statutes 429 for public improvements have been met.
b) Widths
Minimum sidewalk widths shall, when installed, conform to the following
standards:
Classification Width
Single Family Area 5 feet
Multiple Family Area and 6 feet
Public Building Sites
Commercial Areas 10 feet
Industrial Areas 6 feet
c) Grades
Sidewalks shall slope ¼ inch per foot toward the street and the profile
grade shall not exceed six percent (6%). The centerline elevation of the
sidewalk shall be above the corresponding street centerline.
d) Maintenance
Sidewalk maintenance replacement and/or snow and ice removal shall be
the responsibility of the adjacent property owner.
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-6
26. Street Names/Numbering
Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street names unless
a new street is a continuation of or in alignment with the existing or platted
street. In that event, it shall bear the same name of the existing or platted street
so in alignment. Street names shall conform to the City of Princeton’s uniform
street naming and building numbering system.
27. Block Design
Block length and width or acreage within bounding streets shall be such as to
accommodate the size of residential lots required in the area by the zoning
code and to provide for convenient access, circulation control, and safety of
street traffic.
In residential areas, other than water frontage, blocks shall not be less than
three hundred (300) feet nor more than eighteen hundred (1,800) feet in length
measured along the greatest dimension of the enclosed block area, unless minor
variances are necessitated by topography or conformance with an adjoining
plat.
In blocks over nine hundred (900) feet long, a ten (10) foot wide pedestrian
crosswalk may be required through the blocks in locations deemed necessary
to public health, convenience, and necessity. Suitable paving and fencing shall
be provided.
Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from the elements of design
contained in this section if the nature of the use requires such variation. In
such cases, off-street parking for employees and customers shall be provided
along with safe and convenient limited access to the street system. Space for
off-street loading shall also be provided with similar access. Extension of roads
and utilities shall be provided as necessary.
Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots with a minimum depth
as required by the zoning code except adjoining a lake, street, or thoroughfare
or where one tier of lots is necessary because of topographic conditions.
28. Lot Requirements
Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines or radial
to curved street lines or radial to lake or stream shores unless topographic
conditions necessitate a different arrangement.
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-7
Each lot shall be afforded primary access on a public street and shall contain a
utility easement around and within the perimeter of each lot no less than eight
(8) feet in width.
No lot shall have less area or width than is required by zoning regulations applying
to the area in which it is located, except as herein provided.
Lots designed for commercial or industrial purposes shall provide adequate offthe-
street service, loading, and parking facilities.
29. Building Sites
Each lot shall provide an adequate building site at least one (1) foot above the
street grade or have a site drainage plan which is approved by the City Engineer.
30. Minimum Lot Lines
No lot shall have a total width at the front or rear lot line of less than thirty (30)
feet.
Corner lots shall be platted at least twenty (20) wider than interior lots.
31. Butt Lots
In any subdivision butt lots are to be discouraged. Where such lots must be
used to fit a particular type of design, they shall be platted at least five (5) feet
wider than the average width of interior lots in the block.
32. Through or Double Frontage Lots
Such lots shall be permitted except where such lots abut a thoroughfare or major
highway. Such lots shall have an additional depth of ten (10) feet for screen
planting along the rear lot line.
33. Water Courses
Lots abutting upon a water course, drainageway, channel, or stream shall have
an additional depth or width, as required to assure building sites that are not
subject to flooding.
Lots with lakeshore frontage as designed so that the lot lines extended shall
maintain the closest approximation to riparian rights.
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-8
34. Natural Features
In the subdividing of any land, regard shall be shown for all natural features,
such as tree growth, water courses, historic spots, or similar conditions which
as preserved will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.
35. Lot Remnants
All remnants of lots below minimums size left over after subdividing or a larger
tract must be added to adjacent lots, or a plan shown as to future use rather
than allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
36. Access to Thoroughfares
In the case where a proposed plat is adjacent to a limited access highway, other
major highway, or thoroughfare, there shall be no direct vehicular access
from individual lots to such streets and roads. In the platting of small tracts or
land fronting on limited access highways or thoroughfares where there is no
other alternative, a temporary entrance may be granted. As neighboring land
becomes subdivided and more preferable access arrangements become possible,
such temporary access permits shall become void.
37. Large Lot Planning and Future Resubdivision
In any area where lots are platted in excess of 24,000 square feet or 160 feet in
width at the building setback line, a preliminary resubdivision plan be required
showing a potential and feasible way in which the lot or lots may be resubdivided
in future years for more intensive use the land. The placement of buildings
or structures upon such lots shall allow for potential resubdivision.
38. Monuments
All lot corner pipes or iron rods shall be a minimum of ½ inch in diameter, 18
inches in length, and shall be inscribed with the registration number of the land
surveyor making the survey as prescribed in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 505.
39. Street Grading
Streets shall be graded in accordance with a plan approved by the city engineer.
The grading shall include the entire width of the right-of-way and shall
provide a boulevard section in accordance with the minimum pavement width.
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-9
B. Street Openings (Excavations)
1. Permits
A permit will be required for all street openings. A plan, proposed method of
work and list of equipment to be used must be furnished before the permit is issued.
The permit must be posted on the job site before the street opening is
begun.
2. Backfilling
a) In Streets – All trenches shall be backfilled as soon as possible after installation
of piping, conduit, or cable. The backfilling consists of placing
suitable material in twelve inch (12”) thick layers from a point twelve inches
(12”) from the tope of the pipe. Pit run gravel shall be used by the contractor
for water and sanitary sewer connections when unsuitable material
is encountered. Each twelve inch (12”) thick layer shall be compacted before
additional backfill is placed in the excavation. The density of the
backfilled material after compaction shall be equal to or shall exceed the
density of the material before it was excavated. Backfilling shall not be
done in freezing weather, except by permission of the Public works Department,
and it shall not be made with frozen material. No fill shall be
made where the material already in the trench is frozen.
b) In Boulevards or Open Areas – Backfilling of trenches deeper than three
feet (3’) and within five feet (5’) of the curbs shall be done as specified in
this Article, Section 1. A modified type of backfilling will be permitted in
boulevards or open areas where there is no traffic and settlement is not
important. The backfilling may be placed in three foot (3’) thick layers and
compacted by wheel type or crawler type equipment, weighing not less
than six (6) tons, as the backfill material is deposited in the trench. Excess
dirt shall be neatly rounded over the trench to a sufficient height to allow
for settlement to grade after consolidation.
3. Restoration of Surface
a) Street Pavement Width – The street shall be replaced to the original width
before construction.
b) Street Grades – The street surface shall be replaced to the original grade
before construction.
c) Method and Materials – The street construction method and materials
shall conform to the Minnesota Highway Department Specifications.
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-10
d) Sidewalk, Curb, and Street Replacement – The contractor shall replace
in-kind or better all streets, driveways, curbs, and sidewalks disturbed by
his operations. The restoration will be as follows:
1) Sidewalks shall be formed and replaced with 4” of concrete placed
upon a sand cushion of 2 inch minimum thickness.
2) The curbs shall be formed and replaced with the same type of section
and in the same manner of construction as the existing curb.
3) The streets which have a gravel surface shall be replaced with 9
inches of sand and gravel subbase and 6 inches of Class 5 gravel
stabilized base.
4) The streets which have a bituminous surface shall be replaced inkind
or as a minimum 6 inches of Class 5 gravel stabilized base, and
surfaced with 3 inches of AC hot plant mix wearing surface laid with
a paving machine, Minnesota Highway Department Spec. 2331.
5) The contractor shall restore all shrubbery, fences, poles, sod, or other
property removed or disturbed to a condition equal to that before
the work began.
e) Allowable Removal of Pavement – The contractor shall use such methods,
either cutting or milling, as will assure the breaking of the pavement
along straight lines. The face of the remaining pavement shall be approximately
vertical.
f) Subbase and Base Tests – The City reserves the right to require the contractor
to have a series of density tests made by an independent testing
laboratory, one series for any one trench construction. The City will select
the location of the tests.
These tests shall be by the Standard Proctor Density Method in accordance
with the American Association of State Highway Officials Method. If
the tests fail to meet the requirements of the Standard Proctor Density
Test, then the contractor shall do additional compaction over the areas
and repeat the density tests. The city engineer shall be furnished with two
(2) certified copies of the laboratory reports. Payment for Proctor and
Density Tests will be made at the contractor’s expense.
The density tests required are as follows:
1. One test taken three feet below the surface, compacted to 95% density.
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-11
2) One test taken one foot below the finished grade. This is the subgrade
upon which the street is to be constructed and must be compacted
to 100% maximum density.
3) One test taken in the Class 5 gravel base, compacted to 100% maximum
density.
g) Protection of Underground Utilities and Protection of All Existing Structures
Underground or in the Surface – The contractor’s responsibility shall
apply to all property, private or public. The contractor shall restore all facilities
interfered with to their original condition or acceptable equivalent.
The repairs and replacements shall be made without delay so as to cause
a minimum of inconvenience to the property affected. The contractor must
check the location of all underground utilities with the proper agencies before
excavating.
h) Provisions for Traffic – The work shall be carried on in such a manner and
by such means as to cause a minimum of interference with traffic. Suitable
and adequate guards, warnings, barricades, lights, etc. shall be provided
for at and around several parts of the work. Temporary bridges and
railings shall be provided over the trenches for traffic. Street intersections
shall be kept open for traffic. Access to private property shall be maintained.
i) Barricades, Guards, and Safety Provisions – To protect persons from injury
and to avoid property damage, adequate barricades, construction
signs, red lanterns, and guards as required shall be placed and maintained
during the progress of the construction work and until it is safe for
traffic to use the street. All material piles, equipment, and pipe which may
serve as obstructions to traffic shall be enclosed by fences or barricades
and shall be protected by proper lights when the visibility is poor.
Barricades and guards are to prevent entrance into the working and dangerous
area, and to guide traffic away from and around those areas Lights
and signs are to warn of barricades. Proper lights should be visible for
200 feet and windproof. Each end of the project should be marked with
signs and lights, and with intervening lights spaced appropriately for visibility
and safety. All warning lights shall be electric flashing lights conforming
to the requirements set forth below. No open flame torches will be
permitted. All barricades used at night shall have not less than one electric
flashing light at each barricade and in addition shall be reflectorized
with Scotchlite, or equal. The contractor shall notify the Fire Department
of barricaded locations.
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-12
j) Cleaning Up – All surplus material, tools, and temporary structures shall
be removed from the site by the contractor. All dirt, rubbish, and excess
earth from the excavation shall be hauled to a dump and the construction
site left clean to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director or his approved
representative.
k) Sodding and Seeding – The contractor shall replace all sod which he/she
disturbs or destroys in his/her operations on the easements, ditches,
lawns, and boulevards. The contractor shall carry on his operations in
such fashion that only the minimum amount of sod is disturbed or removed.
The sod purchased for replacement shall be cultured sod type lawn and
boulevard. The sod shall not be cut or laid when the ground is frozen. The
sod shall be not less than 1½” thick, shall be cut in strips of not less than
12” in width, not less than 24” in length, and placed within 48 hours after
cutting. Sod laid on embankments shall be pegged.
The topsoil shall be replaced with not less than 3” topsoil. This dirt shall
be loosened and pulverized by disking or hand raking after the surface
has been finished to the former slope and contour.
If, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, the ditch, lawn easement, or
boulevard does not contain the quality of growth that would warrant the
replacement of the disturbed area with sod, the contractor shall seed the
disturbed area. The area shall be seeded after the Public Works Director
has approved the finished slopes and contour of the backfill. The seed
used shall be labeled in accordance with the Department of Agriculture
Rules and Regulations and shall be of quality equal to “Standards for Certified
Seeds” of the State of Minnesota.
The grass seed mixture shall be MN/DOT Type 500 seed.
The contractor shall water as necessary the areas which are seeded immediately
upon completion of seeding. The contractor shall reseed all
areas that do not reestablish a growth of grass equal to or better than that
which existed prior to the construction.
l) Jacking or Auguring Utilities Under Streets – All crossing of the streets
made by jacking or auguring shall be made by boring inside a casing or
carrier pipe. All voids above the pipe zone shall be immediately filled with
cement slurry by adequate pressure grouting equipment methods. No deformation
of the street surface will be allowed during the operations.
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-13
m) alternate Method of Backfilling and Street Restoration – Any person obtaining
a permit for a street opening may elect to request the City to backfill
an excavated area and any necessary street surfacing restoration; said
work will be charged on a time and materials basis.
C. Sewer Construction
1. Authority of Building Official – The Building Official, under the direction of the
Council, shall have control of the municipal drainage and sewer system, and of
all drains and sewers now or hereafter built or authorized by the City, and of the
building, repair, and maintenance thereof, and connections therewith.
2. Permit Required – No drain shall be built, repaired, extended, or connected
with any public sewer or drain until the plan and construction of such drain has
been approved by the Building Official and a permit for such building, repair,
extension, or connection has been issued.
3. Prerequisites to Issue of Permits – No drain shall be built, repaired, extended,
or connected with the public sewer except by a person duly licensed to perform
such work, and no permit shall be issued or approved except when granted to
such person.
No drain shall be built, repaired, extended, or connected with the public sewer
nor a permit issued for any such work until all assessments for sewer construction,
or such installments thereof as shall be due at the time such connection is
made, shall be paid.
4. Applications and Issuance of Permit – Applications for sewer permits shall be
made to the Building Official and the State of Minnesota by the owner/
developer. The applicant shall, before beginning work, deposit with the Building
Official a plan showing the whole course of the drain, from its connection
with the sewer to its terminus within the house, together with the location of all
branches, traps, and fixtures connected therewith. The applicant shall submit
drawings of the sewer proposed to be constructed. If the proposed sewer, as
shown in the drawings, complies with the provisions of the City plumbing code
and other provisions of this Code and is satisfactory to the Council, they shall
authorize the granting of the permit. The drawing shall be filed as a permanent
record in the office of the Building Official.
After the application has been approved, the applicant shall pay to the City of
Princeton a fee as described in the Fee Schedule. The City shall grant the
permit by affixing the authorized signature on the blank provided for that purpose.
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-14
5. Completion and Connection with Public Sewer – The person to whom a permit
is granted may proceed with the construction of the sewer in accordance therewith.
He/she shall notify the Building Official of the progress of the work at
such stages in the course of the construction as the Building Official may direct;
and in particular shall notify the Building Official when the construction of the
sewer is complete and ready for connection with the public sewer, but before
such connection is made.
If the sewer is satisfactory to the Building Official in all respects and complies
with all the requirements of the City Plumbing Code and other provisions of this
Code, she/he will affix her/his signature to the Sewer Connection Permit and
thereafter, but not before, such sewer may be connected with the public sewer.
In the case of repair or extension of existing sewers or any work not requiring
any tapping of or connection with the public sewer, the work may be completed
after the granting of the Sewer Construction Permit without the granting of the
Sewer Connection Permit; but the Building Official shall inspect the work after it
is completed and before the excavations are filled in, and shall require that the
work be done satisfactorily and in compliance with the law before the excavations
are filled in.
6. Construction Requirements - The Minnesota Plumbing Code as amended is
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. All sanitary sewer construction
and materials shall be in accordance with the provisions of said Minnesota
Plumbing Code except as follows:
a) References to bituminized fibre pipe in Section 38 of said Code shall be
deleted.
b) Section 53 of said Code shall be deleted.
c) References to bituminized fibre pipe in Section 125 of said Code shall be
deleted.
d) References to bituminized fibre pipe in Section 129 of said Code shall be
deleted.
e) If the distance is further than 75 feet from the sewer main to a house, a
four inch (4”) clean-out pipe must be installed every 75 feet and brought to
the surface of the ground, and must be PVD (SDR 35 minimum) extraheavy
cast iron pipe with a threaded clean-out and must be connected
with a wye (Y) and 1/8 bend or combination wye and 1/8 bend facing
downstream.
f) All sanitary sewer lines from the house to the street must have a minimum
depth of six feet (6’), unless insulated to the satisfaction of the Building
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-15
Official and except for summer homes which are not occupied during the
winter months. Under driveways, all sewer lines must have a minimum
depth of six feet (6’) unless insulated as stated above.
g) Only four inch (4”) nominal diameter pipe of the following types may be
used:
1) Extra-heavy cast iron pipe with leaded or factory fabricated joints.
2) PVD (SDR 35).
h) If the surface water table is above the sewer lines, extra-heavy cast iron
pipe or PVC (SDR 35) must be used.
i) PVD (SDR 40 minimum) extra-heavy cast iron pipe must be used through
all septic tanks and cesspools.
j) All quarter bends used in the sewer lines must be the longsweep type of
bends.
k) Neoprene gaskets may be used for joints.
l) Plastic pipe acceptable according to the Minnesota Plumbing Code.
7. Only contractors with authorized sewer connection permits, under the direct
supervision of the City employee designed for such purpose, may tap into the
City sewer line and no one else shall do so unless authorized in writing by the
Public Works Director.
8. No plumbing shall be done except under the direct supervision of a master
plumber or City licensed contractor when connecting with the public sewer;
provided, however, that the building sewer may be constructed (except for connections)
by the owner of the building or by such sewer or other licensed contractor
under the following conditions:
a) The owner or licensed contractor shall first obtain a permit as required by
this ordinance.
b) Before covering or backfilling such building sewer, the owner or contractor
must obtain inspection and approval of such building sewer construction
by the Plumbing Inspector designated for such purposes.
c) In cases where the owner or contractor chooses to construct a building
sewer without connecting to either the public sewer or the building drain,
such construction shall be permitted if carried out in accordance with this
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-16
section and provided that at such time as connection is made to either the
building drain or a public sewer, there shall be obtained a second permit
and inspection and approval of such additional connection by the Building
Official before the connection is covered or backfilled.
d) In cases where the Building Official has reason to believe that the owner
is not competent to do the work contemplated by this ordinance, the owner
shall demonstrate his skill, training, knowledge, and experience to the
satisfaction of the inspector. In the event the inspector concludes that said
owner is not competent, said permit shall stand terminated and revoked
until a licensed plumber or contractor is retained.
9. Separate Connections – Every building shall be separately and independently
connected with the public sewer.
10. Obstruction Prohibited – No refuse or solids of any sort obstructive to the flow
of waste water shall be placed, thrown, or allowed to enter any public sewer, or
allowed to remain on or in any trap or catch basin so as to obstruct the sewer;
and no person shall injure or break or remove any portion of any catch basin,
covering flag, gully grating, flush tank, or manhole, or any part of any sewer, or
do any act obstructing or in any way interfering with the use of any sewer or the
flow of waste water through any sewer.
11. Steam Exhaust – No steam exhaust or blow off shall be connected with any soil
or waste pipe or drain which is connected with a public sewer.
12. Rain Spouts – No rain spout or any other form of surface drainage shall connect
with or enter any public sanitary sewer.
13. Inflammable Liquids – No person all allow any waste from dyeing, clothes
cleaning, or other establishments using naphtha, gasoline, or other inflammable
liquids to enter any public sewer.
14. Grease – A grease trap and grated slope basin shall be constructed under the
sink as part of any drainage system installed in every laundry, hotel, eating
place, restaurant, or other public cooking establishment.
15. Slops – All refuse from butcher shops, rendering establishments, and packing
houses must be intercepted by some form of catch basin or grated slop basin
and not allowed to enter the sewer.
16. Inspection and Repairs – The Building Official or any member of the Board of
Health or any representative of either of them shall have the right to enter upon
any premises or into any building at all reasonable hours to inspect the sewers,
drains, traps, and fixtures connected therewith, If, for any reason, a private
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-17
property owner shall refuse to allow the Building Official to enter on his premises
for the purpose of making his inspection, said inspector shall not enter upon
said premises without first obtaining a warrant permitting him to do so. If it is
found that any provision of this Chapter is not being complied with in any respect,
or that any part of the drainage system is in need of cleaning out or repairs,
the Building Official or any member of the Board of Health or their representative
shall serve a notice upon the owner, occupant, and the person in
charge of the premises specifying the work to be done to make the sewer system
comply with the law or to put it in good workable condition. The notice shall
also specify a reasonable time in which to complete such work considering the
amount of work to be done and the nature of the emergency. It shall be the duty
of every person served with such notice to comply therewith; and if it is not
complied with, the City may cause the work to be done at the expense of any
person served.
17. Street Excavations – No person shall make any excavation in any street, sidewalk,
or public ground without first obtaining a permit from the City. The fee for
a permit shall be per the Fee Schedule.
The standard specification for street opening permits in the City of Princeton,
Minnesota, shall be complied with in all respects.
If the person doing such excavation work shall fail to remedy any defect found
therein within a year after its completion upon notice from the Public Works Director,
the City may cause the work to be done at his expense.
18. Excavation Permit – The applicant (i.e. the party performing excavation) for an
excavation permit shall, before such permit is issued, file with the City a certificate
of liability insurance and workers’ compensation insurance, executed by a
surety company registered in Minnesota, and a deposit in the sum comparable
with current City fee schedule, conditioned on a full performance by the applicant
of all the obligations laid upon him by this Code or by his Agreement made
at the time of securing the excavation permit.
D. Sanitary Sewer Design Standards
Sanitary sewer design shall conform to the latest edition of the Great Lakes – Upper
Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers Recommended Standards for
Sewage Works.
1. Minimum sanitary sewer laterals 8” PVD (SDR 35) or DIP Class 52.
2. Manholes, 4’ diameter precast with aluminum steps at 12” on center, and eccentric
cones.
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-18
3. Manholes 400’ maximum on center.
4. Manhole casting shall be Neenah #R-1733 or approved equal.
5. Sanitary sewer services – minimum 4” PVD (SDR 35) or EXCISP, or one percent
(1%) minimum slope.
6. Wyes are to be used on new construction and wherever possible on connections
to existing sewers.
7. Separate sewer services are to be extended to each structure and/or service
account.
8. Direct connection of services to manholes is prohibited, unless authorized by
the city engineer.
9. All sewers and services within public right-of-way shall be a minimum of 10 feet
deep below roadway centerline, unless insulated and approved by the city engineer.
10. Services longer than 75 feet shall have 4” clean-out risers brought to the surface
of the ground. Clean-outs must be PVD (SDR 35) pipe with threaded
clean-out and must also be connected with a wye and 1/8 bend or combination
wye and 1/8 bend facing downstream.
E. Storm Sewer Design Standards
1. Design frequency storm of five years for residential.
2. Design frequency storm of ten years for commercial and industrial.
3. Minimum design velocity of 3 feet per second.
4. Minimum storm sewer pipe size of 12 inches.
5. Minimum culvert size 15 inches.
6. Aprons for all roadway culverts in like materials to culvert.
7. Flared end section for all storm sewer outlets and inlets.
8. Design frequency of 100 years for all retention basins or street low points.
9. Minimum retention basin free board of 1 foot.
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-19
10. Maximum basin side slope of 5:1.
11. Minimum retention basin depth (desirable) of 4 feet.
12. Precast manholes and catch basins shall meet requirements of ASTM C-478.
13. Pipe shall be reinforced concrete of class as shown on plans and ASTM C-361.
14. Corrugated metal culvert shall be 16 gauge galvanized complying to ASTM A-
444.
15. Manhole casting shall be Neenah #R-1733 or equal.
16. Catch basin castings shall be Neenah #403-A or equal.
17. Catch basins shall be installed so that overland drainage does not exceed 600’,
unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.
18. Storm sewer shall be extended to eliminate need for cross gutters.
19. Drainage swales shall have maximum cross slope of 4:1.
20. Drainage swales shall have minimum longitudinal grade of 1.0 percent.
F. Watermain Design Standards
An application to the Princeton Public Utilities Commission for water service shall el
made prior to start of construction.
NOTE: A street excavation permit and bond will be required.
1. Minimum size of watermain is 6 inches. All pipe shall be Class 52 ductile iron
pipe.
2. No dead end mains greater than 600 feet in length.
3. The dead end of a main shall be equipped with a fire hydrant for flushing purposes.
4. Hydrants shall be spaced so that all portions of a building or residence to be
protected fall within a 250 foot radius of a hydrant.
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-20
5. Hydrants shall be Waterous “Pacer” with two 2½” hose connections and one
4½” steamer connection with national standard threads. Hydrants shall meet
the requirements of AWWA Standard C502. Hydrants shall open left and shall
be provided with drain to operate only when hydrant is closed.
6. Each hydrant lead shall be equipped with a gate valve and box for shut-off purposes.
Gate valve shall be resilient-seated gate valves meeting requirements of
AWWA Standard C509 design for 200 psi working pressure. The gate valve
shall have mechanical joint ends, a non-rising operating stem with “O” ring
seals, a 2” operating nut and shall open left.
7. Valves shall be placed throughout the distribution system so that each portion
may be isolated with the least interruption of service. Generally, place valves at
each roadway intersection or intersection of water mains.
8. Minimum depth of cover over watermains shall be 7.5 feet.
9. Minimum size of house service is ¾”.
10. Corporators shall be ¾” diameter equal to Mueller H-15000 with Mueller thread
inlet and copper service pipe outlet.
11. Curb stops and boxes shall be ¾” diameter equal to Mueller H-15154 Mark II
Oriseal with Mueller Minneapolis pattern curb boxes with stationary rods for ¾”
through 2” sizes.
12. Water service lines 1½” and smaller shall be copper type K soft specifications
of ASTM B88.
13. Fittings shall be ductile iron with pressure rating 350 psi with mechanical joints
and conforming to ANSI A21.53, ANSI A21.4, and ANSI A21.11.
14. Each watermain joint, whether “push-on” or mechanical joint type, shall be electrically
bonded with an external copper jumper capable of carrying 500 amps
for an extended period.
15. The design shall be in accordance with the Minnesota Department of Environmental
Health, the Ten State Standards.
G. Street and Utility Service Life
Public improvements are judged to have normal useful life expectancy. For the
purpose of this policy, this life expectancy shall be as follows:
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-21
1. Surface improvements
Concrete curb and gutter 30 years
Bituminous roadways 30 years
Sidewalks 50 years
2. Subsurface improvements
Watermain 50 years
Sanitary Sewer 50 years
Storm Sewer 60 years
3. when any existing improvement is ordered to be renewed or replaced, the assessments
to be levied will be prorated from 0% at one-half life expectancy to
100% at full life expectancy or beyond.
H. Easements
The location of all easements shall be coordinated with the appropriate agencies
servicing the area. Drainage easements shall be coordinated with the City of Princeton.
The minimum width of all easements shall be 16’.
I. Electrical Standards
An application to the Princeton Public Utilities Commission for electrical service
should be made prior to start of construction.
NOTE: An excavation permit will be required.
There will be an “Amp Charge” to customers for overhead line extensions, as well
as upgrades to permanent services and dwellings within the Public Utilities Commission’s
service area.
The following “Amp Charge”* shall apply:
1) Multiple Residence See Fee Schedule
2) Single Residence See Fee Schedule
3) Commercial/Industrial See Fee Schedule
*Subject to annual adjustment.
Underground service extensions, by request of the customer, will be made with the
same “Amp Charge.” The Public Utilities Commission will trench in the wire unless it
is unaccessible, in which case the customer has to provide a 24” deep trench for
the wire to be buried. In either case, after the initial connection of the underground
Engineering Design Standards
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIII-22
line extension, the maintenance of this service becomes the responsibility of the
customer.
When a customer requesting a line extension is not within the city limits, the Public
Utilities Commission will extend its services within its authorized service area (in
accordance with the requirements for overhead and underground extension) only
when anticipated revenue from the sale of the additional service which will result
from the extension is sufficient to be justified. The extension will be made only if the
customer pays to the Public Utilities Commission the portion of the capital expenditure
not justified by the anticipated annual revenue.
All installations shall be in accordance with the National Electrical Code and subject
to final approval by the State Electrical Inspector prior to activation of service.
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIV-1
MISCELLANEOUS
REVIEW AGENCIES, UTILITIES, AND
UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Getting approval from the City of Princeton to start a project is often contingent upon the
actions of various City Boards and other agencies. In addition, other units of government
or utilities must often be contacted for permits in their areas of responsibilities.
Potential agency contacts are summarized below.
Mille Lacs County Highway Department
565 8th Street NE
Milaca MN 56353
Attention: County Engineer
320-983-8201
Sherburne County Highway Department
425 Jackson
Elk River MN 55330
Attn: County Engineer
763-241-7028
Princeton Public Utilities Engineers
Short, Elliott, Hendrickson (SEH)
3535 Vadnais Center Drive
St. Paul MN 55110
Attn: Tom Kaldunski
651-490-2096
Minnesota Department of Transportation
7694 Industrial Park
Baxter MN 56425-8096
218-828-2460
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
1601 Minnesota Drive
Brainerd MN 56401
Attn: Lonnie Thomas
218-828-2605
Miscellaneous
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIV-2
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
520 Lafayette Road
St. Paul MN 55155
651-296-6300
Minnesota Department of Health
Public Health Engineer
Section of Drinking Water Protection
PO Box 64975
St. Paul MN 55164-0975
651-215-0947 0792
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
190 East 5th Street
St. Paul MN 55101
Brenda Miller 651-290-5375
Mille Lacs County – Kelly Urbanek 218-829-2711
Sherburne County – Yvonne Berner 651-290-5365
Miscellaneous
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIV-3
UTILITY INFORMATION
Utility Owner/Address Telephone
Gas CenterPoint Energy Minnegasco 1-877-295-8630
Shelly Houde
800 LaSalle Avenue
Minneapolis MN 55402
Electric Princeton Public Utilities Commission 763-389-2252
907 1st Street
Princeton MN 55371
Garbage Princeton Public Utilities Commission 763-389-2252
907 1st Street
Princeton MN 55371
Water Princeton Public Utilities Commission 763-389-2252
907 1st Street
Princeton MN 55371
Sewer City of Princeton 763-389-2040
705 2nd Street North
Princeton MN 55371
Telephone NorthStar Access 763-262-4722
Russell Vance
QWEST 1-800-526-3557
Cable T.V. U.S. Cable 1-800-783-2356
P.O. Box 496
Cold Spring MN 56320
Miscellaneous
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIV-4
UNDERGROUND TANKS
A. The Environmental Protection Agency has adopted regulations that require underground
tanks of 1,100 gallons or more either be:
1. Upgraded with corrosion protection, spill and overflow protection, and leak detection
systems; or
2. Be closed. The EPA regulations include deadlines for upgrading underground
tanks.
If Tank Was It Must Be Checked
Installed: For Leak Detection By:
Before 1965 or unknown December, 1989
1965 – 1969 December, 1990
1970 – 1974 December, 1991
1975 – 1979 December, 1992
1980 – 1988 December, 1993
3. Any storage tank leaks or spills must be reported to the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency’s Spills Line at 651-649-5451 or 800-422-0798.
Miscellaneous
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIV-5
BUILDING PERMIT INFORMATION
Princeton follows the Minnesota State Building Code. The fee for building permits is
based on finished construction cost. There is also a “plan review” or “plan check” fee in
the amount of 65% of the building permit fee.
Forty eight hours notice is required for building inspections. To arrange an inspection,
call the Building Official’s office at 763-479-1720 or 1-800-223-1720.
Miscellaneous
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XIV-6
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING POLICIES
Historically, tax increment financing has been used in Princeton with both commercial
and residential development. For high priority projects, the City Council may authorize
use of TIF again. The City is most like to use tax increment for:
1. Commercial redevelopment projects.
2. Residential project where there exists an especially difficult infrastructure problem.
At present the City does not have a formal tax increment finance policy and considers
project submittals on their individual merit.
With the approval of the 1989 tax bill came further restrictions on tax increment. This
seems to be the trend: more and more restrictions further reducing the applicability of
the funding tool. Examples from the 1989 bill state that use of Redevelopment District
Increments are permitted for acquiring and clearing substandard parcels or funding related
street, utility, parking, and administrative expenses. Raw land acquisition is no
longer fundable. In addition, 70% of the district must be occupied prior to redevelopment.
To be considered occupied, at least 15% of the square footage of each parcel
must be improved.
In another change, areas designated as Housing Districts must now meet the low to
moderate income levels adopted from Federal law. Change can be expected in Minnesota’s
tax increment financing law each time the legislature meets. Princeton will, however,
work with developers to the extent allowed by laws to promote worthwhile
projects.
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XV -1
ADOPTION OF
ORDINANCE
A. Violations and Penalties
Any person, firm, corporation, or voluntary association which violates or refuses
to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of up to $700 for
every offense or to imprisonment not exceeding 90 days. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Repeal
Ordinances #261 and #407 are hereby repealed in their entirety.
C. Effective Date
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its adoption and publication.
ADOPTED by the Princeton City Council on this 13th day of October, 1994.
s/s
Greg Furzland, Mayor
ATTEST:
s/s
Bill Schimmel, Jr., City Administrator
This ordinance was retyped and non-essential items (i.e. contact info, staff titles)
updated in September, 2006.
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVI-1
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
(City Installed Improvements)
AGREEMENT dated this day of , 20
by and between the CITY OF PRINCETON, a Minnesota municipal corporation (CITY)
and , (the DEVELOPER).
A. Request for Plat Approval. The DEVELOPER has asked the CITY to approve a
plat for , (also referred to in this
Agreement as the “plat”). This land is legally described as:
B. Conditions of Plat Approval. The CITY hereby approves the plat on condition that
(1) the DEVELOPER enter into this Agreement, and (2) that the DEVELOPER provide
the necessary security in accordance with the terms of this Agreement guaranteeing
the payment of the first two years’ special assessments, including interest
and principal, for public improvements and guaranteeing compliance with the terms
of this Agreement.
C. Compliance with Laws and Regulations. The DEVELOPER represents to the
CITY that the plat complies with all City, County, State, and Federal laws and regulations,
including, but not limited to: subdivision ordinances, zoning ordinances, and
environmental regulations. If the CITY determines that the plat does not comply, the
CITY may, at its option, refuse to allow any construction or development work in the
plat until the DEVELOPER does comply. Upon the CITY’s demand, the DEVELOPER
shall cease work until there is compliance.
D. Development Exhibits. The DEVELOPER shall develop the plat in accordance
with the following plans. The plans may be prepared, subject to CITY approval, after
entering the Agreement, but before commencement of any work in the plat. If
the plans vary from the written terms of this Agreement, the written terms shall control.
These plans are:
Development Agreement (City Installed Improvements)
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVI-2
Plan A – Plat/Staging Plan
Plan B – Soil Erosion and Grading Plan
Plan C – Preliminary Engineering Report
Plan D – Landscaping Requirements
E. Phased Development. The plat shall be developed in phases in accordance
with Plan A. No earth moving or other development shall be done in any phase until
final plans have been filed in the County Recorder’s office and the necessary security
has been furnished to the CITY for those phases. For purposes of this requirement,
outlots shall not be deemed to have been final platted. The CITY may refuse
to approve final plats or subsequent phases until public improvements for all prior
phases have been satisfactorily completed. Subject to the terms of this Agreement,
this Development Agreement constitutes approval to develop Phase . Development
of subsequent phases may not proceed until Development Agreements
for such phases are approved by the CITY.
F. Effect of Subdivision Approval. For two (2) years from the date of this Agreement,
no amendments to the CITY’s Comprehensive Plan, except an amendment
placing the plat in the current urban service area, or official controls shall apply to or
affect the use, development density, lot size, lot layout, or dedications or platting
required or permitted by the approved preliminary plat unless required by State or
Federal law or agreed to in writing by the CITY and the DEVELOPER. Thereafter,
notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, to the full extent permitted
by State law, the CITY may require compliance with any amendments to the
CITY’s Comprehensive Plan (including removing unplatted property from the urban
service area), official controls, platting, or dedication requirements enacted after the
date of this Agreement and may require submission of a new plat.
G. Public Improvements. The CITY shall design and construct the Phase
public improvements set for the in Exhibit C.
H. Assessment of Costs. The CITY shall assess the cost of the public improvements
referred to in Paragraph G above, together with administrative, planning, engineering,
capitalized interest, legal, and bonding costs against the land in Phase .
The assessments shall be deemed adopted on the date this Agreement is signed
by the CITY. The assessments shall be paid over a year period without
deferment, together with interest at a rate set by the CITY. Before the CITY issues
a Certificate of Occupancy for a structure built on a lot, however, all the aforementioned
assessments against the lot must be certified with the county.
The DEVELOPER waives any and all procedural and substantive objections to the
installation of the public improvements and the assessments, including any claim
that the assessments exceed the benefit to the property. The DEVELOPER waives
any appeal rights otherwise available pursuant to MSA 429.081
Development Agreement (City Installed Improvements)
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVI-3
I. Security. The DEVELOPER shall furnish the CITY with an irrevocable letter of credit
for $ . The bank and form of the letter of credit shall
be subject to the approval of the City Attorney. The letter of credit shall be for a
term ending 90 days after the second half of the second year’s special assessments
are due and payable. The letter of credit shall secure compliance with the
terms of this Agreement and payment of the first two years’ special assessments,
including principal and interest for all required public improvements. The CITY may
draw down the letter of credit, without notice, for any violation of the terms of this
Agreement. The amount of security was calculated as follows:
Spec. Asmt/Imp. $ Monuments $
Grading $ Street Signs $
Street Lights $ Erosion Control $
Special Asmt/Strm.Sew.Con.Chg. $
J. Storm Sewer. The DEVELOPER shall pay a storm sewer connection charge for
Phase of $ in lieu of the property paying a like
assessment at a later date. The charge shall be assessed against the property in
Phase over a year period with % interest on
the unpaid principal. The assessment shall be deemed adopted on the date this
Agreement is signed by the CITY. The assessments may be assumed or prepaid in
full at any time. The DEVELOPER waives any and all procedural and substantive
objections to the assessments including any claim that the assessments exceed the
benefit to the property. The DEVELOPER waives any appeal rights otherwise available
pursuant to MSA 429.081. Storm sewer charges for subsequent phases shall
be calculated and paid based upon requirements in effect at the time the Development
Agreements for those phases are entered into.
K. Water Area. The DEVELOPER shall pay a water area charge of $
for Phase in lieu of the property paying a like assessment at a later date.
The charge shall be assessed against the property in Phase over a
year period with % interest on the unpaid balance. The assessment
shall be deemed adopted on the date this Agreement is signed by the CITY. The
assessments may be assumed or prepaid in full at any time. The DEVELOPER
waives any and all potential and substantive objections to the assessments including
any claim that the assessments exceed the benefit to the property. The DEVELOPER
waives any appeal rights otherwise available pursuant to MSA No.
429.081. Water area charges for subsequent phases shall be calculated and paid
based upon requirements in effect at the time the Development Agreements for
those phases are entered into.
Development Agreement (City Installed Improvements)
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVI-4
L. Park Dedication. The DEVELOPER shall pay a cash contribution of $
in satisfaction of the CITY’s park dedication requirements for Phase .
The contribution shall be paid upon the execution of the Agreement. Park dedication
requirements for subsequent phases shall be calculated and paid based upon
requirements in effect at the time Development Agreements are entered into for
those phases.
M. Licenses. The DEVELOPER hereby grants the CITY, its agents, employees, officers,
and contractors a license to enter the plat to perform all necessary work and/or
inspections deemed appropriate by the CITY during the installation of public improvements
by the CITY. The license shall expire after the public improvements installed
pursuant to the development contract have been installed and accepted by
the CITY.
N. Developer Installed Improvements. The DEVELOPER shall install to CITY standards.
The design, placement, and construction scheduling shall be approved by
the CITY.
O. Warranty. The DEVELOPER warrants all work required to be performed by it
against poor material and faulty workmanship for a period of one (1) year after its
completion and acceptance by the CITY. All landscaping including, but not limited
to, trees, bushes, shrubs, grass, and sod shall be warranted to be alive, of good
quality, and disease free for twelve (12) months from the time of planting. Any replacements
shall be warranted for twelve (12) months from the time of planting. The
DEVELOPER shall post maintenance bonds or other security acceptable to the
CITY to secure the warranties.
P. Grading Plan. The plat shall be graded and drainage provided by the DEVELOPER
in accordance with the plans attached hereto as Exhibit B.
Q. Landscaping. The DEVELOPER shall landscape the plat in accordance with the
plans attached hereto as Exhibit C. The landscaping shall be accomplished in accordance
with a time scheduled approved by the CITY.
R. Ownership of Improvements. Upon completion of the work and construction required
by this Agreement, the improvements lying within public easements shall become
CITY property without further notice or action.
S. Erosion Control. After the site is rough graded, but before any utility construction
is commenced or building permits are issued, the erosion control plan, Plan B, shall
be implemented by the DEVELOPER and inspected and approved by the CITY.
The CITY or County Soil and Water Conservation District may impose additional
erosion control requirements if they would be beneficial. All areas disturbed by the
excavation and backfilling operations shall be reseeded forthwith after the completion
of the work in that area. Except as otherwise provided in the erosion control
Development Agreement (City Installed Improvements)
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVI-5
plan, seed shall be oat seed. All seeded areas shall be fertilized, mulches, and disk
anchored as necessary for seed retention. The parties recognize that time is of the
essence in controlling erosion. If the DEVELOPER does not comply with the erosion
control plan and schedule, or supplementary instructions received from the
CITY or the County Soil and Water Conservation District, the CITY may take such
action as it deems appropriate to control erosion. The CITY will endeavor to notify
the DEVELOPER in advance of any proposed action, but failure of the CITY to do
so will not affect the DEVELOPER’s and CITY’s rights or obligations hereunder. If
the DEVELOPER does not reimburse the CITY for any cost the CITY incurred for
such work within thirty (30) days, the CITY may draw down the letter of credit to pay
any costs. No development will be allowed and no building permits will be issued
unless the plat is in full compliance with the erosion control requirements.
T. Clean Up. The DEVELOPER shall promptly clear any soil, earth, or debris resulting
from construction work by the DEVELOPER or its agents or assigns.
U. Responsibility for Costs.
1. Except as otherwise specified herein, the DEVELOPER shall pay all costs incurred
by it or the CITY in conjunction with the development of the plat, including,
but not limited to, Soil and Water Conservation District charges, legal,
planning, engineering, and inspection expenses incurred in connection with approval
and acceptance of the plat, preparation of this Agreement, and all reasonable
costs and expenses incurred by the CITY in monitoring and inspecting
development of the plat.
2. The DEVELOPER shall hold the CITY and its officers and employees harmless
from claims made by itself and third parties for damages sustained or costs incurred
resulting from plat approval and development. The DEVELOPER shall
indemnity the CITY and its officers and employees for all costs, damages, or
expenses which the CITY may pay or incur in consequence of such claims, including
attorney’s fees.
3. The DEVELOPER shall reimburse the CITY for costs incurred in the enforcement
of this Agreement, including engineering and attorney’s fees.
4. The DEVELOPER shall pay in full all bills submitted to it by the CITY within thirty
(30) days after receipt. If the bills are not paid on time, the CITY may halt all
plat development work until the bills are paid in full. Bill not paid within thirty
(30) days shall accrue interest at the rate of % per year.
Development Agreement (City Installed Improvements)
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVI-6
V. DEVELOPER’s Default. In the event of default by the DEVELOPER as to any of
the work to be performed by it hereunder, the CITY may, at its option, perform the
work and the DEVELOPER shall promptly reimburse the CITY for any expense incurred
by the CITY, provided the DEVELOPER is first given written notice of the
work in default not less than 48 hours in advance. This Agreement is a license for
the CITY to act, and it shall not be necessary for the CITY to seek a Court order for
permission to enter the land. When the CITY does any such work, the CITY may, in
addition to its other remedies, assess the cost in whole or in part.
W. Miscellaneous.
1. This Agreement shall be binding upon the parties, their heirs, successors, or
assigns, as the case may be.
2. Breach of the terms of this Agreement by the DEVELOPER shall be grounds
for denial of building permits.
3. If any portion, section, subsection, sentence, clause, paragraph, or phrase of
this Agreement is for any reason held invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portion of this Agreement.
4. No one may occupy a building for which a building permit is issued on either a
temporary or permanent basis until the streets needed for access have been
paved with a bituminous surface.
5. The action or inaction of the CITY shall not constitute a waiver or amendment
to the provisions of this Agreement. To be binding, amendments or waivers
shall be in writing, signed by the parties, and approved by written resolution of
the City Council. The CITY’s failure to promptly take legal action to enforce this
Agreement shall not be a waiver or release.
6. The DEVELOPER represents to the CITY to the best of its knowledge that the
plat is not of “metropolitan significance” and that an environmental impact
statement is not required. However, if the CITY or another governmental entity
or agency determines that such a review is needed, the DEVELOPER shall
prepare it in compliance with legal requirements so issued from said agency.
The DEVELOPER shall reimburse the CITY for all expenses, including staff
time and attorney’s fees, that the CITY incurs in assisting in the preparation of
the review.
7. This Agreement shall run with the land and may be recorded against the title to
the property. After the DEVELOPER has completed the work required of it under
this Agreement at the DEVELOPER’s request, the CITY will execute and
deliver to the DEVELOPER a release.
Development Agreement (City Installed Improvements)
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVI-7
X. Notices. Required notices to the DEVELOPER shall be in writing and shall be either
hand delivered to the DEVELOPER, its employees, or agents or mailed to the
DEVELOPER by certified or registered mail at the following address:
(Address)
Notices to the CITY shall be in writing and shall be either hand delivered to the City
Administrator or mailed to the City by certified mail or registered mail in care of the
City Administrator at the following address:
City of Princeton
Attn: City Administrator
705 2nd Street North
Princeton MN 55371
DEVELOPER
By: Date:
Its:
CITY OF PRINCETON
By: Date:
Mayor
By: Date:
City Administrator
By: Date:
Finance Director
Development Agreement (City Installed Improvements)
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVI-8
STATE OF MINNESOTA )
( §
COUNTY OF MILLE LACS )
The foregoing Development Agreement dated
was subscribed to before me in person this day of ,
20 , by
the , of ,
(Title) (Company)
a Minnesota corporation on its behalf, who is personally known to me (whose identify I
proved on the basis of , whose identity
I proved on the oath/affirmation of ,
a credible witness).
Notary Public
My commission expires
STATE OF MINNESOTA )
( §
COUNTY OF MILLE LACS )
The foregoing Development Agreement dated
was subscribed to before me in person this day of ,
20 , by , Mayor, and by
, City Administrator of the City of Princeton (a
Minnesota municipal corporation), who are personally known to me, on behalf of the
corporation and pursuant to the authority of the City Council.
Notary Public
My commission expires
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVII-1
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
(Developer Installed Improvements)
AGREEMENT dated this day of , 20
by and between the CITY OF PRINCETON, a Minnesota municipal corporation (CITY)
and , (the DEVELOPER).
A. Request for Plat Approval. The DEVELOPER has asked the CITY to approve a
plat for , (also referred to in this
Agreement as the “plat”). This land is legally described as:
B. Conditions of Plat Approval. The CITY hereby approves the plat on condition that
(1) the DEVELOPER enter into this Agreement, and (2) that the DEVELOPER provide
the necessary security in accordance with the terms of this Agreement.
C. Development Plans. The DEVELOPER shall develop the plat in accordance with
the following plans. The plans will be prepared for the DEVELOPER by the City engineer
after entering into this Agreement, but before commencement of any work in
the plat. If the plans vary from the written terms of this Agreement, the written terms
shall control. The required plans are:
Plan A – Plat/Staging Plan
Plan B – Soil Erosion and Grading Plan
Plan C – Landscape Plan
Plan D – Preliminary Engineering Report
Plan E – Final Plat of First Addition
D. Required Public Improvements. The DEVELOPER shall install and pay for the
following:
1. Sanitary Sewer System
2. Water System
3. Storm Sewer
Development Agreement (Developer Installed Improvements)
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVII-2
4. Streets
5. Concrete Curb and Gutter
6. Street Signs
7. Street Lights
8. Sidewalks
9. Site Grading and Ponding
10. Underground Utilities
11. Setting of Lot and Block Monuments
12. Surveying and Staking
The improvements shall be installed in accordance with the preliminary engineering
report, Plan A, and in accordance with CITY standards, ordinances, and plans and
specifications which have been prepared by the City Engineer. The DEVELOPER
shall obtain all necessary permits before proceeding with construction. The CITY
will, at the CITY’s discretion and at the DEVELOPER’s expense, have one or more
CITY inspectors and a soil engineer inspect the work on a full or part-time basis to
assure an acceptable level of quality control to the extent that the CITY’s engineer
will be able to certify that the construction work meets the approved CITY standards
as a condition of CITY acceptance. The DEVELOPER or his contractor shall schedule
a preconstruction meeting at a mutually agreeable time at the City Hall with all
parties concerned, including CITY staff, to review the program for the construction
work. Within thirty (30) days after the completion of the improvements and before
the security is released, the DEVELOPER shall supply the CITY with a complete
set of reproducible “As Built” plans.
E. Time of Performance. The DEVELOPER shall install all required public improvements
by (month, year). The DEVELOPER may,
however, request an extension of time from the CITY. If an extension is granted, it
shall be conditioned upon updating the security posted by the DEVELOPER to reflect
cost increases.
F. Owner of Improvements. Upon the completion of the work and construction required
to be done by this Agreement and acceptance by the CITY engineer, the improvements
lying within public easements shall become CITY property without further
notice or action.
G. Warranty. The DEVELOPER warrants all work required to be performed by it
against poor material and faulty workmanship for a period of one (1) year after its
completion and acceptance by the CITY. All landscaping including, but not limited
to, trees, bushes, shrubs, grass, and sod shall be warranted to be alive, of good
quality, and disease free for twelve (12) months from the time of planting. Any replacements
shall be warranted for twelve (12) months from the time of planting. The
DEVELOPER shall post maintenance bonds or other security acceptable to the
CITY to secure the warranties.
Development Agreement (Developer Installed Improvements)
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVII-3
H. Grading Plan. The plat shall be graded and drainage provided by the DEVELOPER
in accordance with Plan B.
I. Erosion Control. After the site is rough graded, but before any utility construction
is commenced or building permits are issued, the erosion control plan, Plan B, shall
be implemented by the DEVELOPER and inspected and approved by the CITY.
The CITY or County Soil and Water Conservation District may impose additional
erosion control requirements if they would be beneficial. All areas disturbed by the
excavation and backfilling operations shall be reseeded forthwith after the completion
of the work in that area. Except as otherwise provided in the erosion control
plan, seed shall be oat seed. All seeded areas shall be fertilized, mulches, and disk
anchored as necessary for seed retention. The parties recognize that time is of the
essence in controlling erosion. If the DEVELOPER does not comply with the erosion
control plan and schedule, or supplementary instructions received from the
CITY or the County Soil and Water Conservation District, the CITY may take such
action as it deems appropriate to control erosion. The CITY will endeavor to notify
the DEVELOPER in advance of any proposed action, but failure of the CITY to do
so will not affect the DEVELOPER’s and CITY’s rights or obligations hereunder. If
the DEVELOPER does not reimburse the CITY for any cost the CITY incurred for
such work within thirty (30) days, the CITY may draw down the letter of credit to pay
any costs. No development will be allowed and no building permits will be issued
unless the plat is in full compliance with the erosion control requirements.
J. Landscaping. The DEVELOPER shall landscape the plat in accordance with Plan
C. The landscaping shall be accomplished in accordance with a time scheduled approved
by the CITY.
K. Phased Development. The plat shall be developed in phases in accordance
with Plan A. No earth moving, construction of public improvements, or other
development shall be done in any phase until a final plat for the phase has been
filed in the County Recorder’s office and the necessary security has been furnished
to the CITY. For purposes of this requirement, outlots shall not be deemed to have
been final platted. The CITY may refuse to approve final plats of subsequent phases
until public improvements for all prior phases have been satisfactorily completed.
Subject to the terms of this Agreement, this Development Agreement constitutes
approval to develop Phase . Development of subsequent phases may not proceed
until Development Agreements for such phases are approved by the CITY.
L. Effect of Subdivision Approval. For two (2) years from the date of this Agreement,
no amendments to the CITY’s Comprehensive Plan, except an amendment
placing the plat in the current urban service area, or official controls shall apply to or
affect the use, development density, lot size, lot layout, or dedications or platting
required or permitted by the approved preliminary plat unless required by State or
Federal law or agreed to in writing by the CITY and the DEVELOPER. Thereafter,
notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, to the full extent permitDevelopment
Agreement (Developer Installed Improvements)
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVII-4
ted by State law, the CITY may require compliance with any amendments to the
CITY’s Comprehensive Plan (including removing unplatted property from the urban
service area), official controls, platting, or dedication requirements enacted after the
date of this Agreement and may require submission of a new plat.
M. Storm Sewer. The DEVELOPER shall pay a storm sewer connection charge for
Phase of $ in lieu of the
property paying a like assessment at a later date. The charge shall be assessed
against the property in Phase over a year period with
% interest on the unpaid principal. The assessment shall be deemed adopted
on the date this Agreement is signed by the CITY. The assessments may be assumed
or prepaid in full at any time. The DEVELOPER waives any and all procedural
and substantive objections to the assessments including any claim that the
assessments exceed the benefit to the property. The DEVELOPER waives any appeal
rights otherwise available pursuant to MSA 429.081. Storm sewer charges for
subsequent phases shall be calculated and paid based upon requirements in effect
at the time the Development Agreements for those phases are entered into.
N. Water Area. The DEVELOPER shall pay a water area charge of $
for Phase in lieu of the property paying a like assessment at a later date.
The charge shall be assessed against the property in Phase over a
year period with % interest on the unpaid balance. The assessment
shall be deemed adopted on the date this Agreement is signed by the CITY. The
assessments may be assumed or prepaid in full at any time. The DEVELOPER
waives any and all potential and substantive objections to the assessments including
any claim that the assessments exceed the benefit to the property. The DEVELOPER
waives any appeal rights otherwise available pursuant to MSA No.
429.081. Water area charges for subsequent phases shall be calculated and paid
based upon requirements in effect at the time the Development Agreements for
those phases are entered into.
O. Park Dedication. The DEVELOPER shall pay a cash contribution of $
in satisfaction of the CITY’s park dedication requirements for Phase .
The contribution shall be paid upon the execution of the Agreement. Park dedication
requirements for subsequent phases shall be calculated and paid based upon
requirements in effect at the time Development Agreements are entered into for
those phases.
P. Licenses. The DEVELOPER hereby grants the CITY, its agents, employees, officers,
and contractors a license to enter the plat to perform all necessary work and/or
inspections deemed appropriate by the CITY during the installation of public improvements
by the CITY. The license shall expire after the public improvements installed
pursuant to the development contract have been installed and accepted by
the CITY.
Development Agreement (Developer Installed Improvements)
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVII-5
Q. Clean Up. The DEVELOPER shall promptly clear any soil, earth, or debris resulting
from construction work by the DEVELOPER or its agents or assigns.
R. Security. To guarantee compliance with the terms of this Agreement, payment of
the costs of all public improvements in Phase and construction of all public
improvements in Phase , the DEVELOPER shall furnish the CITY with a
cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit from a bank for $ .
The bank and form of the letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the City
Administrator. The security shall be for a period ending .
If the required public improvements are not completed or terms of the agreement
are not satisfied at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of a letter of credit,
the CITY may draw down the letter of credit. The CITY may draw down the Security,
without prior notice, for any violation of this Agreement. The amount of the security
was calculated as follows:
Grading $ Monuments $
Sanitary Sewer $ Water Main $
Storm Sewer $ Erosion Control $
Str. Lights & Signs $ Streets $
Engr. Surv. & Insp. $ Blvd. Sodding $
Storm Sewer Chg. $ Blvd. Trees $
S. Responsibility for Costs.
1. The DEVELOPER shall pay all costs incurred by it or the CITY in conjunction
with the development of the plat, including, but not limited to, Soil and Water
Conservation District charges, legal, planning, engineering, and inspection expenses
incurred in connection with approval and acceptance of the plat, preparation
of this Agreement, and all reasonable costs and expenses incurred by
the CITY in monitoring and inspecting development of the plat.
2. The DEVELOPER shall hold the CITY and its officers and employees harmless
from claims made by itself and third parties for damages sustained or costs incurred
resulting from plat approval and development. The DEVELOPER shall
indemnity the CITY and its officers and employees for all costs, damages, or
expenses which the CITY may pay or incur in consequence of such claims, including
attorney’s fees.
3. The DEVELOPER shall reimburse the CITY for costs incurred in the enforcement
of this Agreement, including engineering and attorney’s fees.
Development Agreement (Developer Installed Improvements)
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVII-6
4. The DEVELOPER shall pay in full all bills submitted to it by the CITY within thirty
(30) days after receipt. If the bills are not paid on time, the CITY may halt all
plat development work until the bills are paid in full. Bill not paid within thirty
(30) days shall accrue interest at the rate of % per year.
T. DEVELOPER’s Default. In the event of default by the DEVELOPER as to any of
the work to be performed by it hereunder, the CITY may, at its option, perform the
work and the DEVELOPER shall promptly reimburse the CITY for any expense incurred
by the CITY, provided the DEVELOPER is first given written notice of the
work in default not less than 48 hours in advance. This Agreement is a license for
the CITY to act, and it shall not be necessary for the CITY to seek a Court order for
permission to enter the land. When the CITY does any such work, the CITY may, in
addition to its other remedies, assess the cost in whole or in part.
W. Miscellaneous.
1. This Agreement shall be binding upon the parties, their heirs, successors, or
assigns, as the case may be.
2. Breach of the terms of this Agreement by the DEVELOPER shall be grounds
for denial of building permits.
3. If any portion, section, subsection, sentence, clause, paragraph, or phrase of
this Agreement is for any reason held invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portion of this Agreement.
4. Building permits shall not be issued prior to completion of rough site grading
and installation of erosion control devices. If permits are issued prior to the
completion and acceptance of public improvements, the DEVELOPER assumes
all liability and costs resulting in delays in completion of public improvements
and damage to public improvements caused by the CITY, DEVELOPER,
or their contractors, subcontractors, materialmen, employees, agents, or third
parties. No one may occupy a building for which a building permit is issued on
either a temporary or permanent basis until the streets needed for access have
been paved with a bituminous surface.
5. The action or inaction of the CITY shall not constitute a waiver or amendment
to the provisions of this Agreement. To be binding, amendments or waivers
shall be in writing, signed by the parties, and approved by written resolution of
the City Council. The CITY’s failure to promptly take legal action to enforce this
Agreement shall not be a waiver or release.
Development Agreement (Developer Installed Improvements)
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVII-7
6. The DEVELOPER represents to the CITY to the best of its knowledge that the
plat is not of “metropolitan significance” and that an environmental impact
statement is not required. However, if the CITY or another governmental entity
or agency determines that such a review is needed, the DEVELOPER shall
prepare it in compliance with legal requirements so issued from said agency.
The DEVELOPER shall reimburse the CITY for all expenses, including staff
time and attorney’s fees, that the CITY incurs in assisting in the preparation of
the review.
7. Compliance with Laws and Regulations. The DEVELOPER represents to the
CITY that the plat complies with all City, County, State, and Federal laws and
regulations, including, but not limited to: subdivision ordinances, zoning ordinances,
and environmental regulations. If the CITY determines that the plat does
not comply, the CITY may, at its option, refuse to allow any construction or development
work in the plat until the DEVELOPER does comply. Upon the
CITY’s demand, the DEVELOPER shall cease work until there is compliance.
8. This Agreement shall run with the land and may be recorded against the title to
the property. After the DEVELOPER has completed the work required of it under
this Agreement at the DEVELOPER’s request, the CITY will execute and
deliver to the DEVELOPER a release.
9. DEVELOPER shall take out and maintain until six months after the CITY has
accepted the public improvements, public liability and property damage insurance
covering personal injury, including death, and claims for property damage
which may arise out of DEVELOPER’s work or the work of its subcontractors or
by one directly or indirectly employed by any of them. Limits for bodily injury or
death shall be not less than $600,000 per person and $1,000,000 for each occurrence;
limits for property damage shall be not less than $600,000 for each
occurrence. DEVELOPER shall provide a certificate of workers’ compensation
insurance in compliance with State statute requirements. The CITY shall be
named as an additional named insured on said policy, and DEVELOPER shall
file a copy of the insurance coverage with the CITY prior to the CITY signing
the plat.
X. Notices. Required notices to the DEVELOPER shall be in writing and shall be either
hand delivered to the DEVELOPER, its employees, or agents or mailed to the
DEVELOPER by certified or registered mail at the following address:
(Address)
Development Agreement (Developer Installed Improvements)
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVII-8
Notices to the CITY shall be in writing and shall be either hand delivered to the City
Administrator or mailed to the City by certified mail or registered mail in care of the
City Administrator at the following address:
City of Princeton
Attn: City Administrator
705 2nd Street North
Princeton MN 55371
DEVELOPER
By: Date:
Its:
CITY OF PRINCETON
By: Date:
Mayor
By: Date:
City Administrator
By: Date:
Finance Director
Development Agreement (Developer Installed Improvements)
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
XVII-9
STATE OF MINNESOTA )
( §
COUNTY OF MILLE LACS )
The foregoing Development Agreement dated y
was subscribed to before me in person this day of ,
20 , by
the , of ,
(Title) (Company)
a Minnesota corporation on its behalf, who is personally known to me (whose identify I
proved on the basis of , whose identity
I proved on the oath/affirmation of ,
a credible witness).
Notary Public
My commission expires
STATE OF MINNESOTA )
( §
COUNTY OF MILLE LACS )
The foregoing Development Agreement dated
was subscribed to before me in person this day of ,
20 , by , Mayor, and by
, City Administrator of the City of Princeton (a
Minnesota municipal corporation), who are personally known to me, on behalf of the
corporation and pursuant to the authority of the City Council.
Notary Public
My commission expires

City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VIII-1
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
City of Princeton
A. General Concept Stage
1. General information required for application:
a) The landowner’s name and address and his interest in the subject
property.
b) The applicant’s name and address if different from the landowner.
c) The names and addresses of al professional consultants who have contributed
to the development of the PUC plan being submitted, including
attorney, land planner, engineer, and surveyor.
d) Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the subject property
to effectuate the proposed PUD, including a statement of all legal,
beneficial, tenancy, and contractual interests held in or affecting the
subject property and including an up-to-date certified abstract of title or
registered property report, and such other evidence as the City Attorney
may requires to show the status of title or control of the subject property.
2. Present status:
a) The address and legal description of the subject property.
b) The existing zoning classification and present use of the subject property
and all lands within one thousand (1,000) feet of the subject property.
c) A map depicting the existing development of the subject property and
all land within one thousand (1,000) feet thereof and showing the precise
location of existing streets, property lines, easements, watermains,
and storm and sanitary sewers with invert elevations on and within one
hundred (100) feet of the subject property.
Planned Unit Development Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VIII-2
3. A written statement generally describing the proposed PUD and the market
which it is intended to serve and its demand showing its relationship to the
City’s Comprehensive Plan and how the proposed PUD is to be designed, arranged,
and operated in order to permit the development and use of neighboring
property in accordance with the applicable regulations of the City.
4. Site Conditions: Graphic reproductions of the existing site conditions at a
scale of one inch (1”) to one hundred feet (100’). All of the graphics should
be the same scale as the final plan to allow easy cross reference. The use of
overlays is recommended for clear reference.
a) Contours – minimum two (2) foot intervals.
b) Location, type, and extent of tree cover.
c) Slope analysis.
d) Location and extent of water bodies, wetlands, streams, and floodplains
within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property.
e) Significant rock outcroppings.
f) Existing drainage patterns.
g) Vistas and significant views.
h) Soil conditions as they affect development.
5. Schematic drawing of the proposed development concept including, but not
limited to, the general location of major circulation elements, public and
common open space, residential and other land uses.
6. A statement of the estimated total number of dwelling units proposed for the
PUD and a tabulation of the proposed approximate allocations of land use
expressed in acres and as a percent of the total project area, which shall include
at least the following:
a) Area devoted to residential uses.
b) Area devoted to residential use by building type.
c) Area devoted to office, commercial, or industrial uses.
d) Area devoted to common open space.
e) Area devoted to public open space.
Planned Unit Development Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VIII-3
f) Approximate area devoted to streets
g) Approximate area devoted to a number of off-street parking and loading
spaces and related access.
h) Approximate area and floor area devoted to commercial uses.
i) Approximate area and floor area devoted to industrial or office use.
7. When the PUD is to be constructed in stages during a time extending beyond
a single construction season, a schedule for the development of such stages
or units shall be submitted stating the approximate beginning and completion
date for each such stage or unit and the proportion of the total PUD public or
common open space and dwelling units to be provided or construction during
each such stage and the overall chronology of development to be followed
from stage to stage.
8. When the proposed PUD includes provisions for public or common open
space or service facilities, a statement describing the provision that is to be
made for the care and maintenance of such open space or service facilities,
shall be submitted. If it is proposed that such open space be owned and/or
maintained by an entity other than a governmental authority, copies of the
proposed articles of incorporation and bylaws of such entity shall be submitted.
9. General intents of any restrictive covenants that are to be recorded with respect
to property included in the proposed PUD.
10. Schematic utilities plans indicating placement of water and sanitary and
storm sewers.
11. The Planning Commission may excuse an applicant from submitting any
specific item of information or document required in this stage which it finds
to be unnecessary to the consideration of the specific proposal for PUD approval.
12. The Planning Commission may require the submission of any additional information
or documentation which it may find necessary or appropriate to full
consideration of the proposed PUD or any aspect or state thereof.
B. Development Stage
Planned Unit Development Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VIII-4
Development state submissions should depict and outline the proposed implementation
of the general concept stage for the PUD. Information from the general concept
stage may be included for background and to provide a basis for the submitted
plan. The Development Stage submission shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Zoning classification required for Development Stage submission and any
other public decisions necessary for implementation of the proposed plan.
2. Seven (7) 2’ x 3’ and fifteen (15) 11” x 17” sets of preliminary plans, drawn to
a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet (or scale
requested by the Planner/Zoning Administrator) containing at least the following
information:
a) Proposed name of the development (which shall not duplicate nor be
similar in pronunciation to the name of any plat theretofore recorded in
the County where the subject property is situated).
b) Property boundary lines and dimensions of the property and any significant
topographical or physical features of the property.
c) The location, size, use, and arrangement, including height in stories
and feet, and total square feet of ground area coverage and floor area
of proposed buildings, including mobile homes and existing buildings
which will remain, if any.
d) Location, dimensions, and number of all driveways, entrances, curb
cuts, parking stalls, loading spaces, access aisles, and all other circulation
elements, including bike and pedestrian; and the total site coverage
of all circulation elements.
e) Location, designation, and total area of all common open space.
f) Location, designation, and total area proposed to be conveyed or dedicated
for public open space, including parks, playgrounds, school sites,
and recreational facilities.
g) Proposed lots and blocks, if any, and numbering system.
h) The location, use, and size of structures, and other land uses on adjacent
properties.
i) Detailed sketches and provisions of proposed landscaping.
j) General grading and drainage plans for the developed PUD.
Planned Unit Development Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VIII-5
k) Any other information that may have been required by the Planning
Commission or Council in conjunction with the approval of the general
concept plan.
3. An accurate legal description of the entire area within the PUC for which final
development approval is sought.
4. A tabulation indicating the number of residential dwelling units by number of
bedrooms and expected population/housing profile.
5. A tabulation indicating the gross square footage, if any, of commercial and
industrial floor space by type of activity (i.e. drug store, dry cleaning, supermarket).
6. Preliminary architectural plans indicating use, floor plan, elevations, and exterior
wall finishes of proposed buildings, including mobile homes.
7. A detailed site plan, suitable for recording, showing the physical layout, design
and purpose of all streets, easements, right-of-ways, utility lines and facilities,
lots, blocks, public and common open space, general landscaping
plan, structures, including mobile homes, and uses. Easements shall be a
minimum of 16’ in width.
8. Preliminary grading and site alteration plan illustrating changes to existing
topography and natural site vegetation. The plan should clearly reflect the
site treatment and its conformance with the approved concept plan.
9. Sketch plan, preliminary, and final plat prepared in accordance with the City
Subdivision Ordinance.
10. A Soil Erosion Control Plan acceptable to watershed districts, Minnesota Department
of Natural Resources, Soil Conservation Service, the City engineer,
and/or any other agency with review authority clearly illustrating erosion control
measures to be used during construction and as permanent measures.
11. A statement summarizing all changes which have been made in any document,
plan data, or information previously submitted together with revised
copies of any such document, plan, or data.
12. Such other and further information as the Planning Commission, Planner/
Zoning Administrator, or Council shall find necessary to a full consideration
of the entire proposed PUD or any stage thereof.
Planned Unit Development Procedures
City of Princeton 705 2nd Street North
Subdivision Ordinance Princeton MN 55371
Rev 10-94 763-389-2040
VIII-6
13. The Planning Commission may excuse an applicant from submitting any
specific item of information or document required in this Section which it finds
to be unnecessary to the consideration of the specific proposal for the PUD
approval.
C. Final Plan Stage
After approval of a general concept plan for the PUD and approval of a development
stage plan for a section of the proposed PUD, the applicant will submit the
following material for review by City staff prior to issuance of a building permit:
1. Proof of recording any easements and restrictive covenants prior to the sale
of any land or dwelling unit within the PUD and of the establishment and activation
of any entity that is to be responsible for the management and maintenance
of any public or common open space or service facility.
2. All certificates, seals, and signatures required for the dedication of land and
recording of documents.
3. Final architectural working drawings of all structures.
4. Final engineering plans and specifications for streets, utilities, and other public
improvements, together with a Community/Developer Agreement for the
installation of such improvements and financial guarantees for the completion
of such improvements.
5. Any other plans, agreements, or specifications necessary for City staff to review
the proposed construction. All work must be in conformance with the
Minnesota State Building Code (see Section 300.00, Subd. 1).