
Park Rapids, MN Code of Ordinance


PARK RAPIDS, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-16 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 580, passed 2-27-2018










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  http://www.amlegal.com




TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Rules of interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Official time



   10.11   Reasonable time



   10.12   Ordinances repealed



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Effective date of ordinances



   10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.18   Copies of code



   10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules by reference



   10.20   Enforcement



   10.98   Supplemental administrative penalties



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   (A)   (1)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of
the city, as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into
component codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and
designated as the “city code,” for which designation “code of
ordinances,” “codified ordinances” or “code” may be substituted.



      (2)   Code title, chapter, and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
the components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.” 
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by
the number, such as “§ 10.01.”  Headings and captions used in this code
other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Generally.  Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or
implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and
application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.



   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation.  The construction of all
ordinances of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of
the context of the same ordinance:



      (1)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other
as if written “and/or,” whenever the context requires.



      (2)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute, code provisions or
ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as
well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.



      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting
the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter
genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense
shall include the future, if applicable.



      (4)   General term.  A general term following specific
enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless
expressly so limited.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY.  The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of
Park Rapids, Minnesota, as presently established or as amended by ordinance,
annexation or other legal actions at a future time.  The term CITY when used
in this code may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized
representatives.



      CITY ADMINISTRATOR.  The city employee responsible for
administering the city affairs.



      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This city code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



      COUNCIL.  The City Council.



      COUNTY.  County of Hubbard, Minnesota.



      GENDER.  The masculine shall include the feminine.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.  All
terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an
individual authorized by state law.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission, or department of Park Rapids unless
the context clearly requires otherwise.



      OWNER.  Includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common,
tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole
or of a part of the building or land.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons,
firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or
WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents
thereof.



      PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Every species of property, except real
property.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIDEWALK.  Any portion of a street between the curbline and the
adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of Minnesota.



      STREET or HIGHWAY.  The entire width between the boundary lines
of any way or place when any part therof is open to the use of the public, as
a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



      TENANT.  Includes any person holding written or oral lease of,
or who occupies the whole or part of the building or land, either alone or
with others.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



(Prior Code, § 1-2)



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in 1 section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.11  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain
all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein
enumerated and embraced.



   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.16  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter
or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.17  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.  This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued,
penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this
code.  The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments,
penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had
not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to
utilize highway right-of-ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted,
the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of
corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 10.18  COPIES OF CODE.



   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk for public inspection.  The Clerk shall provide a copy for sale for a
reasonable charge.



§ 10.19  ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.



   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code,
all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by
reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to
the contrary.



§ 10.20  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any licensed police officer of the City's Police Department,
or the County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to
enforce any provision of this code.



   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from
time to time, the City Clerk shall have the authority to administer and
enforce this code.  In addition, under that statutory authority, certain
individuals designated within the code or by the Clerk or City Council shall
have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified.  All
and any person or persons designated may issue a citation in lieu of arrest
or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.



   (C)   The City Clerk and any city official or employee designated by
this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code may
with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property or
resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect
or otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.



   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control
of a premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the
City Clerk, police officer, or any employee or official charged with the duty
of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable
cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of
competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before
conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property.  This warrant
shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made
as a result of the warrant.  No warrant shall be issued unless there be
probable cause to issue the warrant.  Probable cause occurs if the search is
reasonable.  Probable cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the
condition of a particular property.



   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of
property within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or
entrance to the property by the City Clerk or any other authorized city
officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code
enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being
complied with and to enforce these provisions.  Unreasonable refusal to
permit the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for
termination of any and all permits, licenses or city service to the
property.  Mailed notice shall be given to the licensee, owner, resident or
other person in control of the property, stating the grounds for the
termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of
the property shall be given an opportunity to appear before the City Clerk to
object to the termination before it occurs, subject to appeal of the Clerk's
decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled or special meeting.



   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
authority of the city to enter private property in urgent emergency
situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.



§ 10.98  SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.



   (A)   In addition to those administrative penalties established in
this code and the enforcement powers granted in § 10.20, the City Council is
authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a majority of the members of
the Council, supplemental administrative penalties.



   (B)   These administrative penalty procedures in this section are
intended to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost effective
and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of
certain provisions of this code.  The procedures are intended to be
voluntary on the part of those who have been charged with those offenses.



   (C)   Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions
of the code, other than those penalties established in the code or in
statutes that are adopted by reference, may be established from time to time
by resolution of a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to
be effective, an administrative penalty for a particular violation must be
established before the violation occurred.



   (D)   In the discretion of the peace officer, City Clerk, or other
person giving notice of an alleged violation of a provision of this code, in
a written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class mail to the
person who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving notice may
request the payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the violation
directly to the City Treasurer within 14 days of the notice of the
violation.  In the sole discretion of the person giving the notice of the
alleged violation, the time for payment may be extended an additional 14
days, whether or not requested by the person to whom the notice has been
given.  In addition to the administrative penalty, the person giving notice
may request in the notice to the alleged violator to adopt a compliance plan
to correct the situation resulting in the alleged violation and may provide
that if the alleged violator corrects the situation resulting in the alleged
violation within the time specified in the notice, that the payment of the
administrative penalty will be waived.



   (E)   At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty
is due, the person who has been given notice of an alleged violation may
request to appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment
of the penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine
to withdraw the request for payment or to renew the request for payment.
Because the payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary, there shall
be no appeal from the decision of the Council.



   (F)   At any time after the date the payment of the administrative
penalty is due, if the administrative penalty remains unpaid or the situation
creating the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city, through its
Attorney, may bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this
code.  Likewise, the city, in its discretion, may bring criminal charges in
the first instance, rather than requesting the payment of an administrative
penalty, even if a penalty for the particular violation has been established
by Council resolution.  If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any
requested correction of the situation resulting in the violation is
completed, no criminal charges shall be initiated by the city for the alleged
violation.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference,
which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed for any
petty offense which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of
not more than $300.



   (C)   In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor,
the costs of prosecution may be added.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.



   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.



   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or
in § 10.98, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any
provision of this code, the Council or any city official designated by it,
may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain,
correct or abate the violation.



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   CITY ADMINISTRATION



      31.   BOARDS, AGENCIES, AND COMMISSIONS



      32.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



      33.   LAW ENFORCEMENT



      34.   FINANCES



      35.   CITY POLICIES



      36.   FEE SCHEDULE



      37.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



      38.   EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND CHECKS



CHAPTER 30:  CITY ADMINISTRATION



Section




General Provisions




   30.01   City elections



   30.02   Terms of office



   30.03   Hearings




Council




   30.15   Regular meetings



   30.16   Special meetings



   30.17   Initial meeting of each year



   30.18   Public meetings



   30.19   Presiding officer



   30.20   Rules of procedure



   30.21   Appeals procedure



   30.22   Rights of presiding officer



   30.23   Minutes



   30.24   Order of business



   30.25   Quorum and voting



   30.26   Ordinances, resolutions, motions, petitions, and
communications



   30.27   Committees



   30.28   Suspension or amendment of rules



   30.29   Salaries of Mayor and Council members




City Administrator




   30.40   Appointment



   30.41   Duties



   30.42   Organizational chart



   30.43   Separate offices for City Clerk and Treasurer



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.01  CITY ELECTIONS.



   The municipal general election shall be held on the first Tuesday after
the first Monday in November in every even numbered year.



(Prior Code, § 2-1)  (Ord. 297, passed 1999)



§ 30.02  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   The Mayor shall be elected to a 2 year term of office, expiring every
even numbered year.  Council members shall be elected to 4 year terms of
office, with 2 member’s terms expiring every even numbered year.



(Prior Code, § 2-2)  (Ord. 297, passed 1999)



§ 30.03  HEARINGS.



   (A)   General.  Unless otherwise provided in this code, or by law,
every  public hearing required by law, ordinance, or resolution to be held
on any legislative or administrative matter shall be conducted in accordance
with this section.



   (B)   Notice.  Every hearing shall be preceded by notice of a
nature to comply with the provisions and authoritative interpretations of the
Minnesota Open Meeting law, M.S. §§ 13D.01 and 13D.02, as they may be
amended from time to time.  Failure to give notice or defects in it shall
not invalidate the proceedings if a good faith effort has been made to comply
with this division.



   (C)   Conduct of hearing.  At the hearing, each party in interest
shall have an opportunity to be heard and to present any evidence as is
relevant to the proceeding.  The Council may adopt rules governing the
conduct of hearings, records to be made, and other matters as it deems
necessary.



(Prior Code, § 2-3)




CITY COUNCIL




§ 30.15  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   (A)   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held  at least
monthly on the date and at the time set by the Council at its
re-organizational meeting.



   (B)   Any regular meeting falling upon a holiday shall be held on
the next following business day at the same time and place.



   (C)   All meetings, including special and adjourned meetings, shall
be held in a location determined by City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-31)



§ 30.16  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Mayor or any 2 members of the Council may call a special
meeting of the Council upon reasonable notice to each member of the Council.



   (B)   This notice shall be given personally to each member, or the
information shall be left at the member’s usual place of residence with
some responsible person.



   (C)   Similar notice shall be given to the newspapers and electronic
media servicing the city, as time shall permit.



   (D)   The notice shall be posted at the city hall.



(Prior Code, § 2-32)



§ 30.17  INITIAL MEETING OF EACH YEAR.



   At the first Council meeting in January of each year the Council shall:



   (A)   Designate the depositories of city funds;



   (B)   Designate the official newspaper;



   (C)   Choose 1 of the Council members as Acting Mayor, who shall
perform the duties of the Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor
from the city or, in case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, until a
successor has been appointed and qualifies;



   (D)   Appoint officers and employees and members of Boards,
Commissions and Committees as may be necessary; and



   (E)   Designate the date, time, and place of the regular monthly
meeting.



(Prior Code, § 2-33)



§ 30.18  PUBLIC MEETINGS.



   All Council meetings, including special and adjourned meetings and
meetings of Council Committees, shall be open to the public.



(Prior Code, § 2-34)



§ 30.19  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council.  In the
absence of the Mayor, the Acting Mayor shall preside.  In the absence of
both, the Clerk shall call the meeting to order and shall preside until the
Council members present at the meeting choose 1 of their number to act
temporarily as presiding officer.



(Prior Code, § 2-35)



§ 30.20  RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The presiding officer shall preserve order, enforce the rules
of procedure herein prescribed, and determine without debate, subject to
final decision of the Council on appeal, all questions of procedure and order.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by statute or by these rules, the
proceedings of the Council shall be conducted in accordance with Robert’s
Rules of Order, revised.



(Prior Code, § 2-36)



§ 30.21  APPEALS PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any member may appeal to the Council from a ruling of the
presiding officer.



   (B)   If the appeal is seconded, the member may speak once solely on
the question involved and the presiding officer may explain his or her
ruling, but no other Council member shall be sustained if it is approved by a
majority of the members present exclusive of the presiding officer.



(Prior Code, § 2-37)



§ 30.22  RIGHTS OF PRESIDING OFFICER.



   The presiding officer may make motions, second motions, or speak on any
question except that on demand of any Council member, he or she shall vacate
the chair and designate a Council member to preside temporarily.



(Prior Code, § 2-38)



§ 30.23  MINUTES.



   (A)   Who keeps minutes.  Minutes of each meeting shall be kept by
the Clerk or, in his or her absence by the Deputy Clerk.  In the absence of
both, the presiding officer shall appoint a secretary pro tem.  Ordinances,
resolutions, and claims need not be recorded in full in the minutes if they
appear in other permanent records of the Clerk and can be accurately
identified from the description given in the minutes.



   (B)   Approval.  The minutes of each meeting shall be reduced to
typewritten form, shall be signed by the Clerk, and copies thereof shall be
available to each Council member as soon as practicable after the meeting. 
At the next regular Council meeting following the delivery, approval of the
minutes shall be considered by the Council.  The minutes need not be read
aloud, but the presiding officer shall call for any additions or
corrections.  If there is no objection to a proposed addition or correction,
it may be made without a vote of the Council.  If there is an objection, the
Council shall vote upon the addition or correction.  If there are no
additions or corrections, the minutes shall stand approved.



(Prior Code, § 2-39)



§ 30.24  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   Order established.  Each meeting of the Council shall convene
at the time and place appointed therefor.  Council business shall be
conducted in the following order:



      (1)   Call to order;



      (2)   Roll call;



      (3)   Approval of minutes;



      (4)   Public hearing;



      (5)   Petitions, requests, and communications;



      (6)   Ordinances and resolutions;



      (7)   Reports of officers, Boards, and Committees;



      (8)   Unfinished business;



      (9)   New business;



      (10)   Miscellaneous; and



      (11)   Adjournment.



   (B)   Varying order.  The order of business may be varied by the
presiding officer; but all public hearings shall be held at the time
specified in the notice of hearing.



   (C)   Agenda.  An agenda of business for each regular Council
meeting shall be prepared and filed in the office of the Clerk not later than
2 days before the meeting.  The agenda shall be prepared in accordance with
the order of business and copies thereof shall be delivered to each Council
member as far in advance of the meeting as time for preparation will
permit.  No item of business shall be considered unless it appears on the
agenda for the meeting or is approved for addition to the agenda by a
unanimous vote of the Council members present.



(Prior Code, § 2-40)



§ 30.25  QUORUM AND VOTING.



   (A)   Quorum.  At all Council meetings, a majority of all the
Council members elected shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time.



   (B)   Voting.  The votes of the members on any question may be
taken in any manner which signifies the intention of the individual members,
and the votes of the members on any action taken shall be recorded on each
appropriation of money, except for payments of judgments, claims, and amounts
fixed by statute.  If any member is present but does not vote, the minutes,
as to his or her name, shall be marked “Present-Not Voting.”



   (C)   Votes required.  A majority vote of all members of the
Council shall be necessary for approval of any ordinance unless a larger
number is required by statute.  Except as otherwise provided by statute, a
majority vote of a quorum shall prevail in all other cases.



(Prior Code, § 2-41)



§ 30.26  ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, MOTIONS, PETITIONS, AND COMMUNICATIONS.



   (A)   Readings.



      (1)   Every ordinance and resolution shall be presented in
writing.



      (2)    Every ordinance shall receive 2 readings before the
Council prior to final adoption, but shall not be read twice at the same
meeting unless the rules are suspended for that purpose.



      (3)   An ordinance or resolution need not be read in full
unless a member of the Council requests a reading.



   (B)   Signing and publication proof.  Every ordinance and
resolution passed by the Council shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by
the Clerk, and filed by him or her in the ordinance or resolution book. 
Proof of publication of every ordinance shall be attached and filed with the
ordinance.



   (C)   Repeals and amendments.



      (1)   Every ordinance or resolution repealing a previous
ordinance or resolution or a section or subdivision thereof shall give the
number, if any, and the title of the ordinance or code number of the
ordinance or resolution to be repealed in whole or in part.



      (2)   Each ordinance or resolution or part thereof shall set
forth in full each amended section or subdivision as it will read with the
amendment.



   (D)   Motions, petitions, communications.



      (1)   Every motion shall be stated in full force before it is
submitted to a vote by the presiding officer and shall be recorded in the
minutes.



      (2)   Every petition or other communication addressed to the
Council shall be in writing and shall be read in full upon presentation to
the Council, unless the Council dispenses with the reading.



      (3)   Each petition or other communication shall be recorded
in the minutes by title and filed with the minutes in the office of the Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 2-42)



§ 30.27  COMMITTEES.



   (A)   Committees designated.



      (1)   There shall be the following standing committees:



         (a)   Personnel;



         (b)   Finance;



         (c)   Infrastructure; and



         (d)   Intergovernmental.



      (2)   Committee members shall be appointed by the Mayor at the
first regular Council meeting in January of each year.



   (B)   Membership.  Each Committee shall consist of 2 members of the
Council and the Chairperson of each Committee shall be designated by the
Mayor.  Each Committee member shall serve as appointed unless excused by a
majority of the members of the Council.  If the Committee does not provide
otherwise, Committee meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson. 



   (C)   Referrals and reports.  Any matter brought before the Council
for consideration may be referred by the presiding officer to the appropriate
Committee or to a special Committee appointed by him or her for a report and
recommendation before it is considered by the Council as a whole.  Minority
reports may be submitted.  Each Committee shall act promptly and faithfully
on any matter referred to it.



(Prior Code, § 2-43)



§ 30.28  SUSPENSION OR AMENDMENT OF RULES.



   The rules set out in this chapter, except where they reflect state law
requirements, may be suspended only by a 2/3 vote of the members present and
voting.



(Prior Code, § 2-44)



§ 30.29  SALARIES OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   (A)   Establishing Mayor and Council salaries.



      (1)   The City Council establishes the monthly lump sum salary
for the Mayor and Council members.



      (2)   The City Council determined the legal authority for the
action is contained in M.S. § 415.11, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Mayor and Council salaries.



      (1)   The salary for the Mayor and Council members shall be as
listed in the fee schedule.



      (2)   Payment of the monthly salary shall be processed at the
end of each month of service.



      (3)   The Mayor and Council members are not eligible for any
other compensation when serving on Boards, Commissions or Committees of the
city.



   (C)   Effective date.  The effective date of the salary changes for
the Mayor and Council members is January 1, 2017.



(Prior Code, § 2-45)  (Ord. 296, passed 1999; Am. Ord. 447, passed
9-27-2005; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-26-2016)




CITY ADMINISTRATOR




§ 30.40  APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   The office of City Administrator is hereby continued in the
City of Park Rapids.



   (B)   The City Administrator shall be appointed by the Council on
the basis of his or her training, experience, and administrative
qualifications.



   (C)   His or her appointment shall be made by a majority of the
Council for an indefinite term.



   (D)   The City Administrator may be removed only by a majority of
the Council. 



(Prior Code, § 2-62)



§ 30.41  DUTIES.



   The Administrator shall perform the following duties:



   (A)   Direct the administration as provided by Council action, and
state and federal statutes.  Coordinate with Council in administering city
affairs;



   (B)   Prepare reports and summaries relating to contemplated city
projects and/or improvements and submit them with recommendations as may be
required to the Council for study and subsequent action;



   (C)   Prepare an annual fiscal budget and capital improvement plan
for submission to the Council.  Maintain financial guidelines for the city
within the scope of the approved budget and capital program;



   (D)   Prepare the annual financial statement and perform other
duties as required in M. S. 412.141, as it may be amended from time to time;



   (E)   Attend and participate in all Council meetings.  Attend at
his or her discretion or by invitation other Committee and Commission
meetings;



   (F)   Coordinate municipal programs and activities as authorized by
the Council;



   (G)   Supervise the activities of all city department heads in the
administration of city policy with authority to effectively recommend their
employment and removal;



   (H)   Work in cooperation with the Council’s appointed attorney
and engineer;



   (I)   Prepare news releases, develop and discuss public relations
material with all concerned as required.  Maintain good public relations
with the general public;



   (J)   Consult with appointed officials and with other public or
private agencies as may be required;



   (K)   Be fully informed regarding federal, state, and county
programs which affect the city;



   (L)   Negotiate or delegate the negotiation of the terms and
conditions of employee labor contracts for presentation to the Council;



   (M)   Perform all duties required of him or her by ordinances or
resolutions adopted by the Council; and



   (N)   Recommend to the Council any other measures required for the
efficient administration of city affairs and promotion of community welfare.



(Prior Code, § 2-63)



§ 30.42  ORGANIZATIONAL CHART.







 



(Prior Code, § 2-64)  (Ord. 291, passed 1998; Am. Ord. 547, passed
1-28-2014)



§ 30.43  SEPARATE OFFICES FOR CITY CLERK AND TREASURER.



   The Office of City Clerk and City Treasurer will be separate Offices. 
Legal responsibilities for the separate offices are set forth in Minnesota
Statutes, federal law and the City of Park Rapids Personnel Policies I
include related Job Descriptions.



(Prior Code, § 2-65)  (Ord. 337, passed 2001)



CHAPTER 31:  BOARDS, AGENCIES AND COMMISSIONS



Section




Municipal Airport Advisory Commission




   31.01   Established



   31.02   Purpose



   31.03   Meetings



   31.04   Memberships



   31.05   Terms of office



   31.06   Officers



   31.07   Conflict of interest



   31.08   Functions, powers and duties



   31.09   Vacancies



   31.10   Removal from office; vacancies



   31.11   Reimbursement for expenses




Parks and Beautification Board




   31.40   Purpose



   31.41   Responsibilities of the Board



   31.42   Members and terms



   31.43   Composition of Board



MUNICIPAL AIRPORT ADVISORY COMMISSION



§ 31.01  ESTABLISHED.



   The Advisory Airport Commission was established by City Ordinance 104,
effective May 17, 1945.



(Prior Code, § 2-121)  (Ord. 104, passed 1945)



§ 31.02  PURPOSE.



   To serve as an Advisory Commission to the City Council.  To plan,
promote and encourage the development and utilization of the municipal
airport.



§ 31.03  MEETINGS.



   The Commission shall meet from time to time as determined by the
Commission. The Commission may meet more often upon the call of its
Chairperson or a majority of its members.



(Prior Code, § 2-123)



§ 31.04  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Advisory Airport Commission shall consist of 5 members
appointed by the City Council.



   (B)   The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall also
appoint 1 ex-officio member from the membership of the City Council to serve
as liaison with the Advisory Airport Commission.  The ex- officio member
shall be a voting member.



§ 31.05  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   (A)   Terms of office shall be for 3 years, provided however, that
in first establishment of the Commission, 1 member was appointed for a 1-year
term, 1 for a 2-year term and 1 for a 3-year term.



   (B)   The Mayor shall appoint 1 Councilperson as ex-officio member
to the Advisory Airport Commission.  The ex-officio member shall be
appointed for a 1-year term.



§ 31.06  OFFICERS.



   (A)   At the first meeting of each new year, the Commission shall
elect from among those of its members, a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. 
The Commission may create such other offices as it may determine appropriate.



   (B)   The secretary to the City Planner shall serve as the secretary
to the Advisory Airport Commission.



§ 31.07  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   If any appointed Commission member shall find that private or personal
interests are involved in any manner coming before the Commission, the member
shall disqualify himself or herself from taking part in action on the matter,
or the member may be disqualified by the Chairperson of the Commission.



§ 31.08  FUNCTIONS, POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The functions, powers and duties of the Advisory Airport Commission
shall be, in general:



   (A)   Serve as an Advisory Commission to the City Council.



   (B)   Develop and maintain a 5-year capital improvement plan.



   (C)   Recommend capital improvement projects to the City Council,
including recommendations for the zoning and protection of aerial approaches.



   (D)   Advise the City Council with respect to the airport budget,
charges and other financial arrangements for the use of the airport property.



   (E)   Consult and cooperate with the federal, state and other
agencies to attain financial assistance with airport projects.



   (F)   Recommend airport expenditures for submission to the City
Council for approval and payment authorization.



   (G)   Develop, monitor, review and recommend fixed base operator’s
agreement.



   (H)   Develop, monitor, review and recommend airport management
lease agreement.



§ 31.09  VACANCIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Chairperson of the Commission to notify the
City Council promptly of any vacancies occurring in the membership, and the
City Council shall fill such vacancy within 60 days for the unexpired term of
the original appointment.



§ 31.10  REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; VACANCIES.



   Any member of the Commission may be removed from office for just cause
and on written charges by a 2/3 vote of the entire City Council, but the
member shall be entitled to a public hearing before the vote is taken.  In
addition, any member may be removed after 3 consecutive unexcused absences at
Airport Commission meetings without action by the City Council, according to
rules adopted by the Airport Commission.



§ 31.11  REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES.



   Members of the Commission shall receive no salaries or fees for their
services thereon.  Members of the Commission, who incur expenditures related
to travel, lodging and meals, while on official business for the Commission
will be reimbursed by the city.  Mileage will be reimbursed according to IRS
regulations.  Meals and lodging will be reimbursed upon submission of a paid
receipt from the motel(s) and/or restaurant(s).



PARKS AND BEAUTIFICATION BOARD



§ 31.40  PURPOSE.



   The Parks and Beautification Board shall be empowered to advise the
City Council on matters relating to improving the existing parks, and/or
development of new parks, and the overall beautification of the City of Park
Rapids.



(Prior Code, § 2-147)



§ 31.41  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE BOARD.



   (A)   Annually report to the City Council on their
accomplishments.  This report shall be made to the City Council at the
second meeting in May of each respective year.



   (B)    Prepare an annual report for the City Council outlining
applicable plans and specifications, for future park improvements and
beautification plans, including those associated with the plans.  This
report shall be made to the City Council at the second meeting in May of each
year, to allow for incorporation of any anticipated expenditures and/or
capital improvements into the city budget.



   (C)   Frequently visit the city parks to evaluate, assess and
determine what improvements if any are needed.



   (D)   Develop and recommend methods to stimulate positive public
interest in the parks and in the beautification of the entire city.



   (E)   Develop and recommend feasible methods of discouraging
vandalism and destruction in the city parks.



   (F)   Serve as a forum for the public to voice their opinions
regarding the city parks and the beautification of the entire city.



   (G)   Encourage dissemination of information to organizations
interested in the parks and the beautification of Park Rapids.



   (H)   Coordinate efforts with interested organizations.



(Prior Code, § 2-148)



§ 31.42  MEMBERS AND TERMS.



   (A)   The Board shall consist of 7 members.  Members of the Board
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with Council approval, for staggered terms
of 3 years, except that any person appointed to fill a vacancy occurring
prior to the expiration of the term to which his or her predecessor was
appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of that term.  Upon
expiration of his or her term of office, the member shall continue to serve
until a successor is appointed.  In addition to the 7 members, the Mayor
shall appoint, with Council approval, 1 member of the City Council to serve
as an ex-officio member of the Board, and shall have voting privileges.  Two
city employees shall also serve on the Board, at the appointment of the City
Administrator.



   (B)   Any member of the Board may be removed from office for just
cause with written charges or after 3 consecutive unexcused absences at Board
meetings by a 2/3 vote of the entire City Council, but the member shall be
entitled to public comment before the vote is taken.  It shall be the duty
of the Chairperson of the Board to notify the City Council promptly of any
changes occurring in membership, and the City Council shall take action as is
appropriate.



(Prior Code, § 2-149)  (Ord. 361, passed 2-26-2002; Am. Ord. 427, passed
4-12-2005; Am. Ord. 444, passed 8-9-2005; Am. Ord. 553, passed 2-10-2015)



§ 31.43  COMPOSITION OF BOARD.



   (A)   Membership.  Shall be comprised of members of the community
who express an interest in maintaining, enhancing and developing city parks
and beautifying the City of Park Rapids.



   (B)   Chairperson.  The Board shall elect from its members, a
Chairperson who shall preside over the meetings and shall have the power to
call a meeting of the Board at any time.



   (C)   Vice-Chairperson.  The Board shall elect from its members a
Vice-Chairperson to chair the meetings in the absence of the Chairperson.



   (D)   Secretary.  The Board shall elect from its members, a
secretary who shall record the minutes of each meeting and submit a copy of
the minutes to the City Clerk for distribution to the City Council.



   (E)   Compensation.  There shall be no compensation for individuals
serving on the Board.



(Prior Code, § 2-150)  (Ord. 315, passed 3-28-2000)



CHAPTER 32:  FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION



Section




Fire Department




   32.01   Fire Department continued



   32.02   Selection



   32.03   Chief to have Fire Marshal duties



   32.04   Duties of Chief



   32.05   Records



   32.06   Practice drills



   32.07   Assistant Chiefs



   32.08   Firefighters



   32.09   Loss of membership



   32.10   Compensation



   32.11   Minimum pay



   32.12   Relief association



   32.13   Interference with Department




Fire Code




   32.25   Adoption



   32.26   Enforcement



   32.27   Explosive and flammable liquids district



   32.28   Modifications



   32.29   Appeals




Burning




   32.40   Definitions



   32.41   Burning restrictions and permits



 



   32.99   Penalty



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.01  FIRE DEPARTMENT CONTINUED.



   There is hereby continued in this city a volunteer Fire Department
consisting of a Chief, 2 Assistant Chiefs, and not more than 23 firefighters.



(Prior Code, § 30-26)



§ 32.02  SELECTION.



   The Chief of the Fire Department and the Assistant Chiefs shall be
elected annually by the members of the Department.  The Chief shall be
confirmed by the Council.  Each shall hold office for 1 year and until his
or her successor has been duly elected, except that he or she may be removed
by the Council for cause after a public hearing, or he or she may be removed
by the members pursuant to the by-laws of the Department.  Firefighters and
probationary firefighters shall be appointed by the members of the
Department.  All new members of the Department shall be confirmed by the
Council. Firefighters shall continue as members of the Department during good
behavior and may be removed for cause by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 30-27)



§ 32.03  CHIEF TO HAVE FIRE MARSHAL DUTIES.



   The Chief shall have the duties of a Fire Marshal.  He or she shall be
charged with the enforcement of all ordinances aimed at fire prevention.  He
or she shall have full authority to inspect all premises and to cause the
removal or abatement of all fire hazards.



(Prior Code, § 30-28)



§ 32.04  DUTIES OF CHIEF.



   (A)   The Chief shall have control of all the fire fighting
apparatus and shall be solely responsible for its care and condition.



   (B)   He or she shall from time to time make reports to the Council
on the condition of the equipment, the inventory of the equipment, and the
needs of the Fire Department.



   (C)   He or she may submit reports and recommendations at any
meeting of the Council, and he or she shall report each suspension by him or
her of a member of the Fire Department at the first meeting of the Council
following the suspension.



   (D)   He or she shall be responsible for the proper training and
discipline of the members of the Fire Department, and may suspend any member
for refusal or neglect to obey orders pending final action on his or her
discharge or retention pursuant to the by-laws of the Department.



(Prior Code, § 30-29)



§ 32.05  RECORDS.



   The Chief shall keep in convenient form a complete record of all fires.
The record shall include the time of the alarm, location of fire, cause of
fire (if known), type of building, name of owner and tenant, purpose for
which occupied, value of building and contents, members of the Department
responding to the alarm, and any other information as he or she may deem
advisable or as may be required from time to time by the Council or state
insurance department.



(Prior Code, § 30-30)



§ 32.06  PRACTICE DRILLS.



   The Chief shall, when the weather permits, hold a monthly practice
drill of at least 1 hour’s duration for the Fire Department and shall give
or arrange for instructions to the firefighters in approved methods of fire
fighting and fire prevention.



(Prior Code, § 30-31)



§ 32.07  ASSISTANT CHIEFS.



   The Chief shall establish a chain of command between the 2 Assistant
Chiefs.  In the absence or disability of the Chief, the highest ranking
Assistant Chief present shall perform all the functions and exercise all the
authority of the Chief.



(Prior Code, § 30-32)



§ 32.08  FIREFIGHTERS.



   (A)   The Assistant Chiefs and firefighters shall be able-bodied and
not less than 18 years of age. 



   (B)   They shall become members of the Fire Department only after a
6 months’ probationary period. 



   (C)   The Fire Department may require that each candidate, before he
or she may become a probationary firefighter, must satisfy certain minimum
requirements of height, weight, education, and any other qualification which
may be specified by the Fire Department and that he or she must pass
satisfactorily a physical examination.



(Prior Code, § 30-33)



§ 32.09  LOSS OF MEMBERSHIP.



   Absence of any firefighter from 3 consecutive meetings or drills,
unless excused by the Chief, shall be cause for removal from the Department.



(Prior Code, § 30-34)



§ 32.10  COMPENSATION.



   The members and officers of the Fire Department shall receive
compensation for their services.  The amount of the compensation shall be
established by resolution of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 30-35)



§ 32.11  MINIMUM PAY.



   In computing compensation for fires and practice drills, 1 hour shall
be considered as the minimum to be paid to any firefighter or officer.



(Prior Code, § 30-36)



§ 32.12  RELIEF ASSOCIATION.



   The members and officers of the Fire Department may organize themselves
into a Firemen’s Relief Association in accordance with law.



(Prior Code, § 30-37)



§ 32.13  INTERFERENCE WITH DEPARTMENT.



   No person shall give or make, or cause to be given or made, a fire
alarm without probable cause, or neglect or refuse to obey any reasonable
order of the Chief at a fire, or interfere with the Fire Department in the
discharge of its duties.



(Prior Code, § 30-38)  Penalty, see § 32.99



FIRE CODE



§ 32.25  ADOPTION.



   There is hereby continued, for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion,
that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code, Abbreviated Edition,
recommended by the American Insurance Association, of which code not less
than 3 copies have been and now are filed in the office of the Clerk of the
City of Park Rapids and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully
as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the limits of the City of Park Rapids.



(Prior Code, § 30-61)



§ 32.26  ENFORCEMENT.



   The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the Chief of the Fire
Department.



(Prior Code, § 30-62)



§ 32.27  EXPLOSIVE AND FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS DISTRICT.



   The limits referred to in § 53b of the code hereby adopted, in which
storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, the limits referred
to in § 74a of the code hereby adopted, in which storage of Class I liquids
in outside above-ground tanks is prohibited, and the limits referred to in §
114 of the code hereby adopted, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum
gas is restricted are hereby established as follows:  within the corporate
boundaries of the City of Park Rapids.



(Prior Code, § 30-63)



§ 32.28  MODIFICATIONS.



   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the code hereby adopted upon application in writing by the
owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized agent, when there are
practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety
secured, and substantial justice done.  The particulars of the modification
when granted or allowed and the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department
thereon shall be entered upon the records of the Department and a signed copy
shall be furnished the applicant.



(Prior Code, § 30-64)



§ 32.29  APPEALS.



   Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and
meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the
applicant may appeal from the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to
the City Council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.



(Prior Code, § 30-65)



BURNING



§ 32.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OPEN FIRE or OPEN BURNING.  A fire burning in matter, whether
concentrated or disbursed, which is not  contained within a fully-enclosed
firebox, structure or vehicle and from which the products of combustion are
admitted directly to the open atmosphere without passing through a stack,
duct or chimney.



   RECREATIONAL FIRE OR CAMPFIRE.  A fire set for cooking, warming, or
ceremonial purposes which is not more than 3 feet in diameter by 3 feet high
and has had the ground 5 feet from the base of the fire cleared of all
combustible material.



   SNOW COVERED.  The ground has a continuous, unbroken cover of snow, to
a depth of 3 inches or more, surrounding the immediate area of the fire
sufficient to keep the fire from spreading.



(Prior Code, § 30-81)



§ 32.41  BURNING RESTRICTIONS AND PERMITS.



   (A)   Open burning within the city limits of the City of Park Rapids
is prohibited, except as provided for in division (B) below of this
section.  Burning barrels are prohibited within the city limits of the City
of Park Rapids, as well as the burning of grass cover on yards and lots.



   (B)   The burning of vegetative debris, consisting of grass
clippings, leaves, branches, and wood on private property is permitted under
the following conditions:



      (1)   Burning will be allowed only with a valid permit from
the office of the City Administrator.  No burning shall be allowed before 6
p.m. or after 11 p.m.  Burning permits are not required when the ground is
snow-covered, provided there is compliance with the remainder of the
conditions imposed by this subchapter.



      (2)   A responsible person shall be in constant attendance
until the fire is completely extinguished.



      (3)   The fire shall not be less than 100 feet from any
structure, building, hedge, roadway or any other permanent improvement, and
shall be located not less than 100 feet from any property line.



      (4)   No open fire shall be placed on the city street,
boulevard, or on any public property by private citizens.



      (5)   No open burning shall take place during an air pollution
alert warning or emergency  declared by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency (MPCA).



      (6)   The City Fire Chief or Department of Natural Resources
(DNR) may temporarily discontinue burning within the city limits due to
unsafe conditions including, but not limited to, high winds or drought.



      (7)   No open burning shall take place during a high wind or
when a traffic hazard may be created thereby in a nearby street.



   (C)   Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the
Fire Department of the City of Park Rapids may schedule and select certain
lots or structures for controlled burns for demolition or training purposes.



(Prior Code, § 30-82)  Penalty, see § 32.99



§ 32.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.



   (B)   Fire Code.



      (1)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of
§§ 32.25et seq. hereby adopted or violate or fail to comply with any order
made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate
or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who
shall fail to comply with an order as affirmed or modified by the City
Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance
respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor.



      (2)   The imposition of 1 penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all persons shall be
required to correct or remedy any violations or defects within a reasonable
time; and when not otherwise specified, each 10 days that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.



      (3)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held
to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.



(Prior Code, § 30-66)



   (C)   Burning.  Any person violating any portion of §§ 32.40et
seq. shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to
a fine of not more than $700 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days or both,
as amended by the legislature of the State of Minnesota.  The officer
issuing any tickets pursuant to this subchapter may, in his or her
discretion, write upon the face of the tab charge “first
offender/payable,” rendering the matter a petty misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 30-83)



CHAPTER 33:  LAW ENFORCEMENT



Section




Police Department




   33.01   Establishment



   33.02   Chief of Police



   33.03   Duties of police



   33.04   Uniform and badge



   33.05   Extra police




Criminal History Checks




   33.20   Persons subject to criminal history checks



   33.21   Applications



   33.22   Waiver statement to be on applications



   33.23   Information on application



   33.24   Referral to Chief of Police



   33.25   Verification



   33.26   Other investigations



   33.27   Effective date



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 33.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   A Police Department is hereby continued.



   (B)   The head of the Department shall be known as the Chief of
Police and the number of additional members of the Department, together with
the ranks and titles, shall be determined by the Council by resolution.



   (C)   The compensation to be paid members of the Police Department
shall be fixed by the Council.



   (D)   Members of the Department shall be appointed by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 38-26)



§ 33.02  CHIEF OF POLICE.



   The Chief of Police shall have supervision and control of the Police
Department and its members.  He or she shall be responsible to the Council
for law enforcement and for property of the city used by the Department.  He
or she shall be responsible for the proper training and discipline of the
members of the Department.  He or she shall be responsible for the keeping
of adequate records and he or she shall report to the Council on the needs of
the Department and its work.  Every member of the Department subordinate to
the Chief shall obey the instructions of the Chief and any superior
officer.  The Council shall designate 1 of the police officers as Acting
Chief, who shall have all the powers and duties of the Chief during his or
her absence or disability.



(Prior Code, § 38-27)



§ 33.03  DUTIES OF POLICE.



   Members of the Police Department shall enforce the ordinances and laws
applicable to the city, bring violators before the county court, and make
complaints for offenses coming to their knowledge.  Members of the Police
Department shall serve processes on behalf of the city and shall serve
notices as may be required by the Council or other authority.  When the city
is not a party to the proceedings involved in the process or notice, the
officer shall collect the same fees as provided by law for town constables. 
All fees shall be paid into the city treasury.



(Prior Code, § 38-28)



§ 33.04  UNIFORM AND BADGE.



   Each member of the Department shall, while on duty, wear a suitable
badge and uniform furnished by the city, except that the Chief may authorize
the performance of specific duties while not in uniform.  When a member
terminates his or her membership in the Department, he or she shall
immediately deliver to the city his or her badge, uniform, and all other
property of the city in his or her possession.



(Prior Code, § 38-29)



§ 33.05  EXTRA POLICE.



   In case of riot or other law enforcement emergency, the Council may
appoint for a specified time as many special police officers as may be
necessary for the maintenance of law and order.  During the term of
appointment, the special police officers shall have only those powers and
perform only those duties as shall be specifically assigned by the Chief of
Police.



(Prior Code, § 38-30)



CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS



§ 33.20  PERSONS SUBJECT TO CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS.



   (A)   The City Council of the City of Park Rapids hires, appoints
and contracts with individuals for the following positions:  all staff
positions; volunteer firefighters; citizens on patrol (COPS) and other
entities designated as neighborhood watch programs; City Boards and
Committees; and independent contractors hired to perform specific contracts
or services.



   (B)   In addition, the city accepts filings for those wishing to run
for elective offices and issues various licenses and permits pursuant to the
City Code.



(Prior Code, § 38-31)  (Ord. 302, passed 6-13-1999)



§ 33.21  APPLICATIONS.



   Individuals applying for the above list of activities in § 33.20 will
complete an application with the City Clerk or City Administrator with
respect to city offices and with directors of the other agencies mentioned in
the above list in § 33.20.



(Prior Code, § 38-32)  (Ord. 302, passed 6-13-1999)



§ 33.22  WAIVER STATEMENT TO BE ON APPLICATIONS.



   The following waiver language shall appear on all applications.



Everything that I have stated in this application is correct to the best of
my knowledge.  I understand that you will retain this application whether or
not it is approved.  You are authorized to conduct a criminal history check.



(Prior Code, § 38-33)  (Ord. 302, passed 6-13-1999)



§ 33.23  INFORMATION ON APPLICATION.



   Applications submitted to the Chief of Police for background checks
must include the following information:



   (A)   Name, place and date of birth, and residence address;



   (B)   Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name
other than his or her present name, and if so, the names so used and any
additional information concerning dates and places where those names were
used;



   (C)   Whether the applicant is married or single. If married, the
name, place and date of birth, and residence of the applicant’s present
spouse;



   (D)   Whether the applicant, applicant’s spouse, or a parent,
brother, sister or child of either of them has been convicted of any felony,
crime or violation or any city ordinance other than traffic matters and petty
misdemeanors.  If so, the applicant shall furnish information regarding the
time, place, and offense for which convictions were had; and



   (E)   Any other information as the city or other agency may require.



(Prior Code, § 38-34)  (Ord. 302, passed 6-13-1999)



§ 33.24  REFERRAL TO CHIEF OF POLICE.



   All applications will be referred to the Chief of Police for
verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the application.
Investigations shall include, but not be limited to, a criminal history
records check.  The Chief of Police will cause to be made an investigation
of the information requested in § 33.23 as shall be necessary and a list of
all violations of federal or state law or municipal ordinance and other facts
that weigh upon the public interest in considering an application.



(Prior Code, § 38-35)  (Ord. 302, passed 6-13-1999)



§ 33.25  VERIFICATION.



   Upon investigation and verification of the facts set forth in the
application, the City Clerk or City Administrator may use the data compiled
to approve or deny an applicant’s application.



(Prior Code, § 38-36)  (Ord. 302, passed 6-13-1999)



§ 33.26  OTHER INVESTIGATIONS.



   Nothing in this subchapter will prohibit the Chief of Police from
conducting other investigations and background checks including driver’s
license checks and credit checks as authorized by state or federal law.



(Prior Code, § 38-37)  (Ord. 302, passed 6-13-1999)



§ 33.27  EFFECTIVE DATE



   The effective date of this subchapter will be its date of publication.



(Prior Code, § 38-38)  (Ord. 302, passed 6-13-1999)



CHAPTER 34:  FINANCES



Section




Lodging Tax




   34.01   Definitions



   34.02   Imposition of tax



   34.03   Collections



   34.04   Exceptions and exemptions



   34.05   Advertising of no tax



   34.06   Payment and returns



   34.07   Examination of return, adjustments, notices, and demands



   34.08   Refunds



   34.09   Failure to file a return



   34.10   Administration of tax



   34.11   Examination of records



   34.12   Violations



   34.13   Use of proceeds



   34.14   Private or nonpublic data



 



   34.99   Penalty



LODGING TAX



§ 34.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural form include the singular and words in
the singular include the plural form.  The word SHALL is always mandatory
and not merely directory.



   LODGER.  The person obtaining lodging from an operator.



   LODGING.  The furnishing for a consideration of lodging by a hotel,
motel, bed and breakfast, or public/private campground, except where the
lodging shall be a continuous period of 30 days or more to the same
lodger(s).  The furnishing of rooms owned by religious, educational, or
nonprofit organizations for self-sponsored activities shall not constitute
LODGING for purposes of this chapter.



   OPERATOR.  The person who is the proprietor of the lodging facility,
whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, licensee, or any other
capacity.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
estate, receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate, or
any other combination of individuals.  Whenever the term PERSON is used in
any provision of this chapter prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term as
applied to a corporation, association or partnership shall mean the officers
or partners thereof, as the case may be.



   RENT.  The total consideration valued in money charged for the lodging
whether paid in money or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for
services rendered in connection with furnishing lodging other than the room
charge itself.



(Prior Code, § 50-26)  (Ord. 248, passed 1992)



§ 34.02  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   Pursuant to M.S. § 469.190, as it may be amended from time to time,
there is hereby imposed a tax on the rent charged by an operator for
providing lodging to any person.  The lodging tax program shall commence on
1-1-1992.  A tax of 3% of the rent charged shall be imposed on the effective
date of this chapter. The tax collected by the operator shall be satisfied
only by payment to the city of the amount levied by this chapter.  In no
case shall the tax imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the amount
of tax which the operator is authorized and required by this program to
collect from the lodger.



(Prior Code, § 50-27)  (Ord. 248, passed 1992)



§ 34.03  COLLECTIONS.



   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the time
the rent is paid.  The tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust
by the operator for the city.  The amount of tax shall be separately stated
from the rent charged for the lodging and those persons paying the tax shall
receive a receipt of payment from the operator.



(Prior Code, § 50-28)  (Ord. 248, passed 1992)  Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.04  EXCEPTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Exceptions.  No tax shall be imposed on rent for lodging paid
by any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of
express provisions of federal law or international law.



   (B)   Exemptions.  An exemption shall be granted to any person as
to whom or whose occupancy it is beyond the power of the city to tax.  No
exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time the
rent is collected and the claim shall be made in writing and under penalty of
perjury on forms provided by the city.  All claims shall be forwarded to the
city when the returns and collections are submitted as required by this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 50-29)  (Ord. 248, passed 1992)



§ 34.05  ADVERTISING OF NO TAX.



   It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state
to the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any
part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not
be added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be
refunded.



(Prior Code, § 50-30)  (Ord. 248, passed 1992)  Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.06  PAYMENT AND RETURNS.



   (A)   (1)   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid
monthly by the operator to the city not later than 20 days after the end of
the month in which the taxes were collected.



      (2)   At the time of payment, the operator shall submit a
return upon forms and containing information as the city may require.



   (B)   The return shall contain the following minimum information:



      (1)   The total amount of rent collected for lodging during
the period covered by the return;



      (2)   The total amount of exceptions/exemptions;



      (3)   The amount of tax required to be collected and due for
the period;



      (4)   The signature of the person filing the return or that of
his or her agent duly authorized in writing;



      (5)   The period covered by the return; and



      (6)   The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to
the lodging tax.



   (C)   The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect
to any reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed by this program
previously paid as a result of any transaction the consideration for which
became uncollectible during the reporting period, but only in proportion to
the portion of the consideration which became uncollectible.



(Prior Code, § 50-31)  (Ord. 248, passed 1992)  Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.07  EXAMINATION OF RETURN, ADJUSTMENTS, NOTICES AND DEMANDS.



   The city shall, after a return is filed, examine the same and make any
investigation or examination of the records and accounts of the person making
the return deemed necessary for determining its correctness.  The tax
computed on the basis of the examination shall be the tax to be paid.  If
the tax due is found to be greater than that paid, the excess shall be paid
to the city within 10 days after receipt of a notice thereof given either
personally or sent by registered mail to the address shown on the return. 
If the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be
refunded to the person who paid the tax to the city within 10 days after
determination of the refund or credited against the amount due for the next
month.



(Prior Code, § 50-32)  (Ord. 248, passed 1992)



§ 34.08  REFUNDS.



   Any person may apply to the city for a refund of taxes paid in excess
of the amount legally due for that period, provided that no application for a
refund shall be considered unless filed within 1 year after the tax was paid,
or within 1 year from the filing of the return, whichever period is the
longer.  The city shall examine the claim and make and file written findings
thereon denying or allowing the claim in whole or in part and shall mail a
notice thereof by registered mail to the person at the address stated upon
the return. If the claim is allowed in whole or in part, the city shall
credit the amount of the allowance against any taxes due under this chapter
from the claimant and the balance of the allowance, if any, shall be paid by
the city to the claimant.



(Prior Code, § 50-33)  (Ord. 248, passed 1992)



§ 34.09  FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.



   (A)   If any operator required by this chapter to file a return
shall fail to do so within the time prescribed or shall make, willfully or
otherwise, an incorrect, false or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon
written notice and demand, file the return or corrected return within 5 days
of receipt of the written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax due
on the basis thereof.  If the person shall fail to file the return or
corrected return, the city shall make a return or corrected return for the
person from the knowledge and information as the city can obtain, and assess
a tax on the basis thereof, which tax (less payments theretofore made on
account of the tax for the taxable period covered by the return) shall be
paid upon within 5 days of the receipt of written notice and demand for the
payment.  Any return or assessment made by the city shall be prima facie
correct and valid, and the person shall have the burden of establishing its
incorrectness or invalidity in any action or proceeding with respect thereto.



   (B)   If any portion of a tax imposed by this program, including
penalties thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be
paid, the city may institute legal action as may be necessary to recover the
amount due plus interest, penalties, and the cost and disbursements of any
action.



   (C)   Upon a showing of good cause, the city may grant an operator
one 30 day extension of time within which to file a return and make payment
of taxes as required by this chapter provided that interest during the period
of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of 10% per annum.



(Prior Code, § 50-34)  (Ord. 248, passed 1992)  Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.10  ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.



   The City Treasurer shall administer and enforce the assessment and
collection of the taxes imposed by this chapter.  The City Treasurer shall
cause to be prepared blank forms for the returns and other documents required
by this chapter and shall distribute the same throughout the city and furnish
them upon application; but failure to receive or secure them shall not
relieve any person from any obligation required under this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 50-36)  (Ord. 248, passed 1992)



§ 34.11  EXAMINATION OF RECORDS.



   The city may examine the books, papers, and records of any operator in
order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made, to
ascertain the tax as provided in this chapter.  Every operator is directed
and required to give to the city the means, facilities and opportunity for
examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized.



(Prior Code, § 50-37)  (Ord. 248, passed 1992)  Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.12  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person who shall willfully fail to make a return required by this
program, or shall fail to pay the tax after written demand for payment, or
who shall fail to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or interest
imposed by this chapter after written demand for payment, or who shall refuse
to permit the city to examine the books, records and papers under its
control, or who shall willfully make an incomplete, false or fraudulent
return, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 50-38)  (Ord. 248, passed 1992)  Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.13  USE OF PROCEEDS.



   (A)   Ninety-five percent of the proceeds obtained from the
collection of taxes pursuant to this chapter shall be used in accordance with
M. S. § 469.190, as it may be amended from time to time, to fund a local
convention/tourism bureau for the purposes of marketing and promoting the
city as a tourist/convention center.  The city may retain a maximum of 5%
for administrative costs.



   (B)   The city hereby designates the Park Rapids Convention and
Visitors Bureau, Inc., as the recipient of the tax proceeds collected
hereunder.



   (C)   Violation of this article shall be considered a misdemeanor
and punished by a fine of $700 or 90 days in jail, or both.



(Prior Code, § 50-39)  (Ord. 248, passed 1992; Am. Ord. 333, passed 2000) 
Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.14  PRIVATE OR NONPUBLIC DATA.



   Data collected from individuals or persons pursuant to this chapter
shall be considered private data on individuals or nonpublic data pursuant to
M.S. §§ 13.01 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 50-40)  (Ord. 248, passed 1992)



§ 34.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   If any tax imposed by this article is not paid within the time
herein specified for payment, or any extension thereof, there shall be added
thereto a specific penalty equal to 10% of the amount remaining unpaid.



   (B)   In the case of any failure to make and file a return within
the time prescribed by this chapter, unless it is shown that the failure is
not due to willful neglect, there shall be added to the tax, in addition to
the 10% specific penalty provided in division (A) above, 10% of the amount
remaining unpaid if the failure is not for more than 30 days, with an
additional 5% for each additional 30 days or fraction thereof during which
failure continues, not exceeding 25% in the aggregate.  If the penalty as
computed does not exceed $10, a minimum penalty of $10 shall be assessed. 
The amount so added to any tax shall be collected at the same time and in the
same manner and as a part of the tax unless the tax has been paid before the
discovery of the negligence, in which case the amount so added shall be
collected in the same manner as the tax.



   (C)   If any person willfully files a false or fraudulent return or
willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any tax or payment
thereof, there shall also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal to 50% of
any tax (less amounts paid on the basis of false or fraudulent return) found
due for the period to which the return related.  The penalty imposed by this
division shall be collected as part of the tax, and shall be in addition to
any other penalties provided by this chapter.



   (D)   All payments received shall be credited first to penalties,
next to interest, and then to the tax due.



(Prior Code, § 50-35)  (Ord. 248, passed 1992)



CHAPTER 35:  CITY POLICIES



Section




Purchasing Policy




   35.01   Purchasing agent duties, powers, and dollar limits



   35.02   Emergency purchasing and contracting



   35.03   City employee purchasing



   35.04   Contracts from $2,500 to $25,000



   35.05   Contracts from $25,000 to $100,000



   35.06   Contracts of $100,000 or greater



   35.07   Contracts for local improvements paid for by special
assessments of $50,000 or greater




Personnel Policy




   35.20   Establishment, amendment, and modification by resolution




Administrative Penalties




   35.50   Purpose



   35.51   Notice



   35.52   Hearings



   35.53   Hearing officer



   35.54   Findings



   35.55   Appeals



   35.56   Record of proceeding



   35.57   Misdemeanor prosecution



   35.58   Continued violation



   35.59   Penalties



   35.60   Designation as an Administrator violation



   35.61   Collection of Administrator penalties



   35.62   Statute



Cross-reference:



   Abandoned property, see Ch. 97



   Employment background checks, see Ch. 38



PURCHASING POLICY



§ 35.01  PURCHASING AGENT DUTIES, POWERS, AND DOLLAR LIMITS.



   The City Administrator shall serve as the chief purchasing agent for
the city and is responsible for insuring that purchases are reported to the
City Council for approval, ratification and/or confirmation. In the City
Administrator’s absence, the Mayor and City Clerk jointly shall serve as
the chief purchasing agent. The City Council through this subchapter
designates that the officially designated City Administrator/department
heads/supervisors/City Council Finance Committee shall serve as purchasing
agents for the city departmental requirements directly under their control.
All authorized city purchasers are required to coordinate their purchasing
with the chief purchasing agent for reporting to the City Council. All
purchases for the city shall be approved by the City Council when they will
exceed $2,500.  All purchases less than $2,500 will be ratified and
confirmed by the City Council at their next regular meeting.  The chief
purchasing agent will not exceed $1,200 and departmental purchasing agents
will not exceed $600.  The City Council Finance Committee shall not exceed
the amount of $2,500.  The City Council shall let purchases or contracts
over $2,500 in value.  All authorized purchasers shall not permit purchasing
that would exceed the appropriated budget dollar amount per line item without
City Council approval.



(Prior Code, § 2-16) (Am. Ord. 531, passed 1-25-2011)



§ 35.02  EMERGENCY PURCHASING AND CONTRACTING.



   (A)   In the event an emergency occurs requiring immediate action
essential to the public safety, health and/or welfare, the chief purchasing
agent with approval from the City Council may make the necessary purchase(s)
and/or enter into the necessary contracts without following the specific
procedures set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   At least 2 competitive quotes/bids shall be utilized whenever
possible as part of this emergency purchasing and contracting process.



(Prior Code, § 2-17)  (Ord. 347, passed 6-12-2001; Am. Ord. 531, passed
1-25-2011)



§ 35.03  CITY EMPLOYEE PURCHASING.



   Other than as authorized in this subchapter, no city employee, agent or
independent contractor is empowered to order, sign or give any receipt for
materials except as the chief purchasing agent or a purchasing agent
(department head/supervisor/City Council Finance Committee) has approved.
Exceptions to this policy are only by order of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-18)



§ 35.04  CONTRACTS FROM $2,500 TO $25,000.



   Contracts, as that term is defined in M.S. § 471.345, Subd. 2, as it
may be amended from time to time, in amounts estimated to exceed $2,500 but
not exceed $25,000 shall be approved by the City Council.  The chief
purchasing agent shall provide recommendations to the City Council based on a
manner of purchasing deemed most favorable to the interests of the city. 
The purchase or contract may be made upon quotation or in the open market, in
the discretion of the City Council. If the contract or purchase is made upon
quotation it shall be based, so far as practicable, on at least 2 quotations
which shall be kept on file for a period of at least 1 year after their
receipt. Alternatively, the City Council may award a contract for
construction, alteration, repair or maintenance work to the vendor or
contractor offering the best value under a request for proposals described in
M.S. §§ 16C.28, Subd. 1(a)(2), and 16C.28, Subd. 1(c), as the same shall be
amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 2-19)  (Ord. 369, passed 8-27-2002; Am. Ord. 531, passed
1-25-2011)



§ 35.05  CONTRACTS FROM $25,000 TO $100,000.



   Contracts, as that term is defined in M.S. § 471.345, Subd. 2, as it
may be amended from time to time, in amounts estimated to exceed $25,000 but
not exceed $100,000 shall be approved by the City Council and may be made
upon either sealed bids or by direct negotiation pursuant to M.S. § 471.345,
Subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time, by obtaining 2 or more
quotations for the purchase or sale when possible, and without advertising
for bids or otherwise complying with the requirements of competitive bidding,
or pursuant to the best value alternative process established by M.S. §
471.345, Subd. 4a, as it may be amended from time to time, with
recommendation(s) by the chief purchasing agent in a manner of purchasing
deemed most favorable to the interests of the city, or pursuant to any other
procedure authorized in state law.  All quotations shall be kept on file for
at least 1 year after receipt.



(Prior Code, § 2-20)  (Ord. 369, passed 8-27-2002; Am. Ord. 531, passed
1-25-2011)



§ 35.06  CONTRACTS OF $100,000 OR GREATER.



   Contracts, as that term is defined in M.S. § 471.345, Subd. 2, as it
may be amended from time to time, in amounts estimated to exceed $100,000,
shall be approved by the City Council and shall be made pursuant to the
competitive bidding or best value alternative processes set forth in M.S.
§§ 412.311 and 471.345, Subds. 3 and 3a, as they may be amended from time
to time, or pursuant to any other procedure authorized in state law. Sealed
bids shall be solicited by public notice published in the official newspaper
of record at least 10 days in advance of the last day for the submission of
bids. The chief purchasing agent shall prepare or oversee preparation of
formal bid specifications based on a manner of purchasing deemed most
favorable to the interests of the city and on specifications that are broad
enough to allow for competition.  The contract shall be awarded to the
lowest responsible bidder as defined in Minnesota law.



(Prior Code, § 2-21)  (Ord. 369, passed 8-27-2002; Am. Ord. 531, passed
1-25-2011)



§ 35.07  CONTRACTS FOR LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS PAID FOR BY SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
OF $50,000 OR GREATER.



   Contracts for any local improvement project that is paid for with
special assessments pursuant to M.S. Ch. 429 in amounts estimated to exceed
$50,000 shall be approved by the City Council and shall be subject to the
process established in § 35.06, or pursuant to any other procedure
authorized in state law.



(Ord. 531, passed 1-25-2011)



PERSONNEL POLICY



§ 35.20  ESTABLISHMENT, AMENDMENT AND MODIFICATION BY RESOLUTION.



   (A)   The Council is hereby continued to be authorized to establish
by Council resolution or continue in effect a personnel policy for the City
of Park Rapids.



   (B)   The policy may be amended, modified, and added to by Council
resolution.



(Prior Code, § 2-171)



ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES



§ 35.50  PURPOSE.



   Any violation of the City Code which provides for a penalty of a petty
misdemeanor or a misdemeanor may be handled as an administrative penalty
pursuant to this subchapter.  The City Council finds that adequate
enforcement of the City Code may be accomplished through a system of
administrative penalties.  Seldom would the city seek jail time as a penalty
for violation of its code provisions.  A system of administrative penalties
enforced by City Administration is therefore found to be more efficient than
the District Court.



(Prior Code, § 2-200)



§ 35.51  NOTICE.



   (A)   Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator
will be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the
alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of his or her
right to be heard on the accusation.



   (B)   The notice will also inform the violator that a failure to
either pay or respond to the citation will result in the filing of a petty
misdemeanor or misdemeanor complaint with the Court Administrator’s office.



(Prior Code, § 2-201)



§ 35.52  HEARINGS.



   If a person accused of violating this subchapter so requests, a hearing
will be scheduled, the time and place of which provided to the accused
violator.



(Prior Code, § 2-202)



§ 35.53  HEARING OFFICER.



   A hearing officer or officers will be nominated by the Mayor or the
City Administrator and appointed by the City Council.  If the City Council
cannot agree upon the appointment of a hearing officer then the City Council,
upon notice, will serve as the hearing panel at a regular meeting or special
meeting called for that purpose.



(Prior Code, § 2-203)



§ 35.54  FINDINGS.



   If the hearing officer determines that a violation of this subchapter
did occur, that decision, along with the hearing officer’s reasons for
finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed will be recorded in
writing.  A copy of the written findings will be provided to the accused
violator.  Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred
or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, those findings will be
recorded and a copy provided to the accused violator.



(Prior Code, § 2-204)



§ 35.55  APPEALS.



   (A)   Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer will be
filed in Hubbard County District Court, Ninth Judicial District of Minnesota.



   (B)   If the hearing officer has kept a verbatim written record of
the proceeding, including an audio or video tape record which is capable of
transcription, then the appeal to the District Court will be limited to a
review of the record.



   (C)   If the hearing officer has failed to keep a record of the
proceeding, then any appeal to the District Court will be heard by the
District Court de novo.



(Prior Code, § 2-205)



§ 35.56  RECORD OF PROCEEDING.



   At the discretion of the hearing officer an audio-taped, video-taped,
or stenographic transcription of the proceeding may be ordered.  Cameras,
audio or video recorders, or other electronic means of data preservation will
not be allowed without the consent of the hearing officer.



(Prior Code, § 2-206)



§ 35.57  MISDEMEANOR PROSECUTION.



   Nothing in this subchapter will prohibit the city from seeking
prosecution as a petty misdemeanor or a misdemeanor for any alleged violation
of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 2-207)



§ 35.58  CONTINUED VIOLATION.



   Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or continues,
shall constitute a separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 2-208)



§ 35.59  PENALTIES.



   Annually the City Council will establish a fine schedule.  In the
event the City Council fails to establish a fine schedule, then penalties
will be imposed at the discretion of the hearing officer.  The hearing
officer may, in addition to any administrative penalty imposed, require a
violator to pay for a recorder’s record, a stipend for the hearing officer
or the hearing officer’s staff and any other reasonable out-of-pocket
expenses incurred in the hearing process.



(Prior Code, § 2-209)



§ 35.60  DESIGNATION AS AN ADMINISTRATOR VIOLATION.



   The decision to proceed against an accused violator on the basis of an
administrative penalty as opposed to a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor
violation in the District Court shall rest with the City Administrator.  The
City Administrator will, as part of his or her reporting requirement, report
to the City Council of violations pending and the results of those hearings
which have been concluded.



(Prior Code, § 2-211)



§ 35.61  COLLECTION OF ADMINISTRATOR PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any violator who fails or refuses to pay an administrative
penalty will remain subject to misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor District
Court action.



   (B)   Likewise, any license held by the violator is subject to
suspension or revocation for non-payment.



   (C)   No suspension or revocation of license shall be made without a
mailed notice to the violator of non-payment providing for a 10-day term in
which to pay the penalty.



(Prior Code, § 2-212)



§ 35.62  STATUTE.



   Notice is hereby given, pursuant to M.S. 415.021, as it may be amended
from time to time, that copies of the amended Park Rapids City Code, §§
35.50 through 35.62 are on file in the office of the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 2-213)



CHAPTER 36:  FEE SCHEDULE



Section



   36.01   Fees covered



   36.02   Payment



   36.03   Commerce fees



   36.04   Beer fees



   36.05   Liquor fees



   36.06   Employee/contracted services compensation



   36.07   Dog, cat and other animal fees



   36.08   Building permit fees



   36.09   Water and sewer fees



   36.10   City equipment charges



   36.11   Planning/zoning fees



   36.12   Airport fees



   36.13   Miscellaneous fees



   36.14   Revolving Loan Fund fees



   36.15   Event fees



   36.16   Rental inspection fees



§ 36.01  FEES COVERED.



   (A)   All fees payable to the city, by reason of this code or state
law, shall be governed by this chapter.



   (B)   If any code chapter or state law provides for or requires the
payment of a fee to the city, and this chapter makes no reference thereto,
then any other code chapter or law shall govern.



(Prior Code, § 24-1)



§ 36.02  PAYMENT.



   (A)   All fees shall be due and payable in full at the time
specified in the applicable code chapter or state law.



   (B)   If no time is provided, fees shall be due and payable upon
demand of the Clerk or other authorized city officer or agency.



(Prior Code, § 24-2)



§ 36.03  COMMERCE FEES.



 


Type of Fee

 

Fee Amount

 

Reference





Peddler’s, solicitors and transient merchant’s license
 
$25 per day
 

§ 114.04



 
 
$1,500 for seasonal license (valid no more than 4 months)


 
 
Double fee for application not filed within allowed 14 day timeframe
 

§ 114.03



Vendors as part of an organized event
 
$10 per day or $50 per day for the first 5, then $5 each thereafter
 

§ 114.04



Extended garage sale
 
$250  annually
 

§ 112.03



Commercial animal establishment
 
$150 annually
 

§ 111.05



Wrecking or junk yard license
 
$1,000
 

§ 117.01



Backhoe operator’s license
 
$30
 

§ 118.03



Plumber’s license
 
$30
 

§ 115.04



Liability insurance rates for persons installing sewer and water connections
 
$500,000 per person, $1,000,000 per aggregate and $50,000 for property damage
 

§ 50.28



Mechanical contractors
 
$30 annually
 

§ 116.08



Tree contractors
 
$30 annually
 

§ 120.03



Taxi cab license
 
$25 for first vehicle
 

§ 121.04



 
 
$10 for each additional vehicle


Pawn broker license
 
$100 annually
 

§ 113.04



Adult use license
 
$500 annually. License fees are non-refundable.
 

§ 119.08





 



(Prior Code, § 24-3)  (Ord. 342, passed- - ; Am Ord. 351, passed 8-28-2001;
Am. Ord. 395, passed- -; Am. Ord. 446, passed 9-27-2005; Am. Ord. 459, passed
4-25-2006)



§ 36.04  BEER FEES.



 


Type of Fee

 

Fee Amount

 

Reference



Off-sale beer license
 
$50 annually
 

§ 91.017



On-sale beer license
 
$150  annually
 

§ 91.017



Temporary on-sale 3.2 beer license
 
$25 per day
 

§ 91.017




 



(Prior Code, § 24-4)  (Ord. 401, passed- -)



§ 36.05  LIQUOR FEES.



 


Type of Fee

 

Fee Amount

 

Reference



On-sale liquor license
 
$1,800 annually
 

§ 91.056



Temporary on-sale liquor license
 
$25 per day
 

§ 91.056



Administrative fee
 
$300 per new application
 

§ 91.056



On-sale wine license
 
$250 annually
 

§ 91.067



Sunday liquor license
 
$250 annually
 

§ 91.056




 



(Prior Code, § 24-5)  (Ord. 401, passed- -)



§ 36.06  EMPLOYEE/CONTRACTED SERVICES COMPENSATION.



 


Type of Fee

 

Fee Amount

 

Reference





Mayor’s compensation
 
$400 per month, effective January 1, 2017
 

§ 30.29



Council member’s compensation
 
$350 per month, effective January 1, 2017
 

§ 30.29



Fire Chief
 
$2,750 per year
 

§ 32.10



Assistant Fire Chief
 
$750 per year
 

§ 32.10



Training officer
 
$400 per year
 

§ 32.10



Safety officer
 
$300 per year
 

§ 32.10



Fire secretary
 
$500 per year
 

§ 32.10





 



(Prior Code, § 24-6)  (Ord. 296, passed 1999; Res. 2001-121, passed- -; Am.
Ord. 446, passed 9-27-2005; Am. Ord. 471, passed 11-28-2006; Am. Ord. 515,
passed 8-25-2009; Am. Ord. 563, passed 7-26-2016; Am. Ord. 564, passed
8-10-2016)



§ 36.07  DOG, CAT AND OTHER ANIMAL FEES.



 


Type of Fee

 

Fee Amount

 

Reference



 
$5 per year neutered/spayed
 


$10 per year non-neutered/unspayed


Duplicate tags
 
$1
 

§ 90.016



Dangerous dog fee
 
$200 per year
 

§ 90.065




 



(Prior Code, § 24-7)  (Ord. 338, passed- -; Am. Res. 01-220, passed- -; Am.
Ord. 459, passed 4-25-2006)



§ 36.08  BUILDING PERMIT FEES.



 


Type

 


 

Reference





Valuation
 
 
 

§ 150.02




Commercial



Valuation
 

Fee Amount



$1 to $500
 
$22


$501 to $2,000
 
$22 for the first $500, plus $2.75 for each additional $100 or fraction

thereof, to and including $2,000


$2,001 to $25,000
 
$63 for the first $2,000, plus $12.50 for each additional $1,000 or 
fraction thereof, to and including $25,000


$25,001 to $50,000
 
$325 for the first $25,000, plus $9 for each additional $1,000 or  fraction
thereof, to and including $50,000


$50,001 to $100,000
 
$580 for the first $50,000, plus $6.25 for each additional $1,000 or 
fraction thereof, to and including $100,000


$100,001 to $500,000
 
$895 for the first $100,000, plus $5 for each additional $1,000 or  fraction
thereof, to and including $500,000


$500,001 to $1,000,000
 
$2,855 for the first $500,000, plus $4.25 for each additional  $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000


$1,000,001 and up
 
$4,955 for the first $1,000,000, plus $2.75 for each additional $1,000  or
fraction thereof


All permits
 
Plan review shall be required on new construction, major remodels  and major
repairs.  Fee shall be 65% of building permit value




 



 

 


Valuation

 

Fee Amount






Commercial



Demolition permit
 
$50
 

§ 151.249




Residential:  1 or 2-family




Valuation

 

Fee Amount



$1 to $500
 
$15


$501 to $2,000
 
$15 for the first $500, plus $2 for each additional $100 or fraction thereof,
to and including $2,000


$2,001 to $25,000
 
$45 for the first $2,000, plus $9 for each additional $1,000 or fraction
thereof, to and including $25,000


$25,001 to $50,000
 
$252 for the first $25,000, plus $6.50 for each additional $1,000 or fraction
thereof, to and including $50,000


$50,001 to $100,000
 
$414.50 for the first $50,000, plus $4.50 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof, to and including $100,000


$100,001 to $500,000
 
$639.50 for the first $100,000, plus $3.50 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof, to and including $500,000


$500,001 to $1,000,000
 
$2,039.50 for the first $500,000, plus $3.00 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000


$1,000,001 and up
 
$3,539.50 for the first $1,000,000, plus $2.00 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof


All permits
 
Plan review shall be required on new construction, major remodels and major
repairs.  Fee shall be 65% of building permit value


All permits
 
State surcharge shall be applied to all permits based on valuation according
to M.S. 16B-70, as it may be amended from time to time


Other Inspections and Fees:


1.   Inspection outside of normal business hours       $30 per hour*
(minimum charge - two hours)



2.   Reinspection fees                $30 per hour*



3.   Inspections for which no fee is specially indicated   $30 per hour*
(minimum charge - one-half hour)



4.   Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to
plans                         $30 per hour*
(minimum charge - one-half hour)



5.   For use of outside consultants for plan checking and inspections, or
both                             Actual costs*



*    Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the
greatest.  This cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly
wages and fringe benefits of the employees involved.




Residential



Demolition permit
 
$25
 

§ 151.249





 



(Prior Code, § 24-8)  (Ord. 386, passed 5-27-2003; Am. Ord. 399, passed
10-28-2003; Am. Ord. 404, passed 2-24-2004; Am. Ord. 468, passed 10-10-2006;
Am. Ord. 513, passed 3-24-2009)



§ 36.09  WATER AND SEWER FEES.



 


Type of Fee

 

Fee Amount

 

Reference





Water connection fee
 
$375
 

§ 50.01



Residential water base rate
 
$17.50 per quarter
 

§ 50.08



Residential water rates
 
$3.99 per 1,000, 0 to 15,000 gallons
 

§ 50.08



$4.31 per 1,000, 15,001 to 30,000 gallons
 

§ 50.08



$4.78 per 1,000, 30,001 to 45,000 gallons
 

§ 50.08



$5.25 per 1,000, 45,001 gallons and above
 

§ 50.08



Commercial water base rate
 
$17.50 per quarter
 

§ 50.08



Commercial water rates
 
$3.99 per 1,000, 0 to 15,000 gallons
 

§ 50.08



$4.31 per 1,000, 15,001 to 30,000 gallons
 

§ 50.08



$4.78 per 1,000, 30,001 gallons and above
 

§ 50.08



Oversized water lines, not to include fire protection lines
 
Bi-monthly
 




3 inches
 
$40
 




4 inches
 
$70
 




6 inches
 
$100
 




8 inches
 
$160
 




10 inches
 
$400
 




12 inches
 
$750
 




Sewer connection fee
 
$375
 

§ 50.48



Sewer rates
 
Base rate of $10, then $3.58 per 1,000 gallons
 

§ 50.47



Sewer only accounts
 
$43.74 per quarterly billing cycle
 

§ 50.47



Wellhead protection fee
 
$0.75 per quarterly water/sewer billing cycle
 

Wellhead Protection Plan



State mandated water testing fee
 
$1.59 per quarterly water/sewer billing cycle
 

§ 50.08



Private sewer installer fee
 
$75
 

§ 50.28



Meter replacement - remote
 
$100
 




New 5/8 inch meter
 
Cost plus freight
 




Irrigation water base rate
 
$17.50 per quarter
 

§ 50.08



Irrigation water rates
 
$3.99 per 1000, 0 to 15,000 gallons
 

§ 50.08



$4.31 per 1,000, 15,001 to 30,000 gallons
 

§ 50.08



$4.78 per 1,000, 30,001 gallons and above
 

§ 50.08



Meter horn
 
Cost plus 10% to 20%
 




Meter mounting bracket
 
Cost plus freight and 10% to 20%
 




Line valves
 
Cost plus freight and 10% to 20%
 




Hydrant rent
 
With hydrant meter
 




Fill station water
 
$0.25 per 100 gallons
 




Utility connect/disconnect
 
$40 each during regular hours
 




$60 after hours and weekends
 




Excavation permit fee
 
$25
 

§ 50.28



Right-of-way permit fee
 
$25
 

§ 50.28



Obstruction permit fee
 
$25
 

§ 50.28



Septic System Installations:
 
 
 




   New system residential
 
$100
 

§ 50.28, § 151.131



   New system commercial
 
$250
 

§ 50.28, § 151.131



   Drain field extension
 
$50
 

§ 50.28, § 151.131



   Holding tank
 
$100
 

§ 50.28, § 151.131



   Re-inspection fee
 
$50
 

§ 50.28, § 151.131



Storm Water Utility single-family residential standardized fee
 
$2 minimum per month
 

§ 51.04



Review and processing of the Storm Water Utility credit application
 
$25 per application
 

§ 51.04



Storm Water Utility maximum fee
 
$75 per month
 

§ 51.04





 



(Prior Code, § 24-9)  (Ord. 372, passed 1-1-2003; Am. Ord. 426, passed
4-1-2005; Am. Ord. 446, passed 9-27-2005; Am. Ord. 459, passed 4-25-2006; Am.
Ord. 464, passed 6-27-2006; Am. Ord. 472, passed 12-12-2006; Am. Ord. 482,
passed 4-24-2007; Am. Ord. 495, passed 11-13-2007; Am. Ord. 497, passed
4-8-2008; Am. Ord. 516, passed 8-25-2009; Am. Ord. 519, passed 9-22-2009; Am.
Ord. 520, passed 9-22-2009; Am. Ord. 525, passed 5-11-2010; Am. Ord. 528,
passed 6-8-2010; Am. Ord. 546, passed 12-10-2013)



§ 36.10  CITY EQUIPMENT CHARGES.



 


Type of Fee

 

Fee Amount

 

Reference





*All equipment charges will be billed in 1 hour increments


Large truck
 
$95 per hour
 
Ord. 446


Water truck
 
$75 per hour
 
Ord. 399


Propatch unit
 
$110 per hour
 
Ord. 433


Pick-up truck
 
$45 per hour
 
Ord. 446


Large riding mower
 
$50 per hour
 
Ord. 446


Tractor mower
 
$60 per hour
 
Ord. 446


Small mower
 
$45 per hour
 
Ord. 446


Road grader
 
$85 per hour
 
Ord. 446


Payloader
 
$110 per hour
 
Ord. 446


Payloader with snow-blower
 
$170 per hour
 
 


Sewer rodder
 
$75 per hour
 
Ord. 446


Street sweeper
 
$110 per hour
 
Ord. 446


Bobcat
 
$60 per hour
 
 


Labor during normal working hours
 
$40 per hour
 
Ord. 446


Labor rate for the first hour after normal working hours

*Anything after the normal working hours will be billed in a minimum of 1
hour increments.
 
$75 per hour
 
Ord. 446


Labor rate for all hours after the first hour for other than normal working
hours

*Anything after the normal working hours will be billed in a minimum of 1
hour increments.
 
$60 per hour
 
Ord. 446


Water utility truck with hoist
 
$75 per hour
 
 


6" trash pump
 
$75 per hour
 
Ord. 543


Combination sewer cleaning unit
 
$370 per hour
 
Ord. 543




 



(Prior Code, § 24-10)  (Ord. 399, passed 10-28-2003; Am. Ord. 433, passed
5-24-2005; Am. Ord. 446, passed 9-27-2005; Am. Ord. 543, passed 6-11-2013;
Am. Ord. 578, passed 11-14-2017)



2018 S-15



§ 36.11  PLANNING/ZONING FEES.



 


Type of Fee

 

Fee Amount

 

Reference





Conditional use permit
 
$175 (effective 7-1-2005)
 
§ 151.249


Variance
 
$175 (effective 7-1-2005)
 
§ 151.249


Zoning amendment
 
$175 plus $175 when comprehensive plan revision is required (effective
7-1-2005)
 
§ 151.249


Preliminary plats/PUDs
 
$225 plus $15 per lot (effective 7-1-2005)
 
§ 151.249


Minor subdivision
 
$75
 
§ 151.249


Land division - lot splits
 
$25
 
§ 151.249


Vacation of public land
 
$125 (effective 7-1-2005)
 
§ 151.249


Sign permit
 
$25
 
§ 151.180


Temporary/portable sign permit
 
$10
 
§ 151.180


Banner
 
$25 before placement
 
§ 151.180


 
 
$50 after placement
 
 


 
 
$50 security deposit
 
 




 



(Prior Code, § 24-11)  (Ord. 399, passed 10-28-2003; Am. Ord. 440, passed
6-28-2005; Am. Ord. 446, passed 9-27-2005)



§ 36.12  AIRPORT FEES.



 


Type of Fee

 

Fee Amount

 

Reference





Airport hangar 1 - 6
 
$95 per month
 

Ord. 338



Airport hangar 7 - 8
 
$115 per month
 

Ord. 338



Airport hangar 9 - 10
 
$105 per month
 

Ord. 338



Airport hangar 11 - 16
 
$85 per month
 

Ord. 338



Airport hangar 17 - 22
 
$135 per month
 

Ord. 338



Airport hangar 23
 
$185 per month
 

Ord. 338



Airport hangar 24 - 28
 
$125 per month
 

Ord. 338



Airport hangar 29
 
$215 per month
 

Res. 2002-212



Airport hangar 30 - 36
 
$155 per month
 

Ord. 338



Airport hangar 37 - 43
 
$145 per month
 

Ord. 338



Airport hangar 44
 
$195 per month - large planes
 

Res. 2002-212



$155 per month - small planes


Landing fees for 3M
 
None
 




Airport parking fees
 
$75 per year for long term (30 or more days per

year)
 

Res. 2002-211



Airport meeting room fees
 
$40 per ½ day
 

Ord. 371



$60 all day


Airport meeting room key security deposit

(Deposit refunded when key is returned to city hall.)
 
$40 security deposit
 

Ord. 386



Lost keys/cards/transmitters
 
$50 each
 

Ord. 399



Gate key cards, emergency vehicles exempted
 
$5 each
 

Ord. 409





 



(Prior Code, § 24-12)  (Ord. 338, passed- -; Am. Ord. 371, passed
9-11-2002; Am. Res. 2002-211, passed- -; Am. Res. 2002-212, passed- -; Am.
Ord. 386, passed 5-27-2003; Am. Ord. 399, passed 10-28-2003; Am. Ord. 409,
passed 7-13-2004)



§ 36.13  MISCELLANEOUS FEES.



 


Type of Fee

 

Fee Amount

 

Reference





Fire calls
 
$500 for the first hour, $300 for each additional hour
 

§§ 32.01et seq.



Police insurance reports
 
$5
 




Parking fine
 
$10 per violation
 

§ 71.99



Police incident reports
 
$5 per report up to 10 pages, $.25 each

additional page up to 20 pages

Extensive files over 20 pages - per page charge 

plus time and postage
 




Police photographs (copies)
 
$25 per set
 




Cassettes and videos (copies)
 
$25 per tape
 




Vehicle impound fee
 
$50
 




Vehicle storage fee
 
$10 per day after 24 hours
 




Plumbing inspection fees
 
$25 piping and first 5 fixtures; $2 each

additional fixture
 

§ 115.08



Plumbing re-inspection fee
 
$25 per inspection
 

§ 115.08



Copies
 
City information:

$0.25 per each black and white page copied   

($0.50 for 2-sided copy) for 100 or fewer pages    (or) for more than 100
pages the actual costs of 

searching, retrieving, making, compiling and

transmitting copies.
 

M.S. § 13.03, as it may be amended from time to time






Ord. 422



Ord. 446



Maps (large size)
 
$15 each
 

Ord. 399



Fax
 
$1 per page includes long distance
 




Zoning Code book
 
$25
 

Ord. 399



Comprehensive plan book
 
$25
 

Ord. 399



Housing study book
 
$25
 

Ord. 399



City budget book
 
$25
 

Ord. 422



City Council packet
 
$10 (copy for city’s official newspaper exempt)
 

Ord. 422



Surcharge for dishonored checks
 
$30 per check
 

M.S. 604.113, subdivision  2A



Special assessment search
 
$25 per search
 

Ord. 389



Public meeting room fee (Includes library, public safety building and city
hall)
 
Non-profit groups:  No charge

Non-profit groups that charge a fee or tuition:      $50

For-profit groups:  $50
 

Ord. 446



Motorized Golf Cart and Class 2 ATV Fee
 
$25 annually
 

§ 73.08



Abatement administrative charge
 
$100
 

§ 92.05(D)(2)



Assessment charge
 
$50
 

§ 92.90(D)(3)





 



(Prior Code, § 24-13)  (Ord. 386, passed 5-27-2003; Am. Ord. 389, passed-
-; Am. Ord. 399, passed 10-28-2003; Am. Ord. 422, passed 1-25-2005; Am. Ord.
446, passed 9-27-2005; Am. Ord. 512, passed 2-24-2009; Am. Ord. 567, passed
9-13-2016; Am. Ord. 576, passed 7-25-2017; Am. Ord. 578, passed 11-14-2017)



§ 36.14  REVOLVING LOAN FUND FEES.



 


Type of Fee

 

Fee Amount

 

Reference





Application fee

(Loans, loan guarantee or loan participation)
 
A nonrefundable application fee of $150 shall be required with each
application. This fee can be applied toward the origination fee. However, if
the origination fee is less than $150, the application fee shall still remain
at $150 and remains nonrefundable. Upon receiving loan approval, an
additional $250 will be requested to apply toward the costs to prepare the
closing documents.
 

Ord. 419



Original loan
 
1% origination fee, plus normal closing costs
 

Ord. 419



Successive loan
 
½% origination fee, plus normal closing costs
 

Ord. 419



Assumption fee
 
1% of loan balance to be assumed, plus normal closing costs
 

Ord. 419



Loan modification
 
Fee of $150, plus legal costs (if any)
 

Ord. 419



Loan renewal
 
Fee of $100, plus legal costs (if any)
 

Ord. 419



Bank req. subordination
 
Fee of $100, plus legal costs (if any)
 

Ord. 419



Fee for late payments
 
If the regular monthly payment is not received within 15 days of due date,
borrower shall be charged a late fee equal to the lesser of 2% of the monthly
payment of $20, unless otherwise provided in the loan agreement. The late
charge shall be considered unpaid if not received within 30 calendar days of
the missed due date for which it was imposed. Any unpaid late charge(s) shall
be collected when the loan is paid off. Acceptance of a late charge by the
agency does not constitute a waiver of default.
 

Ord. 419



Other closing costs
 
The applicant may be required to pay some costs up front. An example would be
appraisal fees.
 

Ord. 419





 



(Prior Code, § 24-14)  (Ord. 419, passed 11-29-2004)



2017 S-14



§ 36.15  EVENT FEES.



 


Type of Fee

 

Fee Amount

 

Reference



Dance permit
 
$10 per day
 

§ 96.029



Outdoor concert permit
 
$10 per day
 

§ 96.049



Parade permit
 
$10 per block, maximum fee $150 per event
 

§ 96.005



Public facilities use permit - general use
 
$25 per day
 

§ 96.001



Street closing
 
$10 per block
 

§ 96.005




 



(Prior Code, § 24-15)  (Ord. 460, passed 5-9-2006)



§ 36.16  RENTAL INSPECTION FEES.



 


Type of Fee

 

Fee Amount

 

Reference



Single-family
 
$55
 

§ 152.054



2 to 4 units
 
$55 per unit
 

§ 152.054



5 or more units
 
$45 per unit
 

§ 152.054



New construction
 
$15 per unit
 

§ 152.054



Reinspection
 
$40 per unit/per occurrence
 

§ 152.054



No show fee
 
Property owners shall be assessed a $25 fee if they fail to show up for a
scheduled appointment. The fee will be assessed if they do not contact staff
and reschedule their appointment at least two (2) business days prior and
fail to show up. Property owners will be allowed one (1) cancellation before
they are assessed a fee.
 

§ 152.054




 



(Ord. 474, passed 2-27-2007; Am. Ord. 530, passed 12-14-2010; Am. Ord. 578,
passed 11-14-2017)



CHAPTER 37:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   37.01   Policy and purpose



   37.02   Definitions



   37.03   Establishment of emergency management organization



   37.04   Powers and duties of Director



   37.05   Local emergencies



   37.06   Emergency regulations



   37.07   Emergency management a government function



   37.08   Participation in labor disputes or politics



 



   37.99   Penalty



§ 37.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or from sabotage,
hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure;
and in order to insure that preparations of this city will be adequate to
deal with those disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense
and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the
lives and property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and
declared to be necessary:



   (A)   To establish a city emergency management organization
responsible for city planning and preparation for emergency government
operations in time of disasters;



   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during
emergencies and disasters;



   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city
and other political subdivisions of this state and of other states with
respect to the carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions; and



   (D)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be
amended from time to time, which requires that each political subdivision of
the state shall establish a local organization for emergency management.



§ 37.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISASTER.  A situation which creates an immediate and serious
impairment to the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has
resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to property, and for
which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area
are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.



   EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.  The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado, and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous
material mishaps.  These functions include, without limitation,
fire-fighting services, police services, emergency medical services,
engineering, warning services, communications, radiological, and chemical,
evacuation, congregate care, emergency transportation, existing or properly
assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public
utility services and other functions related to civil protection, together
with all other activities necessary or incidental for carrying out the
foregoing functions.  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT includes those activities
sometimes referred to as “civil defense” functions.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES.  The total personnel resources engaged in
city-level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter or any rule or order thereunder.  This includes personnel
from city departments, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and
agencies.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.  The staff responsible for
coordinating city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. 
This organization provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state,
and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and
assures implementation of federal and state program requirements.



§ 37.03  ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.



   There is hereby created within the city government an emergency
management organization which shall be under the supervision and control of
the City Emergency Management Director, called the Director.  The Director
shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term and may be
removed by the Council at any time.  The Director shall serve with a salary
as established by the City Council and shall be paid his or her necessary
expenses.  The Director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration and operation of the emergency preparedness
organization, subject to the direction and control of the Council.



§ 37.04  POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state
conference for emergency management.  The Director shall develop proposed
mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for
reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great
to be dealt with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the
Council for its action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the state
emergency plan.



   (B)   The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human
resources, industries, resources, and facilities of the city as deemed
necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan
for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster.  The
Director shall establish the economic stabilization systems and measures,
service staffs, boards, and sub-boards required, in accordance with state and
federal plans and directions subject to the approval of the Mayor.



   (C)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for
the emergency preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the
Council for its approval.  When the Council has approved the plan, it shall
be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the
city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. 
The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time.  The Director
shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end
that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans
of the federal government and the state and correlated with emergency plans
of the county and other political subdivisions within the state.



   (D)   In accordance with the state and city emergency plan, the
Director shall institute training programs, public information programs and
conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary
to assure prompt and effective operation of the city emergency plan when a
disaster occurs.



   (E)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies, and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to
the maximum extent practicable.  The officers and personnel of all city
departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate
with and extend services and facilities to the city’s emergency management
organization and to the Governor upon request.  The head of each department
or agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the
planning and programming of those emergency activities as will involve the
utilization of the facilities of the department or agency.



   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments
and agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting, and training of
emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state.  To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies
and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.



   (G)   Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director
shall coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations
within the city and assist in establishing and conducting training programs
as required to assure emergency operational capability in the several
services as provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (H)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules, and
regulations issued by the Governor with reference to emergency management.



   (I)   The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency
preparedness activities when requested by the Mayor.



§ 37.05  LOCAL EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or
her legal successor.  It shall not be continued for a period in excess of 3
days except by or with the consent of the Council.  Any order, or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be
given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the
City Clerk.



   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary
portions of the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or
inter-jurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance
thereunder.



   (C)   No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local
emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency
functions.  However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency shall provide
aid and services in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.



Penalty, see § 37.99



§ 37.06  EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare
for an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the
Governor or the Council, the Council may by resolution promulgate
regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation,
respecting:  the conduct of persons and the use of property during
emergencies; the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public
services, emergency health, fire, and safety regulations, drills or practice
periods required for preliminary training, and all other matters which are
required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in declared
emergencies.



   (B)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing;
shall be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains,
if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.  A copy
shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business
hours.  Notice of the existence of these regulations and their availability
for inspection at the City Clerk’s office shall be conspicuously posted at
the front of the city hall or other headquarters of the city or at other
places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the
resolution.  By resolution, the Council may modify or rescind a regulation.



   (C)   The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any
time.  If not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end of
30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it
relates, whichever comes first.  Any resolution, rule, or regulation
inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be
suspended during the period of time and to the extent conflict exists.



   (D)   (1)   During a declared emergency, the city is, under the
provisions of M.S. § 12.31, as it may be amended from time to time and
notwithstanding any statutory provision to the contrary, empowered, through
its Council, acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to
enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster
by protecting the health and safety of persons and property and providing
emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster.



      (2)   The city may exercise these powers in the light of the
exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the time-consuming
procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of
public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and
materials, limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure
of public funds, including, but not limited to, publication of resolutions,
publication of calls for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules,
provisions relating to low bids, and requirement for bids.



Penalty, see § 37.99



§ 37.07  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.



   (A)   All functions and activities relating to emergency management
are hereby declared to be governmental functions.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of
any person to receive benefits to which he or she would otherwise be entitled
under this resolution or under the Worker’s Compensation law, being M.S.
Chapter 176, or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive
any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.



§ 37.08  PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.



   The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form
of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.



§ 37.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation
adopted thereunder relating to acts, omissions, or conduct other than
official acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a misdemeanor.



CHAPTER 38:  EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND CHECKS



Section



   38.01   Applicants for city employment



   38.02   Criminal history employment background investigations



Cross-reference:



   Personnel policy, see § 35.20



§ 38.01  APPLICANTS FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT.



   The purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations that
will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized Criminal
History information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment
background checks for the positions described in § 38.02.



(Ord. 541, passed 2-12-2013)



§ 38.02  CRIMINAL HISTORY EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS.



   (A)   The Park Rapids Police Department is hereby required, as the
exclusive entity within the city, to do a criminal history background
investigation on the applicants for the following positions within the city,
unless the city’s hiring authority concludes that a background
investigation is not needed:



      (1)   Employment positions.



         (a)   All regular part-time or full-time employees of
the city;



         (b)   Positions that work with children or vulnerable
adults; the city will not obtain all of the criminal data authorized under
the Child Protection Background Check Act, M.S. § 299C.61 and M.S. §
299C.62, on positions working with children by using the city’s police
department to conduct background checks - the city must access those records
by using the service provided by the Bureau of Criminal Apprehension and
paying the associated fee;



         (c)   Applicants for city licenses; and



         (d)   Sworn police positions are already authorized and
covered by M.S. § 626.87, Subd. 1.



   (B)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen employment applicants, the Park Rapids Police Department is
authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal
Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance
with BCA policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained
at the Park Rapids Police Department under the care and custody of the chief
law enforcement official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of
the Computerized Criminal History data may be released by the Park Rapids
Police Department to the hiring authority, including the City Council, the
City Administrator or Clerk, or other city staff involved in the hiring
process.



   (C)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
authorize the Park Rapids Police Department by written consent to undertake
the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions
of M.S. Ch. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the
information. Except for the positions set forth in M.S. § 364.09, the city
will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant’s
prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the position of
employment sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or
misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city rejects the applicant’s
request on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the
following:



      (1)   The grounds and reasons for the denial;



      (2)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set
forth in M.S. § 364.06;



      (3)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for
employment; and



      (4)   That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be
considered upon reapplication.



(Ord. 541, passed 2-12-2013)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   WATER AND SEWER



      51.   STORM WATER UTILITY



CHAPTER 50:  WATER AND SEWER



Section




Water




   50.01   Application for service connection



   50.02   Water meters



   50.03   Separate connections, branch systems



   50.04   Installation



   50.05   Installation, water services



   50.06   Connection mandatory



   50.07   Failure to connect; Council action



   50.08   Water rates



   50.09   Billing and payment



   50.10   Disconnection for late payment



   50.11   General regulations



   50.12   Defective service



   50.13   Inspection and repairs



   50.14   Water Superintendent




Sewer Use




   50.25   Definitions



   50.26   Use of public sewers



   50.27   (Reserved)



   50.28   Building sewers and connections



   50.29   Main and lateral sewer construction



   50.30   Protection from damage



   50.31   Authority of Inspectors



   50.32   Validity




Sewer Service Charge




   50.45   Sewer service fund



   50.46   Administration



   50.47   Validity



   50.48   Sewer service rates



 



   50.99   Penalty



WATER



§ 50.01  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE CONNECTION.



   Any party desiring water service connection with the water system of
this city for premises not heretofore connected shall make application or
cause application to be made therefor on a form provided by the city and file
the same with the City Clerk, accompanied by a fee.  The fee for every
connection shall be established by the Council and listed in the Fee
Schedule, Chapter 36 of this code.



(Prior Code, § 62-26)  (Ord. 219, passed 8-10-1981)



§ 50.02  WATER METERS.



   (A)   Placing and testing.  Every customer shall provide a suitable
place where a meter can be installed, and a licensed plumber shall install
and maintain the same, and if at any time the customer desires to have the
meter tested for accuracy, the same shall be done by the city and the fee as
determined by the Council charged therefor to the customer if the meter
registers 90% or more accurate.  If the meter and/or remote reader shall be
damaged by lack of care by the consumer, the cost of replacing the same shall
be charged to and paid by the consumer.



   (B)   Breakage.  In case of breakage, stoppage or other
irregularity in the meter, the owner or consumer, is to notify the utility
billing clerk immediately, and any necessary repairs will be made by the city
as hereinafter provided.



   (C)   Adjustment.  If the testing of a meter, as hereinafter
provided, shows that it fails to register correctly, the charge to the
consumer shall be on the basis for the corresponding period of the previous
year, or for any other reason, the charge for the corresponding period of the
previous year cannot be justly applied, the charge will be equitably adjusted
by the utility billing clerk.



   (D)   Re-reads. First re-read is free all others will be charged as
set forth by Council.



(Prior Code, § 62-27)  (Ord. 341, passed 2001)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.03  SEPARATE CONNECTIONS, BRANCH SYSTEMS.



   Unless special permission is granted by the Water Superintendent, each
premises shall have a separate and distinct service connection, and where
permission is granted for branch systems, each branch system shall have its
own separate meter and separate curb cock.  The supply of water through each
separate service must be recorded by 1 meter only, for which only 1 account
will be rendered by the city.  If additional or auxiliary meters are desired
for recording the subdivision of supply, they must be furnished and set by
the owner or consumer at his or her expense and he or she must assume all
responsibility for reading and maintaining the same.



(Prior Code, § 62-28)



§ 50.04  INSTALLATION.



   (A)   Street services.  No person, except a plumber having a state
license, a plumber with a plumber’s permit issued by the city, or a backhoe
operator licensed by the city, will be permitted to do any work on service
pipes from the main proper to the point of connection to the meter.



   (B)   Standards.  All plumbing connected with the city water system
shall conform to the Minnesota Plumbing Code and ordinances of the city. 
For violation of this regulation, the plumber will be liable for each offense
or the revocation of his or her permit.



   (C)   Supervision.  The stop cocks at the main and sidewalk,
together with the box and cover, are under the supervision of the city, and
all persons are forbidden to interfere with them.



   (D)   Cost of installation.  The cost of installing the service
from the main to the premises, as well as repairs to same shall be borne
entirely by the consumer.



(Prior Code, § 62-29)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.05  INSTALLATION, WATER SERVICES.



   (A)   Connections.  In installing water service, all taps shall be
driven, street excavations made, curb cocks inserted, pipes installed from
main to curb, and the curb cock installed in an iron box to which the service
is to be connected, by the city’s employees only, or by a plumber duly
licensed under the laws of the State of Minnesota or the ordinances of the
City of Park Rapids.



   (B)   Service pipes.  All service pipes connected with the water
system shall be type k copper or plastic approved by the City Engineer and
shall be laid  8 feet below the established grades, or as low as the top of
the street mains.  (Plastics must have a tracer line.) All service lines
will be insulated from main to curb stop.



   (C)   Corporation cock, curb stop and waste cock.  The copper
service line shall be connected to the main with a stainless steel saddle and
a corporation cock.  There shall be a curb cock in every service line
attached to the water main, the same to be placed as near as possible to the
street side of the sidewalk if on a street, or within 1 foot of the alley
line if the main is located in the alley.  To the curb cocks there shall be
attached a substantial iron curb box to permit opening or closing the curb
cock from the surface.  The curb box shall be covered with a tight fitting
iron lid, with the letter “W” cast upon it.  Accessible shutoffs shall
be provided on the main supply line just inside the foundation wall on both
sides of the meter.



   (D)   Check valves.  Check valves are required on all connections
to steam boilers, hot water systems, or any other connection deemed by the
City Plumbing Inspector to require one.  Safety and relief valves shall be
placed on all boilers or other steam apparatus connection with the water
system where the pressure may be raised in excess of 60 pounds per square
inch.



   (E)   Air chamber.  For all 2 inch and smaller connections, an air
chamber shall be placed on the house side of the valve following the meter. 
The chamber must have ample capacity and shall be at least 2 inches in
diameter and at least 4 four feet long, with a reduced connection to the
service pipe.



(Prior Code, § 62-30)  (Ord. 341, passed 2001)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.06  CONNECTION MANDATORY.



   Each lot, piece or parcel of property in the City of Park Rapids,
abutting on any street, avenue or alley in which a municipal water main is
laid, and having a dwelling house or business building thereon, is required
to be connected with the municipal water system of the city within 3 years
after the mains are constructed  provided the dwelling unit served is within
200 feet of the edge of the street closest to the dwelling unit.



(Prior Code, § 62-31)  (Ord. 223, passed 9-12-1983)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.07  FAILURE TO CONNECT; COUNCIL ACTION.



   (A)   Should the owner of any premises having access to the
municipal water system as provided in § 50.06 hereof fail to connect the
premises with the municipal water system, the Council may cause the
connection to the premises by an authorized representative of the city upon
30 days notice to the owner thereof and may cause the cost of the connection
charges to be assessed against the owner of the premises and if not paid
within 30 days may be certified to the County Auditor to be collected in the
same time and manner as real estate taxes against the property.



   (B)   The connection charge/assessment shall be a lien against the
property.  The assessment when levied shall bear interest and term at the
legal rate for local improvements will be set by Council action, and shall be
collected and remitted to the city in the same manner as an assessment for
local improvements.



(Prior Code, § 62-32)  (Ord. 223, passed 9-12-1983; Am. Ord. 517, passed
8-25-2009)



§ 50.08  WATER RATES.



   The rates and charges for water and water service supplied by the city
shall be established by the Council and listed in the Fee Schedule, Chapter
36 of this code.



(Prior Code, § 62-33)  (Ord. 219, passed 8-10-1981)



§ 50.09  BILLING AND PAYMENT.



   (A)   When payment due.  Bills for water service charges shall be
rendered on a quarterly basis succeeding the period for which the service was
rendered and shall be due 20 days from the date of rendering.  Any bill not
paid in full 20 days after the due date will be considered delinquent.  At
that time the city shall notify the delinquent owner/occupant in writing
regarding the delinquent bill and subsequent penalty.  The penalty shall be
computed as 10% of the unpaid balance and shall be increased the same 10% for
every billing that is outstanding.



   (B)   Fractional months.  In all cases where water is furnished for
a period of a fraction of a  month, the minimum monthly charge shall be
payable.



   (C)   Unread meters.  Should the meters not be accessible or for
any other reason not be read during the period designated, a bill shall
nevertheless be rendered for the proper fixed or service charge, for the
period, and subsequent readings shall be equitably adjusted.



   (D)   Shut off.  The fixed service rate will be charged as long as
the meter remains in service.  In response to a written request by the owner
or authorized agent asking that the water be shut off and the meter removed,
the city will proceed to comply with the request and the service charge will
cease on the date when the meter is removed.



(Prior Code, § 62-34)  (Ord. 341, passed 2001)



§ 50.10  DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.



   (A)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills.  The city’s form for
application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to
the title, address, room number, and telephone number of the official in
charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the
effect:



      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date
set forth on the bill; and



      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a
second bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not
paid within 10 days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be
discontinued for nonpayment; and



      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he may be represented in person
and by counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present orally or
in writing his complaint and contentions to the city official in charge of
utility billing.  This official shall be authorized to order that the
customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make
a final determination of the customer’s complaint.



   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be
entertained; only questions of proper and correct billing will be
considered.  In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the
hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time
specified, but in no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at
least 30 days.



   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated
only after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a
turn-on charge in an amount set by City Council.



   (D)   The city reserves the right to discontinue service to any or
all customers of the water system, for non-payment of bills.  When service
has been discontinued for non-payment of bills, it shall not be resumed
except upon payment of the bills, together with interest thereon at the rate,
set by the Council and the payment to the utility billing clerk of a fee
determined by the Council for shutting off and re-establishing service.



   (E)   Any amounts due hereunder for water charges may be collected
in action brought for that purpose in the name of the city against the water
user or the owner of the premises or the utility billing clerk shall certify
to the County Auditor the amounts due for water charges, including penalty,
together with the legal description of the premises served and the County
Auditor shall thereupon enter the amount in the tax levy on the premises
collectible with the taxes for the next ensuing year; provided that nothing
herein shall prevent the Water Superintendent from ordering discontinuance of
service to any premises until any bill shall have been paid.



   (F)   The owner of the premises shall be liable to pay for the water
service charges to the premises, and the service is furnished to the premises
by the city upon the condition that the owner of the premises is liable to
the city.  Premises upon which a shut-off has occurred will not be
reconnected until all delinquent charges, together with fees, penalties and
interest charges where applicable, are paid in full by the owner of the
premises.



(Prior Code, § 62-35)  (Ord. 236, passed 1989; Am. Ord. 341, passed 2001)



§ 50.11  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Consent to regulations.  Every person applying for water
service from the city system, and every owner of property for which the
application is made, shall be deemed by the application to consent to all
rules, regulations, and rates contained in the ordinances of the city and to
all modification thereof and to all new rules, regulations, or rates duly
adopted.



   (B)   Use of water without authority.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to use water from any premises without the consent of the owner, or to
use water from the city system, except to be drawn through a meter installed
by the city. No person, except an authorized representative of the Water
Superintendent, shall turn on or off or tamper with any curb cocks.



   (C)   Furnishing water to others restricted.  No consumer, except
with the written consent of the City Council previously obtained, will be
allowed to furnish water to other persons or premises by means of temporary
service lines, hose, and the like.  Violation of this regulation may cause
the supply to be shut off.



   (D)   Re-establishment of service.  After supply to metered
premises has been shut off for any reason, except for repairs, the service
will not be re-established unless written order is given the Clerk by the
owner or authorized agent, nor until all arrears are paid.



   (E)   Fire hydrants.  No person shall, without authority, use or
interfere with any fire hydrant.



   (F)   Lawn sprinkling.  The use of water for lawn sprinkling
purposes shall at all times be subject to the express condition that the
Council may at any time, when in its opinion the condition of the water
supply demands it, limit the time during each day during which hoses may be
used for sprinkling purposes, or the Council may forbid the use of water for
any given period.



   (G)   Maintenance shut-offs.



      (1)   It is expressly agreed and understood that the Council
reserves the right at any time to shut off the water for the purpose of
extending, replacing, repairing or cleaning mains and appurtenances, and the
Council shall not be held liable for any damages arising therefrom.



      (2)   No claim shall be made against the city by reason of the
breaking of any service pipe or connection.



   (H)   Special winter use, freezing pipes.  Any person using water
supplied by the city may apply to the Clerk for authorization to permit water
to run at a stated location to prevent water pipes from freezing during the
months of January, February, and March of each year.



   (I)   Fires, use of water during.  It is hereby declared to be
unlawful for any person in this city, or any person owning or occupying
premises connected to the municipal water system, to use or allow to be used
during a fire from the system, except for the purposes of extinguishing a
fire, and upon the sounding of a fire alarm it shall be the duty of every
person to see that all water services are tightly closed and that no water is
used except for necessary household purposes during the fire.



(Prior Code, § 62-36)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.12  DEFECTIVE SERVICE.



   All claims for defective service shall be made in writing and filed
with the Water Superintendent on or before the tenth day of the month next
succeeding the defective service, or be deemed waived by the claimant; and if
claims are so filed, it shall be the duty of the Water Superintendent to
investigate the facts alleged in the claim and determine the amount, if any,
which would be refunded to the claimant by reason of the defective service,
and report the determination to the Council, and if approved by that body,
the amount shall be allowed as a credit on the following bill or paid as
other claims; but no claim, shall be made against the city for any fire or
any injuries to the person or property of any consumer of water under the
provision hereof.



(Prior Code, § 62-37)



§ 50.13  INSPECTION AND REPAIRS.



   (A)   The Water Superintendent or his or her representative shall
have the right to enter upon any premises in the municipality, at all the
reasonable hours, to inspect the service pipes and fixtures connected
therewith.



   (B)   If it shall be found from the inspection or otherwise that any
part of the water service line including corporation and curb stop is in need
of repairs, the Water Superintendent or his or her representative, shall
serve notice upon the owner, and upon the occupant, and upon the person in
charge of the premises specifying the time as is reasonable considering the
amount of work to be done, and the nature of the emergency, within which the
repairs must be made.  It shall thereupon become the duty of every person
served with a notice to comply therewith; and if it is not complied with, the
municipality may cause the work to be done at the expense of any person so
served.  Any amounts due hereunder may be collected in the manner provided
herein.



   (C)   The Water Superintendent or employees of the Water Department
shall be furnished with an official department badge with the words “Park
Rapids Water Department,” and his or her number thereon.  This badge shall
be used for identification purposes when entering premises.



(Prior Code, § 62-38)



§ 50.14  WATER SUPERINTENDENT.



   Unless some other agent or employee of the city shall be designated by
the Council as Water Superintendent, the Clerk shall act as the
Superintendent and in the event any reference herein to the Water
Superintendent shall be deemed to refer to the Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 62-39)




SEWER USE




§ 50.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in 5 days at 20°C expressed in milligrams per liter.  Laboratory
procedures shall be in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.



   BUILDING DRAIN.  The part of the lower horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer
beginning 5 feet outside the inner face of the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection.



   CITY.  The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of Park
Rapids, as presently established or as amended by ordinance or other legal
actions at a future time.  The term CITY when used herein may also be used
to refer to the City Council and its authorized representatives.



   COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter, expressed in milligrams per liter, as
determined in accordance with standard laboratory procedures as set out in
the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater.



   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer originally designated to receive both surface
water runoff and sewage.



   GARBAGE.  Solid waste resulting from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage or
sale of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, vegetable or condemned food.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.  The solid, liquid, or gaseous wastes resulting
from an industrial or manufacturing process, trade or business, or from the
development, recovery, or processing of natural resources.



   INFILTRATION.  Water entering the sewage system (including building
drain and pipes) from the ground through means such as defective pipes, pipe
joints, connections, and manhole walls.



   INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I).  The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow.



   INFLOW.  Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system
(including building drains) from sources such as, but not limited to, roof
leaders, cellar drains, yard and area drains, foundation drains, drains from
springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm
sewers, catch basins, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage.



   NPDES PERMIT (NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM).  The
system for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the discharge of
pollutants from point sources into the navigable waters, the contiguous zone,
and the oceans by the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, §§ 402 and 405, being 33 U.S.C. §§
1342 and 1345.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface groundwater.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTES.  Wastes which are characterized by a
composite average strength of 250 mg per liter BOD, and 285 mg per liter
suspended solids.



   OTHER WASTES.  Garbage, municipal refuse, decayed wood, sawdust,
shavings, bark, lime, sand, ashes, oil, tar, chemicals, offal, and other
substances except sewage and other wastes.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, municipal corporation, governmental unit, or group.



   pH.  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   PROCESS WATER.  Any water used in the manufacturing, preparation or
production of goods, materials or food.  PROCESS WATER is an industrial
waste.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  Any sewer owned or operated by a unit or agency of
government.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.



   SANITARY WASTE.  The liquid and water carried wastes discharged from
sanitary plumbing facilities.



   SEWAGE or WASTEWATER.  The water carried waste products from
residence, public buildings, institutions, industrial establishments, or
other buildings including the excrementitious or other discharge from the
bodies of human beings or animals, together with the ground, surface, and
stormwaters as may be present.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage, industrial wastes, or
other waste liquids.



   SEWER SYSTEM.  Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, forcemains and
all other devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, used for collecting or
conducting sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes to a point of ultimate
disposal.



   SHALL or MAY.  SHALL is mandatory.  MAY is permissive.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent, or in quantity of flow exceeds for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than 5 times the average
24 hour concentration of flows during the normal operation.



   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN.  A sewer which carries storm or surface
water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial waste, other than
unpolluted cooling or process water.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Solids that either float on the surface of or are
in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering in accordance with the latest edition of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER.  Clean water uncontaminated by industrial wastes, or
any substance which renders the water unclean or noxious or impure so as to
be actually or potentially harmful or detrimental or injurious to public
health, safety or welfare to domestic, commercial, industrial or recreational
uses; or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish, or other aquatic life.



   WASTEWATER FACILITIES.  The structures, equipment, or processes
required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
dispose of the effluent.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS or TREATMENT WORKS.  An arrangement of
devices and structures for treatment of wastewater, industrial waste and
sludge.  Sometimes used as synonymous for wastewater treatment plant or
waste treatment plant or water pollution control plant or sewage treatment
plant.



(Prior Code, § 62-51)  (Ord. 234, passed 1987)



§ 50.26  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within
the city or any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this section.



   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage if adequate and feasible
city facilities are available.



   (C)   The owner of any building or property which is located within
the city and from which wastewater is discharged shall be required to connect
to a public sewer at his or her expense within 3 years of the date the public
sewer is operational, provided that the public sewer is within 200 feet of
the property generating the wastewater and the public sewer is located in a
public right-of-way or easement for sewer purposes adjacent to the
property.  All future buildings constructed on property adjacent to the
public sewer shall be required to immediately connect to the public sewer. 
If sewer connections are not being made pursuant to this division, an
official 90 day notice shall be served instructing the affected property
owner to make the connection.



   (D)   In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a public sewer
in compliance with a notice given under division (C) above, the city may
undertake to have the connection made and shall assess the cost thereof
against the benefited property.  The assessment shall be a lien against the
property.  The assessment, when levied, shall bear interest at the legal
rate for local improvements and shall be certified to the auditor of the
County of Hubbard, Minnesota, and shall be collected and remitted to the city
in the same manner as assessments for local improvements.  The rights of the
city shall be in addition to any remedial or enforcement provisions of this
section.



   (E)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged directly
or indirectly any stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
waste from on-site disposal systems, unpolluted cooling or processing water
to any sanitary sewer except as permitted by the city or other local unit of
government.  No person may discharge sump pump or footing drain water into
the public sanitary sewer.



   (F)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted water shall be discharged
to a storm sewer, except that unpolluted cooling or processing water shall
only be so discharged upon approval by the city and upon approval and
issuance of a discharge permit by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   (G)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged directly
or indirectly, any of the following described substances to any public sewer:



      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;



      (2)   (a)   Any water or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or
by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any wastewater
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the wastewater treatment works; and



         (b)   A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited
to any pollutant identified pursuant to §  307A of the Clean Water Act,
being 33 U.S.C § 1317(a).



      (3)   Any water or waste having a pH lower than 5.5 or having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater treatment works;



      (4)   Solid or viscous substances, either whole or ground, in
quantities or of the size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the
sewers, or other interference with the proper continuation of the wastewater
facilities, but not limited to ashes, cinders, disposable diapers, glass
grinding or polishing wastes, stone cuttings or polishing wastes, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, sanitary
napkins, paper dishes, cups, milk containers and other paper products; and



      (5)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or substances which
either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the
sewers for their maintenance or repairs.



   (H)   (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
directly or indirectly the following described substances to any public sewer
unless in the opinion of the city that discharge will not harm the wastewater
facilities, nor cause obstruction to the flow in sewers, nor otherwise
endanger life, limb, or public property, nor constitute a nuisance.  In
forming its opinion as to the acceptability of the wastes the city may give
consideration to factors such as the quantities of the subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials or construction of
the sewers, nature of the wastewater treatment process, capacity of the
wastewater treatment plant, the city’s NPDES permit, and other pertinent
factors.  The city may make these determinations either on a general basis
or as to discharges from individual users or specific discharges, and may
prohibit certain discharges from individual users or specific discharges, and
may prohibit certain discharges from individual users because of unusual
concentrations or combinations which may occur.



      (2)   The substances prohibited are:



         (a)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature in excess
of 150°F (65°C);



         (b)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and 65°C);



         (c)   Any garbage that has not been ground or comminuted
to a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under
flows normally prevailing in the public sewers, with no particles greater
than ½ inch in any dimension;



         (d)   Any water or wastes containing strong acid, iron
pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or
not;



         (e)   Any water or wastes containing phenols or other
taste or odor producing substances which constitute a nuisance or hazard to
the structures, equipment, or personnel of the wastewater works, or which
interfere with the treatment required to meet the requirements of the state
or federal government, or any other public agency with proper authority to
regulate the discharge from the wastewater treatment plant;



         (f)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life
or concentration that they are not in compliance with regulations issued by
the appropriate authority having control over their use or may cause damage
or hazards to the treatment works or personnel operating it;



         (g)   Any water or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
and



         (h)   Materials which exert or cause:



            1.   Unusual concentrations of suspended solids,
(such as, but not limited to, Fuller’s earth, lime slurries, and lime
residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride or sodium sulfate);



            2.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not
limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);



            3.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or
chlorine requirements in quantities as to constitute a significant load on
the wastewater treatment works.  The BOD discharged to the public sewer
shall not exceed 400 mg/l;



            4.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of
wastes constituting a slug; and



            5.   Water or water containing substances which
are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment
processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to a degree that the
wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of the NPDES
permit, or requirements of other governmental agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge from the wastewater treatment plant.



   (I)   (1)   If any water or wastes are discharged, or are
proposed to be discharged directly or indirectly to the public sewers, which
water or wastes do not meet the standards set out in or promulgated under
this section, or which in the jurisdiction of the city may have a deleterious
effect upon the treatment works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters,
or which otherwise create a hazard to life, or constitute a public nuisance,
the city may take all or any of the following steps:



         (a)   Refuse to accept the discharges;



         (b)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge;



         (c)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition
for the discharge to the public sewers; and



         (d)   Require payment to cover the added costs of
handling or treating the wastes.



      (2)   The design and installation of the plant and equipment
for pretreatment or equalization of flows shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city, and subject to the requirements of 40 C.F.R. 403,
entitled Pretreatment Standards, and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   (J)   Grease, oil and mud interceptors shall be provided when they
are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable
grease in excessive amounts, as specified in division  (H)(2) of this
section, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except
that the interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units; except, all interceptors shall be a type and capacity
approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. All apartment complexes shall have
interceptors.



   (K)   Where preliminary treatment flow equalization, or interceptors
are required for any water or waste, they shall be effectively operated and
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective condition by the owner
at his or her expense and shall be available for inspection by the city at
all reasonable times.



   (L)   When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying wastes shall install a suitable control
structure together with necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes.  The structure and equipment, when required, shall be constructed at
the owner’s expense in accordance with plans approved by the city and shall
be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.



   (M)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
water and waste to which reference is made in this division shall be
determined in accordance with 40 C.F.R. 136, Guidelines Establishing Test
Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants; the latest edition of Standard
Methods For the Examination of Water and Wastewater and shall be determined
at the control structure provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the
control structure.  In the event that no special structure has been
required, the control structure shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer from the point at which the building
sewer is connected.  Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effluent constituents and their effect upon the
treatment works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, health and
property.  Sampling methods, location, times, duration and frequencies are
to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the city.



   (N)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes may, at the discretion of the city, be required to
provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of waters or wastes to
illustrate compliance with this section and any special condition for
discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction
over the discharge.  The number, type and frequency of sampling and
laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by
the city.  The industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents
of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state
and local standards are being met.  The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at the times and in the
manner as prescribed by the city.  The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses and reporting required by the city. At times as deemed
necessary the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples for
analysis by an outside laboratory.



   (O)   New connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be
prohibited unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream
facilities, including, but not limited to, capacity for flow, BOD, and
suspended solids.



   (P)   No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any
manner, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
this section, or contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
or any state requirements.



   (Q)   No statement contained in this section shall be constructed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangements between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefor by the industrial concern, in accordance with applicable ordinance
and any supplemental agreements with the city.



(Prior Code, § 62-52)  (Ord. 234, passed 1987)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.27  (RESERVED).



§ 50.28  BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The following provisions apply to persons wishing to engage in
the work of installing private sewer service lines and appurtenances for
others.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the work or
business of installing private sewer service lines and appurtenances for
others without a license therefor from the city.



      (2)   Any person desiring to engage in this work shall make
application to the city on forms to be supplied by the city together with a
fee.  The fee for every license shall be established by the Council and
listed in the fee schedule located in the Fee Schedule, Chapter 36 of this
code and shall be for 1 calendar year only.  Each renewal shall be made by
application together with the annual fee.  A plumber licensed by the State
Board of Health shall pay no fee to the city, but shall show evidence of the
state license before the city issues a license.



      (3)   Each applicant for license shall sign an agreement on
form as may be delivered by the city agreeing to pay the city the actual cost
of repair for any damage caused to the city sewer system by the applicant, or
by any of his or her employees or agents.  This agreement shall accompany
the license application.



      (4)   Each applicant shall accompany his or her application
with a certificate of insurance in a company acceptable to the city showing
public liability insurance coverage with limits as may be specified by the
City Council as part of the Council’s annual review of fees.  This
certificate shall specifically state that insurance covers underground
construction operations and shall contain a provision that the coverage
afforded under the policies will not be canceled or materially changed until
at least 15 days prior written notice has been given to the city.



   (B)   No person, unless authorized by a written permit from the city
shall make, install, repair, alter, disturb, uncover, open or break any sewer
connection to the sanitary sewer system of the city.  Permits for connection
of a new sewer service or repairs to an existing service shall be issued by
the city after consideration of the application for the permit with regard to
compliance with other provisions of this section.  Permits shall be issued
in the following manner.



      (1)   Application for a permit to perform work on a sewer
service connection within the city shall be made on a form supplied by the
city by the person or firm who will be performing the work to the city along
with a fee as determined by the Council for the installation of a new
connection.  The person or firm performing the work shall be licensed to
perform the work by the city.



      (2)   After approval of the permit application by the city,
the applicant shall furnish to the city a performance bond in an amount as
determined by the Council.  The performance bond shall be for the good and
faithful performance of all work on public and private property relative to
the work being performed.  The bond shall be payable to the city and the
owner of the property on which the work is being performed.  The bond shall
warrant the work for a period of 1 year from the date of completion.



      (3)   The City  Clerk shall issue a permit for the work after
the application is approved and the bond is received.



   (C)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and
connection of the building sewer or repairs to an existing connection shall
be borne by the owner.  The owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the city
from any loss or damage to the public sewer that may directly or indirectly
be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building, except where 2 or more buildings are situated on 1 parcel
so that the parcel may not be subdivided.  The joint use private sewer may
be extended to the rear building or buildings and the whole considered as 1
joint use private sewer provided the buildings are the property of a single
owner.  Special variances will be considered by the city.



   (E)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, upon examination and testing by the city,
to meet all the requirements of this section.



   (F)   Unused septic tanks, cesspools, leaching pits, and similar
devices and structures shall be backfilled or made safe and unusable in a
manner acceptable to the city.



   (G)   The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a
building sewer and the method used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of the building code and plumbing code; or other applicable
rules and regulations.  In the absence of code provisions, or in
amplifications thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the “Water Pollution Control Federation (W.P.C.F.) Manual
of Practice No. 9" and the American Society for Testing Materials (A.S.T.M.)
Standards shall apply.



   (H)   Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor.  In all buildings in
which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, the building drain shall be provided with a lifting device by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer.



   (I)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, roof
drains, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of
surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which, in
turn, is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



   (J)   The construction of the building sewer and its connection into
the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State of Minnesota
Plumbing Code, the sewer specifications included herein, and other applicable
rules and regulations and procedures adopted by the city.  All construction
shall be made gas tight and watertight.  Any deviation from the prescribed
procedures and materials must be approved by the city prior to installation.



   (K)   Employees of the city shall be allowed to inspect the work at
any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit
shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection and no
underground portions shall be covered before the final inspection is
complete.  The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city or
its representative.



   (L)   All excavations for building sewer installations shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazards.  Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed during the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city.



(Prior Code, § 62-54)  (Ord. 234, passed 1987; Am. Ord. 341, passed 2001) 
Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.29  MAIN AND LATERAL SEWER CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   No person, unless authorized, shall uncover, make any
connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any sanitary or storm
sewer within the city or any part of the city wastewater facilities.



   (B)   No sanitary or storm sewers shall be constructed in the city
(except house or building service sewers) except by the city or by others in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by a professional
engineer.  No sewers shall be constructed or considered to be part of the
public sewer system unless accepted by the city.



   (C)   The size, slope, alignment, material of construction, methods
to be used in excavation, placing of pipe, jointing, testing, backfilling and
other work connected with the construction of sewers shall conform to the
requirements of the city.



(Prior Code, § 62-55)  (Ord. 234, passed 1987)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.30  PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.



   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities.



(Prior Code, § 62-56)  (Ord. 234, passed 1987)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.31  AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   Duly authorized employees of the city shall be permitted to
enter all premises for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. 
Those employees shall have no authority to inquire into processes including
metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries
except as is necessary to determine the kind and source of the discharge to
the public sewer.



   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private property as
referred to in division (A) above of this section, the authorized employees
of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises.



   (C)   Duly authorized employees of the city shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the city holds easements for the
purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, maintenance, and
construction of public sewers.



(Prior Code, § 62-57)  (Ord. 234, passed 1987)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.32  VALIDITY.



   The validity of any section, subdivision, paragraph, clause, sentence,
or provision of this subchapter shall not affect the validity of any other
part of this subchapter which can be given effect without the invalid part or
parts.



(Prior Code, § 62-59)  (Ord. 234, passed 1987)




SEWER SERVICE CHARGE




§ 50.45  SEWER SERVICE FUND.



   (A)   (1)   The City of Park Rapids hereby continues a sewer
service fund as an income fund to receive all revenues generated by the sewer
service charge system, and all other income dedicated to the operation,
maintenance, replacement and construction of the wastewater treatment works,
including taxes, special charges, fees, and assessments intended to retire
construction debt.



      (2)   The city also continues the following accounts as income
and expenditure accounts within the sewer service fund:



         (a)   Operation and maintenance account;



         (b)   Equipment replacement account; and



         (c)   Debt retirement account.



   (B)   All revenue generated by the sewer service charge system, and
all other income pertinent to the treatment system, including taxes and
special assessments dedicated to retire construction debt, shall be held by
the City Clerk separate and apart from all other funds of the city.  Funds
received by the sewer service fund shall be transferred to the operation and
maintenance account, the equipment replacement account, and the debt
retirement account in accordance with state and federal regulations and the
provisions of this section.



   (C)   Revenue generated by the sewer service charge system
sufficient to insure adequate replacement throughout the design of useful
life, whichever is longer, of the wastewater facility shall be held separate
and apart in the equipment replacement account and dedicated to affecting
replacement costs. Interest income generated by the equipment replacement
account shall remain in the equipment replacement account.



   (D)    Revenue generated by the sewer service charge system
sufficient for operation and maintenance shall be held separate and apart in
the operation and maintenance account.



(Prior Code, § 62-85)  (Ord. 235, passed 1987)



§ 50.46  ADMINISTRATION.



   The sewer service charge and sewer service fund shall be administrated
according to the following provisions:



   (A)   (1)   The City Treasurer shall maintain a proper system of
accounts suitable for determining the operation and maintenance, equipment
replacement and debt retirement costs of the treatment works, and shall
furnish the City Council with a report of the costs annually in the city’s
financial report.



      (2)   The City Council shall annually determine whether or not
sufficient revenue is generated for the effective operation, maintenance,
replacement and management of the treatment works, and whether sufficient
revenue is being generated for debt retirement.  The Council will also
determine whether the user charges are distributed proportionately to each
user in accordance with § 204(b)(2)(A) of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1284.



      (3)   The city shall thereafter, but not later than the end of
the year, reassess, and as necessary revise the sewer service charge system
then in use to insure the proportionality of the user charge and to insure
the sufficiency of funds to maintain the capacity and performance to which
the facilities were constructed, and to retire the construction debt.



   (B)   In accordance with federal and state requirements each user
will be notified annually in conjunction with a regular billing of that
portion of the sewer service charge attributable to operation, maintenance
and replacement.



   (C)   In accordance with federal and state requirements, the City
Clerk shall be responsible for maintaining all records necessary to document
compliance with the sewer service charge system adopted.



   (D)   Bills for sewer service charges shall be rendered on a
quarterly basis succeeding the period for which the service was rendered and
shall be due 20 days from the date of rendering.  Any bill not paid in full
20 days after the due date will be considered delinquent.  At that time the
city shall notify the delinquent owner/occupant in writing regarding the
delinquent bill and subsequent penalty. The penalty shall be computed as 10%
of the original bill and shall be increased the same 10% for every quarter
the bill is outstanding.



   (E)   The owner of the premises, shall be liable to pay for the
service to the premises, and the service if furnished to the premises by the
city only upon the condition that the owner of the premises is liable
therefore to the city.



   (F)   Any additional costs caused by discharges to the treatment
works of toxics or other incompatible wastes, including the cost of restoring
wastewater treatment services, clean up and restoration of the receiving
waters and environs, and sludge disposal, shall be borne by the discharger(s)
of the wastes, at no expense to the city.



(Prior Code, § 62-86)    (Ord. 235, passed 1987; Am. Ord. 341, passed 2001)



§ 50.47  VALIDITY.



   (A)   If any section or paragraph of this subchapter shall be held
invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect the validity of the other
provisions of this subchapter, which shall continue in full force and effect.



   (B)   The sewer service charge system shall take precedence over any
terms or conditions of agreements or contracts which are inconsistent with
the requirements of § 204(b)(1)(A) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1284 and
federal regulation 40 C.F.R. 35.2140 of the Environmental Protection
Agency’s grant regulations.



(Prior Code, § 62-87)  (Ord. 235, passed 1987)



§ 50.48  SEWER SERVICE RATES.



   The sewer service rates and charges supplied by the city shall be
established by the Council and listed in the Fee Schedule, Chapter 36 of this
code.



(Prior Code, § 62-33)  (Ord. 219, passed 8-10-1981)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Water.



      (1)   Any person violating any regulation of §§ 50.01et seq.
shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.



      (2)   Any prosecution hereunder shall not prevent the
enforcement of any civil right or remedy hereunder or under any other
applicable law.



(Prior Code, § 62-40)



   (B)   Sewer use.



      (1)   Any person found to be violating any provisions of §§
50.25et seq. shall be served by the city with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof.  The offender shall within the time period
stated in the notice permanently cease all violations.



      (2)   (a)   Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the time limit provided for in the written notice shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not
exceeding $500 for each violation.



         (b)   Each day in which any violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.



      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
50.25et seq. shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned by the city by reason of the violations.



(Prior Code, § 62-58)  (Ord. 234, passed 1987)



   (C)   Sewer service charge.



      (1)   Each and every sewer service charge levied by and
pursuant to §§ 50.45et seq. is hereby made a lien upon the lot or premises
served, and all charges which are on October 31of each year past due and
delinquent, shall be certified to the County Auditor as taxes or assessments
on the real estate. Nothing in this division shall be held or construed as in
any way stopping or interfering with the right of the city to levy as taxes
or assessments against any premises affecting any delinquent or past due
service charges.



      (2)   As an alternative to levying a lien, the city may, at
its discretion, file suit in a civil action to collect the amounts as are
delinquent and due against the occupant, owner, or user of the real estate,
and shall collect as well all attorney’s fees incurred by the city in
filing the civil action.  The attorney’s fees shall be fixed by an order
of the court.



      (3)   In addition to all penalties and costs attributable and
chargeable to recording notices of the lien or filing a civil action, the
owner or user of the real estate being serviced by the treatment works shall
be liable for interest upon all unpaid balances at the rate of 10% per annum.



(Prior Code, § 62-87)  (Ord. 235, passed 1987; Am. Ord. 429, passed
4-26-2005)



CHAPTER 51:  STORM WATER UTILITY



Section



   51.01   Storm water utility and authority



   51.02   Purpose



   51.03   Administration



   51.04   Rates and charges



§ 51.01  STORM WATER UTILITY AND AUTHORITY.



   There is hereby established a public utility to be known as the Storm
Water Utility for the City of Park Rapids. The Storm Water Utility shall be
operated as a public utility pursuant to the city code of ordinances and
applicable statutes. The revenues shall be subject to provisions of this
section and M.S. § 444.075.



(Ord. 524, passed 5-11-2010)



§ 51.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a funding mechanism for the
following services:



   (A)   The administration, planning, analysis, installation,
operation, maintenance, and replacement of public drainage systems;



   (B)   The administration, planning, implementation, and maintenance
of storm water Best Management Practices (BMP’s) to reduce the introduction
of sediment and other pollutants into local water resources; and



   (C)   Other education, engineering, inspection, monitoring, testing
and enforcement activities as necessary to maintain compliance with local,
state, and federal storm water requirements.



(Ord. 524, passed 5-11-2010)



§ 51.03  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Storm Water Utility shall be part of the Public Works Department
and shall be administered by the Public Works Director and the City Planner.
This chapter shall apply to the entire City of Park Rapids.



(Ord. 524, passed 5-11-2010)



§ 51.04  RATES AND CHARGES.



   In determining charges, the City Council may establish a Storm Water
Utility Policy and Credit Policy to specify application fees, exemptions and
exceptions, unit areas, residential equivalency factors, and unit rates to
charge utility users based upon the volume or direct runoff estimated to be
generated by various land uses within the city.



   (A)   Minimum or maximum fees.  The City Council shall establish a
per parcel minimum and maximum monthly fee, and a storm water utility credit
application fee, and they shall be listed in the fee schedule, Chapter 36 of
this code.



   (B)   Estimated charges.  If, for any reason, precise information
related to the use, development or area of a premise is not available; then
storm water utility charges for such premise shall be estimated, and billed,
based upon information then available to the city.



   (C)   Billing method.  Storm water utility fees will be computed
and collected by the city together with other city utility fees, in
accordance with the procedures set forth in § 50.09 of this code.



   (D)   Delinquent accounts.  Delinquent and unpaid storm water
utility fees may be certified to the County Auditor for collection with real
estate taxes during the following year or any year thereafter in the manner
prescribed in § 50.99, pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, Subd. 3.



   (E)   Appeal.  If a property owner believes that the fee charged to
a particular property is incorrect, she/he may request review and
re-computation of the fee.



(Ord. 524, passed 5-11-2010)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      71.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      72.   SNOWMOBILES



      73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



      74.   BICYCLES, ROLLER BLADES, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER SKIS AND
SKATEBOARDS



CHAPTER 70:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



   70.01   State highway traffic regulations adopted by reference



   70.02   Trucks prohibited on certain streets



   70.03   Stop intersections



   70.04   Through streets and 1-way streets



   70.05   Turning restrictions



   70.06   U-turns restricted



   70.07   Excessive noise



   70.08   Exhibition driving prohibited



   70.09   Cruising prohibited



   70.10   Motor vehicle noise



§ 70.01  STATE HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The Highway Traffic Regulations Act is hereby adopted by
reference.  The regulatory provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted as a traffic ordinance
regulating the use of highways, streets and alleys within the city and are
hereby incorporated in and made a part of this section as completely as if
set out in full herein.



   (B)   The penalty for violation of the provisions of state statutes
adopted by reference in this section shall be identical with the penalty
provided for in the statutes for the same offense.



§ 70.02  TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   (A)   The City Council by resolution may designate streets on which
travel by commercial vehicles in excess of 10,000 pounds axle weight is
prohibited.  The Chief of Police shall cause appropriate signs to be erected
on those streets.  No person shall operate a commercial vehicle on posted
streets in violation of the restrictions posted.



   (B)   The weight restrictions established in division (A) shall not
apply to city or emergency vehicles, public school buses or to garbage and
refuse trucks making regular collections and are under contract with the
city, nor shall the weight restrictions in division (A) apply if a commercial
vehicle must use the particular street in question for the purpose of local
pick-up or delivery.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.03  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   The city may designate intersections as a stop intersection and require
all vehicles to stop at 1 or more entrances to those intersections.  The
city shall post signs at those designated intersections, giving notice of the
designation as a stop intersection.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
fail to obey the markings or signs posted under this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.04  THROUGH STREETS AND 1-WAY STREETS.



   The City Council by resolution may designate any street or portion of a
street as a through street or 1-way street where necessary to preserve the
free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents.  No trunk highway shall be so
designated unless the consent of the Commissioner of Transportation to the
designation is first secured.  The city shall cause appropriate signs to be
posted at the entrance to designated streets.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to fail to obey the markings or signs posted under this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.05  TURNING RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   The City Council by resolution may, whenever
necessary to preserve a free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents,
designate any intersection as one where turning of vehicles to the left or to
the right, or both, is to be restricted at all times or during specified
hours.  No intersection on a trunk highway shall be so designated until the
consent of the Commissioner of Transportation to the designation is first
obtained.



      (2)   The city shall mark by appropriate signs any
intersection so designated.



      (3)   No person shall turn a vehicle at any intersection
contrary to the direction on those signs.



   (B)   Except at intersections, and then only if not posted
otherwise, it shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle on
any street to cross the center of the street for the purpose of parking on
the side of the street opposite the original direction of travel.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle
on any street to back up or drive from a parked position and commence travel
in the opposite direction from which the motor vehicle faced when parked.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.06  U-TURNS RESTRICTED.



   No person shall turn a vehicle so as to reverse its direction on any
street in the business district or at any intersection where traffic is
regulated by a traffic control signal.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.07  EXCESSIVE NOISE.



   (A)   As used in this section, LIGHT-MOTOR VEHICLES means any
automobile, van, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, motor scooter, go-cart,
minibike, trail bike, or truck with a gross vehicular weight of less than
10,000 pounds.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to
operate, or use a light-motor vehicle in a manner as to cause, or allow to be
caused, excessive noise levels as a result of unreasonable rapid
accelerations, deceleration, revving of engine, squealing of tires, honking
of horns, or as a result of the operation of audio devices including but not
limited to radios, phonograph, tape players, compact disc players or any
other sound-amplifying device on or from the light-motor vehicle.



   (C)   No person shall operate, or cause to operate, or use a
light-motor vehicle in violation of the noise standards contained in Minn.
Rules parts 7030.1050 and 7030.1060, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (D)   No person shall operate, or cause to operate, or use a
light-motor vehicle that discharges its exhaust other than through a muffler
or other device that effectively prevents loud or explosive noises. No person
shall operate, or cause to operate, or use a light-motor vehicle whose
exhaust system has been modified, altered, or repaired in any way, including
the use of a muffler cut-out or by-pass, that amplifies or otherwise
increases noise above that emitted by the light-motor vehicle as originally
equipped.



   (E)   The following are exempted from the provisions of this section:



      (1)   Sound emitted from sirens of authorized emergency
vehicles;



      (2)   Burglar alarms on light-motor vehicles of the electronic
signaling type which also transmit an audible signal to a receiver which can
be carried by the owner or operator of the vehicle; and



      (3)   Celebrations on Halloween and other legal holidays and
celebrations in connection with duly authorized parades.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.08  EXHIBITION DRIVING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise operate a
motor vehicle within the city in a manner which causes unnecessary engine
noise or backfire, squealing tires, skidding, sliding, swaying, throwing of
sand or gravel, or in a manner simulating a race.  Unreasonable squealing or
screeching sounds emitted by tires or the unreasonable throwing of sand or
gravel by the tires is prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.09  CRUISING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   As used in this section, CRUISINGmeans the operation of a
motor vehicle as defined in M.S. § 169.01, Subd. 3, as it may be amended
from time to time, past a traffic control point as determined by a peace
officer on a street in an area designated “No Cruising Zone” by City
Council resolution 4 or more times between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 3:30
a.m.



   (B)   The passing of a traffic control point under the conditions
previously stated, shall constitute unnecessary repetitive driving and is a
violation of this section.



   (C)   The following use of vehicles shall constitute valid
exceptions to this prohibition: taxicabs for hire, buses, authorized
emergency vehicle, vehicles use used by or under contract with any
governmental jurisdiction, any vehicle being used to conduct legitimate
business activities.



   (D)   This section may be enforced only in an area that has been
posted as a “No Cruising Zone.”  Signs shall be posted at the beginning
and the end of any public street, alley or highway, or portion thereof which
is a no cruising zone.



§ 70.10  MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
phrases are defined as follows:



      ABNORMAL OR EXCESSIVE NOISE.



         (a)   Distinct and loudly audible noise that
unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort and repose
of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their
property's value;



         (b)   Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. §
169.69, as it may be amended from time to time, which requires every motor
vehicle to be equipped with a muffler in good working order; or



         (c)   Noise in excess of that permitted by M.S. §
169.693 and Minn. Rules parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as this statute
and these rules may be amended from time to time, which establish motor
vehicle noise standards.



      ENGINE-RETARDING BRAKE.  A dynamic brake, jake brake, Jacobs
brake, C-brake, Paccar brake, transmission brake or other similar
engine-retarding brake system which alters the normal compression of the
engine and subsequently releases that compression.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge the exhaust
or permit the discharge of the exhaust from any motor vehicle except through
a muffler that effectively prevents abnormal or excessive noise and complies
with all applicable state laws and regulations.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck to
intentionally use an engine-retarding brake on any public highway, street,
parking lot or alley within the city which causes abnormal or excessive noise
from the engine because of an illegally modified or defective exhaust system,
except in an emergency.



   (D)   Minnesota Statutes §§ 169.69 and 169.693 (motor vehicle
noise limits) and Minn. Rules parts 7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as these
statutes and rules may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by
reference.



   (E)   Signs stating “VEHICLE NOISE LAWS ENFORCED” may be
installed at locations deemed appropriate by the City Council to advise
motorists of the prohibitions contained in this section, except that no sign
stating “VEHICLE NOISE LAWS ENFORCED” shall be installed on a state
highway without a permit from the Minnesota Department of Transportation. The
provisions of this section are in full force and effect even if no signs are
installed.



CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   71.01   No parking where posted



   71.02   Limited parking



   71.03   Other parking restrictions



   71.04   Declaration of snow emergency; parking prohibited



   71.05   Parking certain semi-trailers or tractors on public streets
prohibited



   71.06   Overnight parking



   71.07   Repairing of vehicles



   71.08   Prohibiting parking areas in front yards in residential zones



   71.09   Impoundment



   71.10   Prima facie violation



Cross-reference:



   Abandoned vehicles, see Chapter 97



§ 71.01  NO PARKING WHERE POSTED.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon the public streets
of the city at any place where official signs or where appropriate devices,
marks, or painting, either upon the surface of the street or the curb
immediately adjacent thereto, prohibit these acts.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.02  LIMITED PARKING.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon the public streets
of the city where official signs are erected limiting the parking time
thereon, for a period of time in excess of the time as designated by the
official signs.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.03  OTHER PARKING RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   The City Council may by resolution order the placing of signs,
devices or marks, or the painting of streets or curbs prohibiting or
restricting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on any street
where, in its opinion, as evidenced by a finding in its official minutes, the
stopping, standing or parking is dangerous to those using the highway, or
where the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere
with the free movement of traffic.  The signs, devices, marks or painting
shall be official signs, devices, marks or painting, and no person shall
stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation of the restrictions thereon or
as indicated thereby.



   (B)   “No parking” signs may be placed by city employees on any
street of the city to permit construction, repair, snow removal, street
cleaning or similar temporary activities.  While the signs are in place, it
shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the streets or portion thereof so
posted.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a person to park in an area
designated by Council resolution and posted as a fire lane.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person to park a vehicle or permit
it to stand, whether attended or unattended, on an alley within the city,
provided that this does not prohibit the parking of vehicles for less than 1
hour on an alley for the purpose of access to abutting property for loading
or unloading merchandise or other material when parking on the property
itself is not available.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for a person to park a motor vehicle in
an area designated by posted signs pursuant to Council resolution for certain
types of vehicles, unless the motor vehicle is 1 of the types of vehicles
specifically permitted.



   (F)   Every vehicle parked upon any street with a curb shall be
parked parallel to the curb, unless angle parking is designated by
appropriate signs or markings. On streets with a curb, the right-hand wheels
of any vehicle parked shall be within 1 foot of the curb. On streets without
a curb, the vehicle shall be parked to the right of the main traveled portion
of the street and parallel to it and in such a manner as not to interfere
with the free flow of traffic, unless angle parking is designated by
appropriate signs or markings.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.04  DECLARATION OF SNOW EMERGENCY; PARKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The Mayor, Police Chief or other designated official may
declare a snow emergency in the city.  The emergency shall continue in
effect for a period of 24 hours or until the snow has been removed from the
city's streets or until the snow emergency has been rescinded by action of
the Mayor, Police Chief or other designated officer.



   (B)   Notice of the declaration of a snow emergency shall be given
by notifying the local news media; however, the notification shall be a
service aid only and not a duty on the part of the officials.



   (C)   During a declared snow emergency, no motor vehicle shall be
left parked on any street or public way in the city.



   (D)   During a declared snow emergency, any police officer who finds
a motor vehicle in violation of this section shall attempt to contact the
owner of the motor vehicle and require the owner to immediately move the
motor vehicle so as not to be in violation of this section.  If the owner
does not immediately remove the motor vehicle or the owner cannot be located,
the police officer is authorized to have the motor vehicle removed at the
owner's expense.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.05  PARKING CERTAIN SEMI-TRAILERS OR TRACTORS ON PUBLIC STREETS
PROHIBITED.



   No person shall park a semi-tractor or trailer, or any truck rated with
a gross vehicle weight in excess of 10,000 pounds, in any area of the city
zoned for residential use or other area designated by City Council resolution
except when the vehicle is parked in a completely enclosed garage.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.06  OVERNIGHT PARKING.



   The following vehicles shall not be allowed to park on city streets
overnight: repair, delivery, rented vehicles with commercial plates and
refuse and recycling haulers or any other vehicle not registered as a
passenger vehicle.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.07  REPAIRING OF VEHICLES.



   Minor repairs and tune-ups, such as replacement of spark plugs, spark
plug wires, thermostat, radiator or heater hoses, oil changes and brake jobs
shall be permitted on city streets; provided, that they can be accomplished
within the same day and completed by 10:00 p.m.  All other repairs shall be
considered major repairs and shall not be permitted on any city street,
unless the repairs are made within an enclosed structure allowed within the
zoning district.  Damage to city streets because of repairs or lack of
repairs shall be charged to the person responsible for the damage to the city
streets.



§ 71.08  PROHIBITING PARKING AREAS IN FRONT YARDS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.



   (A)   The construction, operation or maintaining a parking area,
either paved or unpaved, in the front yard of any lot is prohibited in any
area zoned for residential use.  For the purpose of this section, front yard
shall mean and include that area between the sidewalk, or street line in the
event there is no sidewalk, and the front line of the principal building,
extending in both directions to the side lot lines.



   (B)   Use of that portion of a vacant lot within 30 feet of the
sidewalk lines for parking in an area zoned for residential use is prohibited.



   (C)   Driveways in any area zoned for residential use shall not
exceed 25% of the width at the front or side lot line.  Where more than 1
driveway is desired or required, they shall be at least 70 feet apart.



   (D)   The front part of any lot shall not be used for the parking of
an automobile, truck, trailer, tractor, recreational vehicle, camper, travel
trailer, camper top, tent, wagon, boat, boat trailer, storage area or motor
home.



   (E)   No person, being the owner or having control of any building,
shall violate or fail to conform to any provision of this section, or fail to
obey any lawful order of an officer charged with its enforcement.  Each and
every day on which any person continues to violate the provisions of this
section, after having been notified of the violation, shall constitute a
separate offense.  This conviction shall not relieve any person from
thereafter complying with the provisions of this section, and shall be
sufficient cause to refuse further building or land use permits to the
offender until a time as the orders have been complied with.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.09  IMPOUNDMENT.



   Any police officer may order the removal of a vehicle from a street to
a garage or other place of safety when the vehicle is left unattended and
constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hinders snow removal, street
improvements or maintenance operations.  The vehicle shall not be released
until the fees for towing and storage are paid in addition to any fine
imposed for violation of this chapter.



§ 71.10  PRIMA FACIE VIOLATIONS.



   The presence of any motor vehicle on any street when standing or parked
in violation of this chapter is prima facie evidence that the registered
owner of the vehicle committed or authorized the commission of the violation.



CHAPTER 72:  SNOWMOBILES



Section



   72.01   Intent



   72.02   Definitions



   72.03   Application of traffic ordinances



   72.04   Restrictions



   72.05   Stopping and yielding



   72.06   Persons under 18



   72.07   Equipment



   72.08   Unattended snowmobiles



   72.09   Emergency operation permitted



§ 72.01  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this chapter to supplement M.S. §§ 84.81 to
84.91, and M.S. Ch. 169, as these statutes may be amended from time to time
and Minn. Rules parts 6100.5000 through 6100.6000, as these rules may be
amended from time to time, with respect to the operation of snowmobiles. 
These statutes and rules are incorporated herein by reference.  This section
is not intended to allow what the state statutes and rules prohibit, nor to
prohibit what the state statutes and rules allow.



§ 72.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEADMAN THROTTLE or SAFETY THROTTLE.  A device which, when pressure is
removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be
disengaged from the driving mechanism.



   OPERATE.  To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.



   OPERATOR.  Every person who operates or is in actual physical control
of a snowmobile.



   OWNER.  A person, other than a lien holder having the property in or
title to a snowmobile, or entitled to the use or possession thereof.



   PERSON.  Includes an individual, partnership, corporation, the state
and its agencies and subdivision, and any body of persons, whether
incorporated or not.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The entire strip of land traversed by a highway or
street in which the public owns the fee or an easement for roadway purposes.



   ROADWAY.  That portion of a highway or street improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.



   SNOWMOBILE.  A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or
ice, steered by skis or runners.



   STREET.  A public thoroughfare, roadway, alley or trail used for motor
vehicular traffic which is not an interstate, trunk, county-state aid, or
county highway.



§ 72.03  APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC ORDINANCES.



   The provisions of Ch. 70 of this code shall apply to the operation of
snowmobiles upon streets and highways, except for those relating to required
equipment, and except those which by their nature have no application.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.04  RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to enter, operate or stop a
snowmobile within the limits of the city:



      (1)   On the roadway of any street, except the most right hand
lane then available for traffic or as close as practicable to right hand curb
or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle
stopped in the lane or proceeding in the same direction, or in making a left
turn.  Snowmobiles may also be operated upon the outside slope of trunk,
county-state aid and county highways where the highways are so configured
within the corporate limits.



      (2)   On a public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel.



      (3)   On boulevards within any public right-of-way.



      (4)   On private property of another without specific
permission of the owner or person in control of the property.



      (5)   Upon any school grounds, except as permission is
expressly obtained from responsible school authorities.



      (6)   On public property, playgrounds and recreation areas,
except areas previously listed or authorized for the use by resolution of the
City Council, in which case the use shall be lawful, and snowmobiles may be
driven in and out of those areas by the shortest route.



      (7)   On streets as permitted by this chapter at a speed
exceeding 10 miles per hour.



      (8)   During the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., Sunday
through Thursday, and 12:01 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. on other days closer than 100
feet from any residence.  This provision is not intended to prohibit
snowmobiles from operating on city streets during the hours specified herein.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile within
the limits of the city:



      (1)   So as to tow any person or thing in a public street or
highway except through use of a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of the
snowmobile; provided, that a disabled snowmobile may be towed to a private
residence or a place of business where snowmobiles are repaired without the
use of a rigid tow bar.



      (2)   Within 100 feet of any fisherman, pedestrian, skating
rink or sliding area where the operation would conflict with use or endanger
other persons or operation.



      (3)   To intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any
animal.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.05  STOPPING AND YIELDING.



   No snowmobile shall enter any uncontrolled intersection without making
a complete stop.  The operator shall then yield the right-of-way to any
vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so close to the intersection
as to constitute an immediate hazard.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.06  PERSONS UNDER 18.



   (A)   No person under 14 years of age shall operate on streets or
make a direct crossing of a city street as the operator of a snowmobile.  A
person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age, may operate a
snowmobile on streets as permitted under this chapter and make a direct
crossing of those streets only if he or she has in his or her immediate
possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued pursuant to M.S. §
84.872, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile to permit the
snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provision of this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.07  EQUIPMENT.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile any place within
the limits of the city unless it is equipped with the following:



   (A)   Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce
the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. 
No person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass straight pipe or similar device
on a snowmobile motor.



   (B)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and
hold the snowmobile under any condition of operation.



   (C)   A safety or so called deadman throttle in operating condition.



   (D)   When operated between the hours of one-half hour after sunset
to one-half hour before sunrise, or at times of reduced visibility, at least
1 clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient intensity to reveal
persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the
hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.  The head lamp shall
be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an oncoming
snowmobile operator.  It shall also be equipped with at least 1 red light
plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during hours of
darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.



   (E)   Snowmobiles shall fly a pennant flag or red or blaze material,
of a size not less than 12 inches by 9 inches, at a height of not less than 6
feet from ground level at any time when the vehicle is operated on public
streets.



   (F)   Reflective material at least 16 square inches on each side,
forward of the handlebars and at the highest practical point on any towed
object, so as to reflect lights at a 90 degree angle.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.08  UNATTENDED SNOWMOBILES.



   Every person leaving a snowmobile on a public place shall lock the
ignition, remove the key and take the same with him or her.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.09  EMERGENCY OPERATION PERMITTED.



   Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this chapter, a snowmobile may be
operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of time
and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile
impractical.



CHAPTER 73:  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



Section



   73.01   Purpose and intent



   73.02   Definition



   73.03   Operation requirements



   73.04   Street crossings



   73.05   Hours of operation



   73.06   Minimum equipment requirements



   73.07   Designation of public areas for use



   73.08   Motorized golf carts/ Class 1 and Class 2 all-terrain
vehicles



§ 73.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable
regulations for the use of recreational motor vehicles on public and private
property in the city.



      (2)   This chapter is not intended to allow what the Minnesota
Statutes prohibit nor to prohibit what the Minnesota Statutes expressly allow.



   (B)   It is intended to ensure the public safety and prevent a
public nuisance.



§ 73.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any self-propelled vehicle and any
vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle used for recreational
purposes including, but not limited to trail bike, off-highway motorcycle, as
defined by M.S. § 84.787, Subd. 7, as it may be amended from time to time,
or other all-terrain vehicle as defined by M.S. § 84.92, Subd. 8, it may be
amended from time to time, motorized go-carts, hovercraft or motor vehicle
licensed for highway operation which is being used for off-road recreational
purposes.



§ 73.03  OPERATION REQUIREMENTS.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate a recreational motor vehicle:



   (A)   On private property of another without specific written
permission of the owner of the property; (Written permission may be given by
a posted notice of any kind or description, so long as it specifies the kind
of vehicles allowed, that the owner, occupant or lessee prefers, such as by
saying “Recreational Vehicles Allowed,” “Trail Bikes Allowed,”
“All-Terrain Vehicles Allowed” or words substantially similar.)



   (B)   On publicly-owned land, including school, park property,
playgrounds, recreation areas and golf courses, except where permitted by
this chapter;



   (C)   In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual
noise which disturbs, annoys or interferes with the peace and quiet of other
persons;



   (D)   On a public sidewalk or walkway provided or used for
pedestrian travel;



   (E)   At a place while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
narcotics or habit-forming drugs;



   (F)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all
the surrounding circumstances;



   (G)   At any place in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as
to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or to cause
injury or damage thereto;



   (H)   On any public street, highway or right-of-way unless licensed
pursuant to Minnesota law;



   (I)   To intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any animal,
wild or domestic;



   (J)   By halting any recreational motor vehicle carelessly or
heedlessly in disregard of the rights or the safety of others or in a manner
so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or in
excess of 25 miles per hour on publicly-owned lands; and/or



   (K)   Within 150 yards of any public recreational area or gathering
of people. This provision does not apply to the occasional use of
recreational motor vehicles on private property for the purpose of loading or
unloading it from a trailer or for mechanically checking it.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.04  STREET CROSSINGS.



   No person under 14 years of age operating the vehicles regulated herein
shall make a direct crossing of any street, highway or public right-of-way.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.05  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Hours for use are 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.06  MINIMUM EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Standard mufflers shall be properly attached and in constant
operation to reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum
necessary for operation. No person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass,
straight pipe or similar device on a recreational motor vehicle motor. The
exhaust system shall not emit or produce a sharp popping or crackling sound.



   (B)   Brakes shall be adequate to control the movement of and to
stop and hold under any conditions of operation.



   (C)   At least 1 clear lamp shall be attached to the front with
sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least
100 feet ahead during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions. The head lamp shall be so that glaring rays are not projected
into the eyes of an oncoming vehicle operator.  It shall also be equipped
with at least 1 red tail lamp having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet
to the rear during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions.  This equipment shall be required and shall be in operating
condition when the vehicle is operated between the hours of one-half hour
after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, or at times of reduced
visibility.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.07  DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC AREAS FOR USE.



   (A)   The Council may designate areas for use of recreational motor
vehicles by approval of a majority of the members of the City Council. The
areas designated may be changed from time to time by the City Council. Any
area designated shall be published in the official newspaper of the city in a
conspicuous place after the approval. If an area is changed, the change shall
be published in like manner in the official newspaper of the city. An
up-to-date map of any designated park areas open for recreational motor
vehicle use shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, who shall
provide on request a copy of the map together with the applicable rules,
regulations and this chapter to each person requesting the information from
the city.



   (B)   Unless designated by the City Council as an area for
recreational motor vehicles, the use on city park property shall be unlawful.
Further, the use of city parks designated by the City Council shall be in
accordance with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.08  MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS/ CLASS 1 AND CLASS 2 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   (a)   No person shall operate a motorized golf
cart, or Class 2 all-terrain vehicle, on streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public property without obtaining a permit as provided herein.



         (b)   No person shall operate a Class 1 all-terrain
vehicle on streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other public property.



      (2)   Every application for a golf cart or Class 2 all-terrain
vehicle permit shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall contain
the following information:



         (a)   The name, address, and phone number of the
applicant;



         (b)   The current valid driver’s license number of the
applicant or a certificate signed by a physician that the applicant is able
to safely operate a motorized golf cart or Class 2 all-terrain vehicle on 
the roadways as designated; and



         (c)   Other information as the city may require.



      (3)   The annual permit fee shall be as set forth in the fee
schedule ordinance, as that ordinance may be amended from time to time.



      (4)   Permits shall be granted for a period of 1 year and may
be renewed annually January 1 to December 31.



      (5)   No golf cart or Class 2 all-terrain vehicle permit shall
be granted or renewed unless the following conditions are met:



         (a)   The applicant must demonstrate that he or she
currently holds a current valid driver’s license or submit a certificate
signed by a physician that the applicant is able to safely operate a
motorized golf cart on the roadways as designated;;



         (b)   The applicant shall supply proof of insurance that
complies with M.S. § 65B.48, Subd. 5; M.S. § 169.045, Subd. 2. If a person
operating a motorized golf cart or Class 2 all-terrain vehicle under this
section cannot obtain liability insurance on the private market, that person
may purchase automobile insurance, including no-fault coverage, from the
Minnesota Automobile Insurance Plan. See M.S. § 169.045, Subd. 8;



         (c)   The applicant has not had his or her driver's
license revoked, suspended or canceled as the result of criminal proceedings.



      (6)   Motorized golf carts and Class 2 all-terrain vehicles
are permitted to operate only on city streets, not state or federal highways,
such as U.S. Route 71 and State Highway 34, except to cross at designated
intersections.



      (7)   Motorized golf carts and Class 2 all-terrain vehicles
may only be operated on designated roadways from sunrise to sunset, unless
equipped with original equipment, including headlights, taillights, and
rear-facing brake lights. They shall not be operated to inclement weather,
except during emergency conditions as provided in the ordinance, or when
visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions, or at any
time when there is insufficient visibility to clearly see persons and
vehicles on the roadway at a distance or 500 feet.



      (8)   The operator of a motorized golf cart or Class 2
all-terrain vehicle, may cross any street or highway intersecting a
designated roadway.



      (9)   Motorized golf carts shall display the slow-moving
vehicle emblem provided for in M.S. § 169.045, as it may be amended from
time to time, when operated on designated roadways.



      (10)   Motorized golf carts and Class 2 all-terrain vehicles
shall be equipped with a rear view mirror to provide the driver with adequate
vision from behind as required by M.S. § 169.70.



      (11)   Every person operating a motorized golf cart, or Class
2 all-terrain vehicle on designated roadways has all the rights and duties
applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under the provisions of M.S.
Ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to time, except when these provisions
cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts, or Class 2 all-terrain
vehicles, and except as otherwise specifically provided in M.S. §
169.045(7), as it may be amended from time to time.



      (12)   The City Council may suspend or revoke a permit granted
hereunder upon a finding that the holder thereof has violated any of the
provisions of this section or M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be amended from time to
time, or if there is evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate
the motorized golf cart or the Class 2 all-terrain vehicle on the designated
roadways.



      (13)   The number of occupants in the golf cart, or Class 2
all-terrain vehicle may not exceed the design occupant load.



      (14)   An application for permit to operate a motorized golf
cart or Class 2 all-terrain vehicle on Park Rapids city streets may be
obtained at City Hall.



      (15)   In order to obtain a permit, the golf cart and Class 2
all-terrain vehicle will be inspected by the Chief of Police or his/her
designee. The following information will be required and verified during the
inspection:



         (a)   Model, name, make, year, serial number of the
vehicle to be permitted;



         (b)   Proof of insurance for the vehicle;



         (c)   Golf cart has installed a slow-moving emblem;



         (d)   The Class 2 all-terrain vehicle has current DNR
registration;



         (e)   Vehicle is equipped with rear-view mirror; and,



         (f)   The vehicle is fully functional (i.e. manufactured
installed equipment is operational such as lights, turn signals, horn, brakes
and parking brake, reverse alarm, etc.).



      (16)   The city issued golf cart and Class 2 all-terrain
vehicle permit sticker must be clearly visible and displayed on the left back
of the vehicle at least 12 inches from the ground. The sticker must be
maintained in a clear and legible condition.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      CLASS 2 ALL-TERRAIN AND UTILITY VEHICLES. All-terrain vehicles
(ATVs) under Minnesota law are flotation-tired motorized vehicles with at
least three, but no more than six, low-pressure or non-pneumatic tires, an
engine with a less than 960 cc displacement, and a dry weight up to 1,800
pounds. ATVs include Class 1 and Class 2. Dry weight is normally the weight
of the vehicles without fluids. See M.S. § 84.92, Subd. 8 through 10; §
169.045, Subd. 1.



         (a)   Class 1 ATV has a total width 50 inches or less
from outside of tire rim to outside of tire rim (Note: Class 1 ATV may not be
operated on city streets).



         (b)   Class 2 ATV has a total width greater than 50
inches but not more than 65 inches from outside of tire rim to outside of
tire rim.



      DRIVER.  The person driving and having physical control over the
motorized golf cart or Class 2 all-terrain vehicle and being the licensee.



      MOTORIZED GOLF CART.  Not specially defined other than MOTORIZED
GOLF CARTS. They usually seat two to four people and can be powered by an
electric or gasoline engine ranging from under four to over 20 horsepower.
Vehicle weight can go from 500 to over 2,000 pounds. Top speed is typically
less than 20 miles per hour. See M.S. § 169.045.



      UTILITY TASK VEHICLES (UTVS). Under Minnesota law are vehicles
that must have four wheel drive, four wheels, an internal combustion engine
with a displacement of no more than 1,200 cc, and a dry weight of 1,800 to
2,600 pounds. Due to the larger tire size, most UTVs fit the definition of a
Class 2 ATV when used for recreational purposes. See M.S. § 169.045, Subd. 1.



(Am. Ord. 574, passed 7-11-2017)



CHAPTER 74:  BICYCLES, ROLLER BLADES, ROLLER SKATES,
ROLLER SKIS AND SKATEBOARDS



Section




Bicycles




   74.01   Definition



   74.02   Traffic laws apply



   74.03   Manner and number riding



   74.04   Hitching rides



   74.05   Where to ride



   74.06   Right-of-way; sidewalks



   74.07   Carrying articles



   74.08   Lighting and brake equipment



   74.09   Sale with reflectors



   74.10   Riding on sidewalks in business district




Roller Blades, Roller Skates, Roller Skis and Skateboards




   74.25   Definitions



   74.26   Unlawful acts



   74.27   Right-of-way



   74.28   Hours of use



 



   74.99   Violations



BICYCLES



§ 74.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BICYCLE.  Every device propelled solely by human power upon which any
person may ride, having 2 tandem wheels, except scooters and similar devices,
and including any device generally recognized as a BICYCLE though equipped
with 2 front or rear wheels.



§ 74.02  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY.



   Every person riding a bicycle on a street or upon any path set aside
for the exclusive use of bicycles shall be granted all of the rights and
shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
by this title, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as
to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no
application.



§ 74.03  MANNER AND NUMBER RIDING.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person propelling a bicycle to ride
other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.



   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at 1 time than
the number for which it is designed and equipped, except on a baby seat
attached to the bicycle, provided that the seat is equipped with a harness to
hold the child securely in the seat and that protection is provided against
the child's feet hitting the spokes of the wheel, or in a seat attached to
the bicycle operator.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.04  HITCHING RIDES.



   It is unlawful for any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, roller blades, skate board, sled, or toy vehicle to attach the same
or themselves to any vehicle upon a street.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.05  WHERE TO RIDE.



   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a street shall ride as
near to the right side of the street as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or 1 proceeding in the same direction.



   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a street shall not ride more than
2 abreast except on paths or parts of streets set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.06  RIGHT-OF-WAY; SIDEWALKS.



   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person shall
yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before
overtaking and passing the pedestrian.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.07  CARRYING ARTICLES.



   It is unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to carry any package,
bundle, or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least 1 hand
upon the handlebars.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.08  LIGHTING AND BRAKE EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Every bicycle, when in use at night time, shall be equipped
with, or its operator shall carry a lamp on the front which shall emit a
white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front, and
with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Department of
Public Safety which is visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet
to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a
motor vehicle.  A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.  No person
may, at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly
discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 500 feet
ahead, operate a bicycle unless the bicycle or its operator is equipped with
reflective surfaces that shall be visible during the hours of darkness from
600 feet when viewed in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle. The reflective surfaces shall include reflective materials on each
side of each pedal to indicate their presence from the front or the rear and
with a minimum of 20 square inches on each side of the bicycle or its
operator of white reflective material. All reflective materials used in
compliance with this section shall meet the requirements as prescribed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety.



   (B)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable
the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.09  SALE WITH REFLECTORS.



   It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any new bicycle
unless it is equipped with such reflectors as are prescribed in § 74.08.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.10  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS IN BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   No person shall ride a bicycle on any sidewalk in the business district
of the city.  The business district shall consist of those sidewalks within
an area bounded on the north by First Street, on the east by Park Avenue, on
the south by Fourth Street and on the west by Pleasant Avenue.



(Prior Code, § 54-81)  Penalty, see § 72.99



ROLLER BLADES, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER SKIS AND SKATEBOARDS



§ 74.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  That part of the city so designated by council
resolution.



   OPERATE.  To ride on or upon or control the operation of roller
blades, roller skates, or a skateboard.



   OPERATOR.  Every person who operates or is in actual physical control
of roller blades, roller skates, or a skateboard.



   ROLLER BLADES/ROLLER SKATES.  A shoe with wheels attached or a device
with wheels which is designed to be attached to a shoe.



   ROLLER SKIS.  A pair of skis platformed with wheels attached which is
intended to simulate skiing.



   SKATEBOARD.  A device for riding-upon, usually while standing,
consisting of an oblong piece of wood, or of other composition, mounted on
skate wheels.



§ 74.26  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate roller blades, roller
skates, roller skis or a skateboard under the circumstances set forth
hereafter:



      (1)   On any public sidewalk, street, or public parking lot
within the Business District;



      (2)   On private property of another without the express
permission to do so by the owner or occupant of the property; or



      (3)   In any careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to
endanger or be likely to endanger the safety of any person or property of any
other person.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person operating roller blades, roller
skates, roller skis or a skateboard to attach the same, or the person of the
operator, to any vehicle upon a street.



   (C)   Every person operating roller blades, roller skates, roller
skis or a skateboard upon a street shall ride as close as possible to the
right-hand curb or edge of the street.



   (D)   Every person operating roller blades, roller skates, roller
skis or a skateboard upon a street shall observe the same rules of the road
as required of bicycles, pursuant to M.S. § 169.222.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.27  RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   The operator of roller blades, roller skates, roller skis or a
skateboard emerging from any alley, driveway, or building, upon approaching a
sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, shall yield the
right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area
and upon entering the street shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the street.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.28  HOURS OF USE.



   It is unlawful for any person to use roller blades, roller skates,
roller skis or a skateboard upon a public street, sidewalk, or other roadway
from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., except on private property with express
permission of owner, and except if the roller blades, roller skates, roller
skis, skateboard or operator are equipped with reflective surfaces that shall
be visible during the hours of darkness from 600 feet when viewed in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. The reflective material
shall be a minimum of 40 square inches. All reflective materials used in
compliance with this section shall meet the requirements as prescribed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety.



Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.99  VIOLATIONS.



   A person apprehended by a peace officer in violation of the provisions
of this chapter does, by his or her use of the public sidewalks, streets, and
public parking lots, consent to the impoundment by a police officer of the
roller blades, roller skates, roller skis or skateboard for a period of 3
days upon a first offense, a week upon the second offense and 30 days upon a
third or additional offense. Any operator aggrieved by the impoundment of his
or her roller blades, roller skates roller skis or skateboard may petition
the Council for a hearing thereon at the next regular Council meeting
following the impoundment. This provision is in addition to the provisions
for fines and penalties as set forth in § 10.99.



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS



      91.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      92.   NUISANCES



      93.   ENVIRONMENT



      94.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES



      95.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT



      96.   PUBLIC PROPERTY/FACILITIES REGULATIONS



      97.   ABANDONED PROPERTY



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section




General Provisions




   90.001   Definitions




Dogs and Cats




   90.015   Registration and licensing requirements



   90.016   License tag and fees



   90.017   Rabies inoculation



   90.018   Terms of license



   90.019   New residents in the city



   90.020   Running at large



   90.021   Dog and cat nuisances



   90.022   Confinement of certain animals



   90.023   Impoundment and redemption procedures




Other Animals




   90.040   General prohibition



   90.041   Animals at large



   90.042   Non-domestic or exotic animals




Humane Treatment




   90.055   Improper care



   90.056   Cruelty to animals




Dangerous Dogs and Animals




   90.063   Diseased animals



   90.064   Declaration/designation of dangerous or potentially
dangerous dog



   90.065   Registration of dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs



   90.066   Dangerous dog designation review



   90.067   Exemptions



   90.068   Tag



   90.069   Appeal of designation




Destruction and Confiscation




   90.080   Quarantine of certain dogs and cats



   90.081   Confiscation of dangerous dogs



   90.082   Dangerous animals and safety emergencies



   90.083   Provision of reclamation



   90.084   Subsequent offenses



   90.085   Destruction of certain dogs and cats



   90.086   Destruction of animals in certain circumstances



   90.087   Enforcement



   90.088   Interference with animal control authority prohibited



 



   90.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 90.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL. Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all fowl
and poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal
kingdom, except homo sapiens. ANIMALS shall be classified as follows:



      (1)   DOMESTIC ANIMALS means those animals commonly accepted
as domesticated household pets. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall
include dogs, cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated
rabbits, fish, non-poisonous, non-venomous and non-constricting reptiles or
amphibians, and other similar animals.



      (2)   NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS or WILD ANIMALS means those animals
commonly considered to be naturally wild and not naturally trained or
domesticated, or which are commonly considered due to size, wild nature or
other characteristics to be inherently dangerous to the health, safety, and
welfare of people. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include:



         (a)   Any member of the large cat family (family
felidae) including but not limited to lions, tigers, cougars, bobcats,
leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly accepted domesticated house cats.



         (b)   Any naturally wild member of the canine family
(family canidae) including but not limited to wolves, foxes, coyotes,
dingoes, and jackals, but excluding commonly accepted domesticated dogs.



         (c)   Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a
wolf and a dog, unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated
house pet.



         (d)   Any member or relative of the rodent family
including but not limited to any skunk (whether or not descented) raccoon,
squirrel, or ferret, but excluding those members otherwise defined or
commonly accepted as domesticated pets.



         (e)   Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or
inherently dangerous member of the reptile or amphibian families including
but not limited to rattlesnakes, boa constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and
alligators.



         (f)   Any animal the keeping of which is licensed or
prohibited by state or federal law.



         (g)   Any other animal which is not explicitly listed
above but which can be reasonably defined by the terms of this section,
including, but not limited to bears, deer, weasels, badgers, monkeys, apes,
bison and game fish.



      (3)   FARM ANIMALS means those animals commonly associated
with a farm or performing work in an agricultural setting. Unless otherwise
defined, such animals include, but are not limited to, members of the
equestrian family (horses, mules, llamas, alpacas), bovine family (cows,
bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl (ducks, geese, ostriches,
emus), swine (including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees, and other
animals associated with a farm, ranch, or stable.



   ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY.  An agency of the state, county,
municipality, or other governmental subdivision of the state which is
responsible for animal control operations within its jurisdiction. The Park
Rapids Police Department shall be designated as the animal control authority
for the City of Park Rapids.



   AT LARGE.  Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of
the owner or a member of his or her immediate family, either by leash or
otherwise.



   CAT.  All cats over 4 months of age. CAT means any male or females of
the feline species, commonly accepted as domesticated household pets.



   DANGEROUS DOG. Shall have the meaning given it in M.S. § 347.50, Subd.
2, as amended.



   DOG.  All dogs over 4 months of age. DOG means any male or female of
the canine species, commonly accepted as domesticated household pets.



   GREAT BODILY HARM.  Shall have the meaning given it in M.S. § 609.02,
Subd. 8.



   NON-DOMESTIC OR EXOTIC ANIMAL. Any wild animal, reptile, or fowl which
is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild disposition or which,
because of its size, vicious nature or other characteristics would constitute
a danger to human health, safety or property.



   OWNER.  Any person, firm, corporation, organization, or department
possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in, or having care,
custody, or control of a dog or cat.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, organization,
department or group, however organized.



   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. Shall have the meaning given it in M.S. §
347.50, Subd. 3, as amended.



   PROPER ENCLOSURE. Shall have the meaning given it in M.S. § 347.50,
Subd. 4.



   RESTRAIN.  The animal is on the premises of the person harboring or
keeping the animal or that the animal is effectively restrained by a leash,
chain, or electronic control device is within 10 feet of the person having
custody of it and is obedient to the command of that person.



   SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM. Shall have the meaning given it in M.S. §
609.02, Subd. 7(a).



(Prior Code, § 10-1)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 580, passed
2-27-2018)




DOGS AND CATS




§ 90.015  REGISTRATION AND LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.



   Every person who owns a dog or cat shall cause the animal to be
registered and licensed as hereafter provided.



(Prior Code, § 10-26)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.016  LICENSE TAG AND FEES.



   All dogs and cats kept in this city shall be registered in the office
of the City Clerk.  The owner shall obtain a license and a tag for each
animal and pay for a fee as the City Council may, by ordinance, adopt.  The
tag should be attached to the collar of the animal.  If the tag is lost or
stolen, the owner shall receive a duplicate license and tag upon payment to
the City Clerk, a fee, as provided.  The animal tags are not transferable
and no refunds shall be made on any license because of leaving the city
before expiration of the license period.



(Prior Code, § 10-27)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 458, passed
4-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.017  RABIES INOCULATION.



   No license shall be issued for a dog or a cat unless the owner shall
show written evidence that the animal has been inoculated for the prevention
of rabies within the past 2 years.



(Prior Code, § 10-28)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.018  TERMS OF LICENSE.



   The license period shall be for the whole or unexpired portion of the
year ending on the ensuing December 31.



(Prior Code, § 10-29)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.019  NEW RESIDENTS IN THE CITY.



   Any person who moves into and becomes a resident of the city and who
owns a dog or cat within the city shall cause the same to be registered and
licensed as provided herein within a period of not more than 30 days after
becoming a resident of the city.



(Prior Code, § 10-30)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.020  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat of any person who
owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat, to run at large.



   (B)   A person, who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat which runs
at large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (C)   Dogs or cats on a leash and accompanied by a responsible
person or accompanied by and under the control and direction of a responsible
person, so as to be effectively restrained by command as by leash, shall be
permitted in streets or on public land unless the city has posted an area
with signs reading “Dogs or Cats Prohibited.”



(Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.021  DOG AND CAT NUISANCES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to exercise proper
care and control of his or her animal to prevent them from becoming a public
nuisance.



   (B)   It shall be considered a nuisance for any animal to bark or
cry excessively; to molest, annoy, or bite any person if the person is not on
the property of the owner or custodian of the animal; or to damage, defile,
or destroy public or private property.



   (C)   Failure of the owner or custodian of a dog or cat to prevent
the animal from committing a nuisance is a violation of the chapter.



(Prior Code, § 10-43)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.022  CONFINEMENT OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.



   Every dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or other
secure enclosure, in a manner that it cannot come into contact with another
dog or cat except for planned breeding.



(Prior Code, § 10-44)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.023  IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION PROCEDURES.



   The city will abide by rules and regulations set up by any shelter
operated under the auspices of the Humane Society.



(Prior Code, § 10-45)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006) 




OTHER ANIMALS




§ 90.040  GENERAL PROHIBITION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any cattle,
sheep, goats, swine, or poultry within the platted area of the city except in
areas zoned agricultural.



(Prior Code, § 10-55)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.041  ANIMALS AT LARGE.



   No person shall permit any horse, mule, donkey, or pony of which he or
she is the owner, caretaker, or custodian to be at large when it is off the
premises owned or rented by the owner and not under his or her individual
restraint.



(Prior Code, § 10-56)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.042  NON-DOMESTIC OR EXOTIC ANIMALS.



   It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or harbor animals as
theretofore described.



(Prior Code, § 10-57)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999




HUMANE TREATMENT




§ 90.055  IMPROPER CARE.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to provide animals with
sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection
from weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with
humane care and treatment.



(Prior Code, § 10-65)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.056  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner to beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment,
or otherwise abuse any animal.



(Prior Code, § 10-66)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



DANGEROUS DOGS AND ANIMALS



§ 90.063  DISEASED ANIMALS.



   (A)   Running at large. No person shall keep or allow to be kept on
his or her premises, or on premises occupied by them, nor permit to run at
large in the city, any animal which is diseased so as to be a danger to the
health and safety of any persons in the city.



   (B)   Confinement. Any animal reasonably suspected of being diseased
and presenting a threat to the health and safety of the public, may be
apprehended, seized, and confined in an impound facility by the animal
control authority. The animal control authority shall have a qualified
veterinarian examine the animal. If the animal is found to be diseased in
such a manner so as to be a danger to the health and safety of the pubic, the
animal control authority shall cause such animal to be killed and shall
properly dispose of the remains. The owner of the animal killed under this
section shall be liable to the city for the cost of maintaining, destroying
and disposing of the animal, plus the costs of any veterinarian examinations
and those from any impound facility, as applicable.



   (C)   Release. If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be
diseased within the meaning of this section, the animal shall be released to
the owner as provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 580, passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.064  DECLARATION/DESIGNATION OF DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.



   The provisions of M.S.  §§ 347.50 through 347.565 (commonly referred
to as the "Dangerous Dog Regulations") are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference, as the same may be amended from time to time, and must
be adhered to in all respects, except as otherwise explicitly provided in
this section. The animal control authority may declare a dog to be dangerous
or potentially dangerous when the animal control authority has probable cause
to believe that a dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous as those terms
are defined in this chapter. In addition to those factors defining dangerous
or potentially dangerous dog,  the following factors may be considered in
determining whether to designate a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog.



   (A)   Whether any injury or damage to a person by the dog was caused
while the dog was protecting or defending a person or the dog's offspring
within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or
assault.



   (B)   The strength and size of the dog, including jaw strength, and
the animal's propensity to bite humans or other domestic animals.



   (C)   Whether the dog has wounds, scarring, is observed in a fight,
or has other indications that the dog has been or will be used, trained, or
encouraged to fight with another animal or whose owner is in possession of
any training apparatus, paraphernalia or drugs used to prepare such dogs to
fight with other animals.



(Ord. 580, passed 2-27-2018)



§ 90.065  REGISTRATION OF DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.



   (A)   No person may own a potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog
in this jurisdiction unless the dog is registered as provided in this
section. The owner of, or person keeping, a dangerous or potentially
dangerous dog must register the dog in accordance with M.S. § 347.51. The
owner must obtain a registration certificate annually from the city and must
register a newly declared dangerous or potentially dangerous dog within 14
days after notice that a dog has been declared dangerous or potentially
dangerous. Regardless of any appeal of such designation that may be
requested, the owner must comply with the requirements of M.S. § 347.52(a)
and (c) regarding proper enclosures and notification to the city upon
transfer or death of the dog, until and unless the City Council or a court of
law reverses the declaration/designation.



   (B)   The animal control authority shall issue a certificate of
registration to the owner of a dangerous dog if the owner presents sufficient
evidence that the requirements of M.S. §§ 347.51 to 347.52 have been met:



      (1)   A proper enclosure exists for the dangerous dog and a
posting on the premises with a clearly visible warning sign, including a
warning symbol to inform children, that there is a dangerous dog on the
property pursuant to M.S. § 347.51, Subd. 2a.



      (2)   A surety bond issued by a surety company authorized to
conduct business in this state in a form acceptable to the animal control
authority in the sum of at least $300,000 payable to any person injured by
the dangerous dog, or a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance
company authorized to conduct business in this state in the amount of at
least $300,000, insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the
dangerous dog.



      (3)   The owner has paid an annual registration fee, of not
more than $500, with such amount set by the City Council by ordinance, in
addition to any regular dog licensing fees, to obtain a certificate of
registration for a dangerous dog under this section.



      (4)   The owner has had a microchip identification implanted
in the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog pursuant to M.S. § 347.515.



(Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 458, passed 4-25-2006; Am. Ord. 580,
passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.066  DANGEROUS DOG DESIGNATION REVIEW.



   Beginning 6 months after a dog is declared a dangerous or potentially
dangerous dog, an owner may request annually that the animal control
authority review the designation. The owner must provide evidence that the
dog's behavior has changed due to the dog's age, neutering, environment,
completion of obedience training that includes modification of aggressive
behavior, or other factors. If the animal control authority finds sufficient
evidence that the dog's behavior has changed, the authority may rescind the
dangerous dog designation.



(Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 580, passed 2-27-2018)



§ 90.067  EXEMPTIONS.



   Any dog used by law enforcement officials for police work shall be
exempt from this subchapter. Also, dogs that may not be declared dangerous if
the threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person:



   (A)   Who was committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other
tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog.



   (B)   Who was provoking, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog
or who can be shown to have repeatedly, in the past, provoked, tormented,
abused, or assaulted the dog.



   (C)   Who was committing or attempting to commit a crime.



(Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006) 



§ 90.068  TAG.



   A dangerous dog registered under this section must wear a standardized,
easily identifiable tag, identifying the dog as dangerous, affixed to the
dog's collar at all times.



(Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 580, passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see
§ 90.999



§ 90.069  APPEAL OF DESIGNATION.



   (A)   Notice and appeal hearing. After a dog has been declared
dangerous or potentially dangerous or has been seized for destruction
pursuant to M.S. § 347.54, the city shall give notice pursuant to M.S. §
347.541 to the owner. The owner may appeal this designation or seizure in
writing on the form required by the City Clerk within 14 days of the date of
the notice of declaration or seizure. Failure to do so within 14 days of the
date of the notice will terminate the owner's right to a hearing. If an
appeal is properly and timely filed with the City Clerk, a hearing will be
held pursuant to M.S. § 347.541.



   (B)   Appeal fee. In addition to any other fees under this chapter,
the owner must pay an appeal fee for an appeal hearing that will be
established from time to time by the City Council.



   (C)   Time of hearing and hearing officer. Pursuant to M.S. §
347.541, Subd. 4, the appeal hearing will be held within 14 calendar days of
the written request for hearing. The hearing officer must be an impartial
employee of the city and shall be the City Administrator, or the City
Administrator's designated representative, unless the City Administrator
determines that another impartial person be retained by the city to conduct
the hearing.



   (D)   Decision and costs. If the declaration/designation or
destruction is upheld by the hearing officer, actual expenses of the hearing
up to a maximum of $1,000, in addition to all maintenance and related costs
for impound and/or destroying and disposing of the dog shall be the
responsibility of the dog's owner. The hearing officer shall issue a decision
on the matter within 10 days after the hearing. The decision shall be
delivered to the dog's owner by hand delivery or registered mail as soon as
practical and a copy shall be provided to the Chief of Police. The decision
of the hearing officer is final.



   (E)   Failure to comply with order. Any owner who fails to comply
with an order to destroy a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog or
fails to otherwise comply with an order from the animal control authority,
hearing officer or City Council is guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition, the
animal control authority will confiscate/seize the dog and have it destroyed
in a proper and humane manner and the costs thereof will be the
responsibility of the owner.



(Ord. 580, passed 2-27-2018)



DESTRUCTION AND CONFISCATION



§ 90.080  QUARANTINE OF CERTAIN DOGS AND CATS.



   Any dog or cat, which bites a person, shall be quarantined for the time
as may be directed by the animal control authority.  During the quarantine
the animal shall be securely confined and kept from contact with any other
animal.  At the discretion of the animal control authority, the quarantine
may be on the premises of the owner, however, if the animal control authority
requires other confinement, the owner shall surrender the animal for the
quarantine period to the animal shelter, or shall, at his or her own expense,
place it in a veterinary hospital.



(Prior Code, § 10-46)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.081  CONFISCATION OF DANGEROUS DOGS.



   The animal control authority having jurisdiction shall immediately
seize any dangerous dog if:



   (A)   After 14 days, after the owner has been given notice that the
dog is dangerous, the dog is not properly registered with the animal control
authority, under this chapter and M.S. § 347.51, and the owner does not
secure the proper liability insurance or surety coverage as required;



   (B)   The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure;



   (C)   The dog is outside of the proper enclosure and not under
physical restraint of a responsible person as required under this chapter and
M.S. § 347.52;



   (D)   The dog is not sterilized within 30 days, pursuant to M.S. §
347.52(d); or



   (E)   If the owner of the dog is convicted of a crime for which the
dog was originally seized, the court may order that the dog be confiscated
and destroyed in a proper and humane manner, and that the owner pay the costs
incurred in confiscating, confining, and destroying the dog.



(Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 580, passed 2-27-2018) 



§ 90.082  DANGEROUS ANIMALS AND SAFETY EMERGENCIES.



   The animal control authority of this city are hereby authorized and
empowered to kill any animal found in violation of this subchapter whenever
the animal cannot be safely taken up and impounded.  No impounding or
killing of any animal shall exempt the owner or keeper of the animal from the
penalties provided in this subchapter. If, in the reasonable belief of any
person or animal control authority, an animal presents an immediate danger to
the health and safety of any person, or the animal is threatening imminent
harm to any person, or the animal is in the process of attacking any person,
the person or animal control authority may immediately kill the animal in a
proper and humane manner. Otherwise, the person or animal control authority
may seize the animal and deliver it to an impound facility for confinement.
If the animal is destroyed or impounded, the owner of the animal destroyed
shall be liable to the city for the costs of destroying, maintaining and/or
disposing of the animal, plus the costs of any veterinarian examinations and
those from any impound facility, as applicable. If the animal is found not to
be a danger to the health and safety of the city in the judgement of the
animal control authority, it may then be released to the owner.



(Prior Code, § 10-48)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 580, passed
2-27-2018)



§ 90.083  PROVISION OF RECLAMATION.



   A dog, cat, or dangerous dog seized under this subchapter may be
reclaimed by the owner of the dog or cat upon payment of impounding and
boarding fees, and presenting proof to the appropriate animal control
authority that the requirements have been met. An animal not reclaimed within
7 days may be disposed of as provided in § 90.085, and the owner is liable
to the animal control authority for costs incurred in confining and disposing
of the animal.



(Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006) 



§ 90.084  SUBSEQUENT OFFENSES.



   If a person has been convicted of a misdemeanor for violating a
provision of this subchapter, and the person is charged with a subsequent
violation relating to the same animal, the animal must be seized by the
animal control authority having jurisdiction. If the owner is convicted of
the crime for which the animal was seized, the court shall order that the
animal be destroyed in a proper and humane manner and the owner pay the cost
of confining and destroying the animal. If the person is not convicted of the
crime for which the animal was seized, the owner may reclaim the animal upon
payment to the animal control authority of a fee for the care and boarding of
the animal. If the animal is not reclaimed by the owner within 7 days after
the owner had been notified that the animal may be reclaimed, the animal may
be disposed of as provided under § 90.085 and the owner is liable to the
animal control authority for the costs incurred in confining, impounding, and
disposing of the animal.



(Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006) 



§ 90.085  DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN DOGS AND CATS.



   (A)   Upon sworn complaint by the animal control authority to the
county court any one of the following facts exist:



      (1)   Any dog or cat at any time has destroyed property or
habitually trespassed in a damaging manner on property of persons other than
the owner;



      (2)   Any dog or cat at any time has attacked or bitten a
person outside the owner's or custodian's premises;



      (3)   Any dog or cat is vicious or shows vicious habits or
molests pedestrians or interferes with the driving of automobiles on the
public streets; or



      (4)   Any dog or cat is a public nuisance as heretofore
defined.



   (B)   The judge shall issue a summons directed to the owner of the
animal commanding him or her to appear before the court to show cause why the
animal should not be seized by any police officer, or otherwise disposed of
in the manner authorized in this subchapter. Upon the hearing and finding the
facts true as complained of, the court may either order the animal killed or
order the owner or custodian to remove it from the city, or may order the
owner or custodian to keep it confined to a designated place.  If the owner
or custodian violates the order, any police officer may impound the animal
described in the order.  The costs of all proceedings described herein shall
be assessed against the owner or custodian of the animal, if the facts in the
compliant are found to be true; or to the complainant if the facts are found
to be untrue.



(Prior Code, § 10-47)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.086  DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS IN CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES.



   Notwithstanding § 90.085, a dog that (i) inflicted substantial or
great bodily harm on a human being on public or private property without
provocation, (ii) inflicted multiple bites on a human on public or private
property without provocation; (iii) bit multiple human victims on public or
private property in the same attack without provocation; or (iv) bit a human
on public or private property without provocation in an attack where more
than 1 dog participated in the attack,  may be destroyed in a proper and
humane manner by the animal control authority. The animal control authority
may not destroy the dog until the dog owner has had the opportunity for a
hearing before an impartial decision maker as provided in § 90.069.



(Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 580, passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see
§ 90.999



§ 90.087  ENFORCEMENT.



   The animal control authority shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter and any other applicable laws, statutes, or rules, pertaining to the
protection of animals and persons. It shall also constitute a violation of
this chapter for any person, within the city, to violate a statute or rule of
the State of Minnesota dealing with the care, keeping, or treatment of
animals. Any police officer or such other animal control authority as
designated by the City Council, having reasonable cause to believe that a
person has or is violating a provision of this chapter or the conditions,
limitations, restrictions or prohibitions of any permit or license the city
issues under this chapter, may apply to the appropriate authority as
prescribed by law for a warrant empowering the police officer or animal
control officer to enter the dwelling or residence of the owner or keeper of
any animal for the purpose of investigating the same and to demand the
owner's or keeper's presentation of the animal to the police officer or
animal control authority.



(Ord. 580, passed 2-27-2018)



§ 90.088  INTERFERENCE WITH ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall in any manner molest, hinder, or interfere
with any person authorized by the City Council or animal control authority to
capture and seize dogs, cats, or other animals and convey them to an impound
facility while such person is engaged in their official capacity of animal
care and control duties, operation, and functions on behalf of the city. Nor
shall any unauthorized person break open an impound facility, or attempt to
do so, or take or attempt to take from any agent thereof any animal taken up
by him or her in compliance with this chapter, or in any other manner
interfere with or hinder such person or animal control authority in the
discharge of his or her duties under this chapter.



   (B)   A violation of any section of Chapter 10 of this city code is
a misdemeanor. Each day a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted
to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such under this section.



(Ord. 580, passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter or the
provisions of M.S. §§ 347.51, 347.515, or 347.52 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



   (B)   It is a misdemeanor to remove a microchip from a dangerous or
potentially dangerous dog, to fail to renew the registration of a dangerous
dog, to fail to account for or sign a false affidavit with respect to a
dangerous dog's death or removal from the jurisdiction, or to fail to
disclose ownership of a dangerous dog to a property owner from whom the
person rents property.



   (C)   Each day a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted
to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such under this section. A person who is convicted of a second or subsequent
violation of division (A) or (B) above is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 10-67)  (Ord. 455, passed 2-28-2006; Am. Ord. 580, passed
2-27-2018) 



CHAPTER 91:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section




Beer Generally




   91.001   Definitions



   91.002   Restrictions on purchase and consumption




Beer Licensing




   91.015   License required



   91.016   Applications



   91.017   Fees



   91.018   Granting



   91.019   Persons ineligible for license



   91.020   Places ineligible for license



   91.021   Conditions



   91.022   Closing hours



   91.023   Revocation




Liquor Regulations Generally




   91.035   Adoption of state law by reference



   91.036   City may be more restrictive than state law



   91.037   Definitions



   91.038   Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited



   91.039   Consumption in public places




Licensing




   91.050   Number of licenses which may be issued



   91.051   Term and expiration of licenses



   91.052   Kinds of liquor licenses



   91.053   License fees; pro rata



   91.054   Council discretion to grant or deny a license



   91.055   Application for license



   91.056   Description of premises



   91.057   Applications for renewal



   91.058   Transfer of license



   91.059   Investigation



   91.060   Hearing and issuance



   91.061   Restrictions on issuance



   91.062   Conditions of license



   91.063   Hours and days of sale



   91.064   Minors on premises



   91.065   Restrictions on purchase and consumption



   91.066   Suspension and revocation




Municipal Liquor Stores




   91.080   Application of this subchapter



   91.081   Existing municipal stores continued



   91.082   Location



   91.083   Operation



   91.084   Proof of financial responsibility



   91.085   Issuance of other licenses



 



   91.999   Penalties




BEER GENERALLY




§ 91.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BEER or 3.2% MALT LIQUOR.  Any malt beverage with an alcoholic content
of more than ½ of 1% by volume and not more than 3.2% by weight.



   BEER STORE.  An establishment for the sale of beer, cigars,
cigarettes, all forms of tobacco, beverages, and soft drinks at retail.



   MINOR.  Any person under the age of 21.



(Prior Code, § 6-26)  (Ord. 185, passed 6-14-1971)



§ 91.002  RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.



   (A)   Age misrepresentation.  No minor shall misrepresent his or
her age for the purpose of obtaining beer.



   (B)   Inducing purchase.  No person shall induce a minor to
purchase or procure beer.



   (C)   Procurement.  No person other than the parent or legal
guardian shall procure beer for any minor.



   (D)   Possession.  No minor shall have beer in his or her
possession with the intent to consume it at a place other than the household
of his or her parent or guardian.



   (E)   Consumption.  No minor shall consume beer unless in the
company of his or her parent or guardian.



   (F)   Consumption prohibited - where.  No person shall consume, or
have in his or her possession on his or her person, any beer or open bottle
or receptacle containing 3.2% malt liquor which have been partially removed,
in any automobile, theater, recreation hall or center, dance hall, public
street, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare, not licensed in accordance
with the ordinances of the City of Park Rapids and the State of Minnesota,
except that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit
the consumption of 3.2% malt liquor by non-minors in city parks between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



   (G)   Liquor consumption and display.  No person shall consume or
display any intoxicating liquor on the premises of a licensee who is not also
licensed to sell intoxicating liquors or who does not hold a consumption and
display permit.



(Prior Code, § 6-27)  (Ord. 218, passed 11-10-1980)




BEER LICENSING




§ 91.015  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Generally.  No person, except wholesalers and manufacturers
to the extent authorized by law, shall deal in or dispose of by gift, sale or
otherwise, or keep or offer for sale, any beer within the city without first
having received a license as hereinafter provided.  Licenses shall be of 3
kinds: regular on-sale, temporary on-sale and off-sale.



   (B)   Regular on-sale.  Regular on-sale licenses shall be granted
only to beer stores, and restaurants and hotels where food is prepared and
served for consumption on the premises.  On-sale licenses shall permit the
sale of beer for consumption on the premises only.



   (C)   Temporary on-sale.  Temporary on-sale licenses shall be
granted only to bona fide clubs and charitable, religious, and non-profit
organizations for the sale of beer for consumption on the premises only.



   (D)   Off-sale.  Off-sale licenses shall permit the sale of beer at
retail, in the original package for consumption off the premises only.



(Prior Code, § 6-41)



§ 91.016  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Every application for a license to sell beer shall be made to
the City Clerk on a form supplied by the city and containing any information
as the Clerk or the City Council may require.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in an
application.



(Prior Code, § 6-42)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.017  FEES.



   (A)   Payment required.  Each application for a license shall be
accompanied by a receipt from the City Treasurer for payment in full of the
required fee for the license.  All fees shall be paid into the general fund
of the city.  Upon rejection of any application for a license, the Treasurer
shall refund the amount paid.



   (B)   Expiration; pro rata fees.  Every license, except a temporary
license, shall expire on the last day of March in each year.  Each license,
except a temporary license, shall be issued for a period of 1 year, except
that if a portion of the license year has elapsed when the license is
granted, the license shall be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro
rata fee.  In computing the fee, any unexpired fraction of a month shall be
counted as 1 month.  A temporary license shall be issued for a specific
period in which a special event to which the sale is incident is being held
and the period shall be stated on the license.



   (C)   Amounts.  The amount of the fee for every license shall be
established by the Council and listed in the Fee Schedule, Chapter 36.



   (D)   Refunds.  No part of the fee paid for any license issued
under this subchapter shall be refunded except in the following instances
upon application to the Council within 30 days from the happening of the
event.  There shall be refunded a pro rata portion of the fee for the
unexpired period of the license, computed on a monthly basis, when operation
of the licensed business ceases not less than 1 month before the expiration
of the license because of:



      (1)   Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire
or other catastrophe;



      (2)   The licensee's illness;



      (3)   The licensee's death;



      (4)   Sale of property to another qualified buyer; or



      (5)   A change in the legal status of the municipality making
it unlawful for the licensed business to continue.



(Prior Code, § 6-43)  (Ord. 233, passed 1987)



§ 91.018  GRANTING.



   (A)   Investigation and hearing.  The City Council shall
investigate all facts set out in the application.  Opportunity shall be
given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. 
After the investigation and hearing, the Council shall grant or refuse the
application in its discretion.



   (B)   Transfers.  Each license shall be issued to the applicant
only and shall not be transferable to another holder.  Each license shall be
issued only for the premises described in the application.  No license may
be transferred to another place without the approval of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 6-44)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.019  PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   No license shall be granted to or held by any person who:



   (A)   Is under 21 years of age;



   (B)   Has, within 5 years prior to the application for the license,
been convicted of a felony or of violating any law of this state or local
ordinance relating to the manufacture, sale or distribution of intoxicating
liquors or beer and cannot show competent evidence under M.S. § 364.03, as
it may be amended from time to time, of sufficient rehabilitation and present
fitness to perform the duties of a beer licensee;



   (C)   Is a manufacturer of beer or is interested in the control of
any place where beer is manufactured;



   (D)   Is an alien;



   (E)   Is not of good moral character;



   (F)   Is or during the period of this license becomes the holder of
a federal retail liquor dealer's special tax stamp for the sale of
intoxicating liquor at any place unless there has also been issued to him or
her a local license to sell intoxicating liquor at the place; or



   (G)   Is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the
license is issued.



(Prior Code, § 6-45)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.020  PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Conviction or revocation.  No license shall be granted for
sale on any premises where a licensee has been convicted of the violation of
this chapter, or of the state beer and liquor law, or where any license
hereunder has been revoked for cause until 1 year has elapsed after the
conviction or revocation.



   (B)   Residences.  No license shall be issued where the premises
intended for use is a dwelling house or residence property, or where a
portion of the premises are used as living quarters, and are directly
connected with that portion intended to be used in connection with the
license.  Provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply in the
case of any business block, or store building, where a part thereof is used
for living purposes, the same not being directly connected with the business
portion thereof, and having a separate and independent entrance.



   (C)   Adult uses.  No license shall be granted for sale on any
premises which is licensed pursuant to the Adult Establishments Chapter as
contained in Chapter 119, §§ 119.01et seq. of this code.



(Prior Code, § 6-46)  (Ord. 353, passed 8-28-2001)



§ 91.021  CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Generally.  Every license shall be granted subject to the
conditions in the following sections and all other provisions of this chapter
and of any other applicable ordinance of the city or state law.



   (B)   Sales to minors or intoxicated persons.  No beer shall be
sold or served to any intoxicated person or to any person under 21 years of
age.



   (C)   Consumption by minors.  No minor shall be permitted to
consume beer on the licensed premises.



   (D)   Employment of minors.  No person under the legal drinking age
shall be employed on the premises of a beer store.



   (E)   Gambling.  No gambling or any gambling device shall be
permitted on any licensed premises.



   (F)   Interest of manufacturers or wholesalers.  No manufacturer or
wholesaler of beer shall have any ownership of or interest in an
establishment licensed to sell at retail contrary to the provisions of M.S.
§ 340A.308, as it may be amended from time to time.  No retail licensee
shall receive any benefits contrary to law from a manufacturer or wholesaler
of beer and no manufacturer or wholesaler shall confer any benefits contrary
to law upon a retail licensee.



   (G)   Liquor dealer's stamp.  No licensee shall sell beer while
holding or exhibiting in the licensed premises a federal retail liquor
dealer's special tax stamp unless he or she is licensed under the laws of
Minnesota to sell intoxicating liquors.



   (H)   Sales of intoxicating liquor.  No licensee who is not also
licensed to sell intoxicating liquor and who does not hold a consumption or
display permit shall sell or permit the consumption and display of
intoxicating liquors for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor. 
The presence of intoxicating liquors on the premises of a licensee shall be
prima facie evidence of possession of intoxicating liquors for the purpose of
sale; and the serving of any liquid for the purpose of mixing with
intoxicating liquors shall be prima facie evidence that intoxicating liquor
is being permitted to be consumed or displayed contrary to this subchapter.



   (I)   Searches and seizures.  Any peace officer may enter, inspect
and search the premises of a licensee during business hours without a search
and seizure warrant and may seize all intoxicating liquors found on the
licensed premises in violation of division (H) above.



   (J)   Licensee responsibility.  Every licensee shall be responsible
for the conduct of his or her place of business and shall maintain conditions
of sobriety and order.



   (K)   Posting.  Licenses shall be kept conspicuously posted on the
premises at all times.



(Prior Code, § 6-47)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.022  CLOSING HOURS.



   No on-sale sales of beer shall be made on any Sunday between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m.  No on-sale sales shall be made between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any other day.



(Prior Code, § 6-48)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.023  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The violation of any provision or condition of this subchapter
by a beer licensee or his or her agent is ground for revocation or suspension
of the license.



   (B)   The license of any person who holds a federal retail liquor
dealer's special tax stamp without a license to sell intoxicating liquors at
that place shall be revoked without notice and without hearing. 



   (C)   In all other cases, a license granted under this subchapter
may be revoked or suspended by the Council in accordance with § 110.07 of
this code.



(Prior Code, § 6-49)



LIQUOR REGULATIONS GENERALLY



§ 91.035  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.



   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as they may be amended from time to
time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and
consumption of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor are hereby
adopted by reference and are made a part of this Chapter as if set out in
full. It is the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to
M.S. Ch. 340A are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had
been in existence at the time this Chapter is adopted.



§ 91.036  CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.



   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it
may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time.



§ 91.037  DEFINITIONS.



   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may
be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of
this chapter:



   LIQUOR.  As used in this chapter, without modification by the words
“intoxicating” or “3.2 percent malt,” includes both intoxicating
liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor.



   RESTAURANT.  An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control
of a single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises, where full waitress/waiter table service is provided, where a
customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is
served and consumed while seated at a single location.  To be a
“restaurant” as defined by this section, an establishment shall have a
license from the state as required by M.S. § 157.16, as it may be amended
from time to time, and meet the definition of either a “small
establishment,” “medium establishment” or “large establishment” as
defined in M.S. § 157.16, Subd. 3d, as it may be amended from time to time.
An establishment which serves prepackaged food that receives heat treatment
and is served in the package or frozen pizza that is heated and served, shall
not be considered to be a restaurant for purposes of this chapter unless it
meets the definitions of “small establishment”, “medium
establishment” or “large establishment.”



§ 91.038  NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that
nudity is prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any
establishment licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the
owners, operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and
the public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and
combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely
to lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including
prostitution, sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds
that the prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed
under this chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing
community standards of the city.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person
or persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her
buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non- transparent
material. It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when
the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals
covered with a non-transparent material.



   (C)   A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as
provided by law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any
liquor, wine, or 3.2 percent malt liquor license or the imposition of a civil
penalty under the provisions of § 91.99(B).



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.039  CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor
on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any public place
other than on the premises of an establishment licensed under this chapter,
in a municipal liquor dispensary if one exists in the city, or where the
consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted.



Penalty, see § 91.99



LICENSING



§ 91.050  NUMBER OF LICENSES WHICH MAY BE ISSUED.



   State law establishes the number of liquor licenses that a city may
issue. However, the number of licenses which may be granted under this
chapter is limited to the number of license which were issued as of the
effective date of this chapter, even if a larger number of licenses are
authorized by law or election. The Council in its sound discretion may
provide by ordinance that a larger number of licenses may be issued up to the
number of licenses authorized by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from
time to time. If a larger number of licenses in a particular category has
been authorized by a referendum held under the provisions of M.S. §
340A.413, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time, but not all of
them have been issued, the larger number of licenses is no longer in effect
until the Council by ordinance determines that any or all of the licenses may
be issued. The Council is not required to issue the full number of licenses
that it has available.



§ 91.051  TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.



   Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of 1 year. All
licenses, except temporary licenses, shall expire on February 28 of each year
unless another date is provided by ordinance. All licenses shall expire on
the same date. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms.
Consumption and display permits issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety,
and the accompanying city consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of
each year.



§ 91.052  KINDS OF LIQUOR LICENSES.



   The Council of a city that does not have a municipal liquor store is
authorized to issue the following licenses and permits, up to the number
specified in § 91.050.  The Council of a city which has a municipal liquor
store is authorized to issue only those licenses specified in § 91.085.



   (A)   3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued
only to golf courses, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and
establishments used exclusively for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor with
the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.



   (B)   3.2 percent malt liquor off-sale license.



   (C)   Temporary 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses which may be issued
only to a club, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization.



   (D)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued
only to exclusive liquor stores or drug stores that have an off-sale license
which was first issued on or before May 1, 1994. The fee for an off- sale
intoxicating liquor license established by the Council under § 91.23 shall
not exceed $100 or a greater amount which may be permitted by M.S. §
340A.408, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (E)   On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to
the following establishments as defined by M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, and this chapter: hotels, restaurants, bowling
centers, theaters, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations,
and exclusive liquor stores. Club licenses may be issued only with the
approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety. The fee for club licenses
established by the Council under § 91.053 shall not exceed the amounts
provided for in M.S. § 340A.408, Subd. 2b, as it may be amended from time to
time. The Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale
licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off  the licensed premises at a
community festival held within the city under the provisions of M.S. §
340A.404, Subd. 4b, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may
in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense
intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any convention, banquet,
conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the premises of a sports,
convention, or cultural facility owned by the city, under the provisions of
M.S. § 340A.404, Subd. 4a, as it may be amended from time to time; however,
the licensee is prohibited from dispensing intoxicating liquor to any person
attending or participating in an amateur athletic event being held on the
premises.



   (F)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, only after
authorization to do so by voter approval at a general or special election as
provided by M.S. § 340A.504, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time. Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to a
restaurant as defined in § 91.03, club, bowli ng center, or hotel which has
a seating capacity of at least 30 persons, which holds an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license, and which serves liquor only in conjunction with
the service of food. The maximum fee for this license, which shall be
established by the Council under the provisions of § 91.053, shall not
exceed $200, or the maximum amount provided by M.S. § 340A.504, Subd. 3c, as
it may be amended from time to time.



   (G)   Combination on-sale/off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses if
the city has a population less than 10,000.



   (H)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the
approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, which may be issued only in
connection with a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious, or
other nonprofit corporation that has existed for at least 3 years. No license
shall be for longer than 4 consecutive days, and the city shall issue no more
than 12 days worth of temporary licenses to any 1 organization in 1 calendar
year.



   (I)   On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner
of Public Safety to: theaters, restaurants that have facilities for seating
at least 25 guests at 1 time and meet the criteria of M.S. § 340A.404, Subd.
5, as it may be amended from time to time, and which meet the definition of
restaurant in § 91.037; and to licensed bed and breakfast facilities which
meet the criteria in M.S. § 340A.401, Subd. 1, as it may be amended from
time to time. The fee for an on-sale wine license established by the Council
under the provisions of § 91.053 shall not exceed one-half of the license
fee charged for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license. The holder of an
on-sale wine license who also holds an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor
license is authorized to sell malt liquor with a content over 3.2 percent
(strong beer) without an additional license.



   (J)   One day consumption and display permits with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety to a nonprofit organization in conjunction
with a social activity in the city sponsored by the organization.



   (K)   Approval of the issuance of a consumption and display permit
by the Commissioner of Public Safety. The maximum amount of the additional
fee which may be imposed by the Council on a person who has been issued a
consumption and display permit under the provisions of § 91.053 shall not
exceed $300, or the maximum amount permitted by M.S. § 340A.14, Subd. 6, as
it may be amended from time to time. Consumption and display permits shall
expire on March 31 of each year.



§ 91.053  LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA.



   (A)   No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed
any limit established by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to
time, for a liquor license.



   (B)   The Council may establish from time to time in the Ordinance
Establishing Fees and Charges the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is
authorized to issue. The license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the
license and other costs directly related to the enforcement of the liquor
laws and this chapter. No liquor license fee shall be increased without
providing mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed increase to all affected
licensees at least 30 days before the hearing.



   (C)   The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted
after the commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a quarterly
basis.



   (D)   All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the
application is filed with the city. If the application is denied, the license
fee shall be returned to the applicant.



   (E)   A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may
occur only if authorized by M.S. § 340A.408, Subd. 5, as it may be amended
from time to time.



§ 91.054  COUNCIL DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE.



   The Council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the
application for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No
applicant has a right to a license under this chapter.



§ 91.055  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Form.  Every application for a license issued under this
chapter shall be on a form provided by the city. Every application shall
state the name of the applicant, the applicant's age, representations as to
the applicant's character, with references as the Council may require, the
type of license applied for, the business in connection with which the
proposed license will operate and its location, a description of the
premises, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the business, how
long the applicant has been in that business at that place, and other
information as the Council may require from time to time. An application for
an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be in the form prescribed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety and shall also contain the information required
in this section. The form shall be verified and filed with the city. No
person shall make a false statement in an application.



   (B)   Financial responsibility.  Prior to the issuance of any
license under this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of
financial responsibility as defined in M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended
from time to time, with regard to liability under M.S. § 340A.801, as it may
be amended from time to time. This proof will be filed with the city and the
Commissioner of Public Safety. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof
of financial responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. §
340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. Operation of a business
which is required to be licensed by this chapter without having on file with
the city at all times effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause
for revocation of the license.



Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.056  DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES.



   The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous
premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed. The description
may not include any parking lot or sidewalk.



§ 91.057  APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.



   At least 90 days before a license issued under this chapter is to be
renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the city. The
decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion
of the Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.



§ 91.058  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the
approval of the Council.  Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is
deemed to be a transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior
Council approval is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to
transfer a license shall be treated the same as an application for a new
license, and all of the provisions of this code applying to applications for
a license shall apply.



Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.059  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Preliminary background and financial investigation.  On an
initial application for a license, on an application for transfer of a
license and, in the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public
interest to do so, on an application for renewal of a license, the city shall
conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant
or it may contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the
investigation. The applicant shall pay with the application an investigation
fee of $500 which shall be in addition to any license fee. If the cost of the
preliminary investigation is less than $500, the unused balance shall be
returned to the applicant. The results of the preliminary investigation shall
be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an
on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license.



   (B)   Comprehensive background and financial investigation.  If the
results of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of
the Council, a comprehensive background and financial investigation, the
Council may either conduct the investigation itself or contract with the
Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee
for this comprehensive background and financial investigation to be paid by
the applicant shall be $500, less any amount paid for the initial
investigation if the investigation is to be conducted within the state, and
$10,000, less any amount paid for the initial investigation, if the
investigation is required outside the state. The unused balance of the fee
shall be returned to the applicant whether or not the application is denied.
The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation and the amount actually
expended on the investigation shall not be refundable in the event the
application is denied. The results of the comprehensive investigation shall
be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an
on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license.



§ 91.060  HEARING AND ISSUANCE.



   The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and
not investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial
investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the
Council shall in its sound discretion grant or deny the application. No
license shall become effective until the proof of financial security has been
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.



§ 91.061  RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the
premises described in the application.



   (B)   Not more than 1 license shall be directly or indirectly issued
within the city to any 1 person.



   (C)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any
premises on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or
other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.



   (D)   No license shall be issued for any place or any business
ineligible for a license under state law.



   (E)   No license shall be granted within 500 feet of any school or
church. The distance is to be measured from the closest side of the church to
the closest side of the structure on the premises within which liquor is to
be sold.



Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.062  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the
license specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the
condition is met.



   (A)   Within 90 days after employment, every person selling or
serving liquor in an establishment which has an “on-sale” license shall
receive training regarding the selling or serving of liquor to customers. The
training shall be provided by an organization approved by the State of
Minnesota. Proof of training  shall be provided by the licensee.



   (B)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of
business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any
employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well,
and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter
and the law equally with the employee.



   (C)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer,
city employee,  or any other person designated by the Council to conduct
compliance checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of
the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the time
when customers remain on the premises without a warrant.



   (D)   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public
during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.



   (E)   Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state
law and of this chapter is a continuing condition of any license.



Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.063  HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.



   (A)   No “on-sale” sale of intoxicating liquor shall be made on
licensed premises between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of
Monday through Saturday.



   (B)   On-sale liquor license holders are permitted to sell liquor,
in conjunction with the sale of food, for on-premises consumption on Sundays
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sundays and 1:00 a.m. on Mondays, with a
Sunday liquor license issued by the municipality.



(Prior Code, § 6-92)  (Ord. 313, passed - -2000; Ord. 398, passed
10-28-2003; Ord. 572, passed 4-25-2017)



   (C)   Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds
for revocation or suspension of the license.



Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.064  MINORS ON PREMISES.



   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any
rooms constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent
malt liquor are sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the age of
18 may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person or
dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other
multi-purpose building serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors or
3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on sale.



   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed
establishment except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a
restaurant, or attend social functions that are held in a portion of the
premises where liquor is not sold.



Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.065  RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.



   No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public
place of business unless it has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit from
the Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.414,
as it may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the
Council, and no person shall consume liquor in any such place.



Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.066  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed 60
days or revoke any liquor license upon finding that the licensee has failed
to comply with any applicable statute, regulation, or provision of this
chapter relating to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial
responsibility, no suspension or revocation shall take effect until the
licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the
Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended
from time to time. The Council may act as the hearing body under that act, or
it may contract with the Office of Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.



   (B)   The following are the minimum periods of suspension or
revocation which shall be imposed by the Council for violations of the
provisions of this chapter or M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time
to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended
from time to time:



      (1)   For commission of a felony related to the licensed
activity, sale of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension,
sale of intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2 percent malt
liquor, or violation of § 91.04, the license shall be revoked.



      (2)   The license shall be suspended by the Council after a
finding under division (A) that the licensee has failed to comply with any
applicable statute, rule, or provision of this chapter for at least the
minimum periods as follows:



         (a)   For the first violation within any 3-year period,
at least 1 day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties
which may be imposed.



         (b)   For a second violation within any 3-year period,
at least 3 consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed.



         (c)   For the third violation within any 3-year period,
at least 7 consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed.



         (d)   For a fourth violation within any 3-year period,
the license shall be revoked.



      (3)   The Council shall select the day or days during which
the license will be suspended.



   (C)   Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall
effect an immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter
or state law without further action of the Council. Notice of cancellation or
lapse of a current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to
the licensee of the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a
license who has received notice of lapse of required insurance or of
suspension or revocation of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a
request is made in writing to the Clerk, a hearing before the Council shall
be granted within 10 days. Any suspension under this division (B) shall
continue until the Council determines that the financial responsibility
requirements of state law and this chapter have again been met.



   (D)   The provisions of § 91.999 pertaining to administrative
penalty may be imposed in addition to or in lieu of any suspension or
revocation under this chapter.



Penalty, see § 91.999



MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORES



§ 91.080  APPLICATION OF THIS SUBCHAPTER.



   This subchapter, consisting of §§ 91.080 through 91.085, applies only
to a city that has in existence on the effective date of this chapter a
municipal liquor store.



§ 91.081  EXISTING MUNICIPAL STORES CONTINUED.



   If the city has in existence on the effective date of this chapter a
municipal liquor store for the sale of intoxicating liquor, the store is
continued. Except as provided in § 91.085, no intoxicating liquor may be
sold at retail elsewhere in the city.



Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.082  LOCATION.



   The municipal liquor store shall be located at a suitable place in the
city as the Council determines by motion. However, no premises upon which
taxes, assessments, or other public charges are delinquent shall be leased
for municipal liquor store purposes. The Council shall have the right to
establish additional off-sale and on-sale stores at other locations as it
may, from time to time, by motion, determine.



§ 91.083  OPERATION.



   (A)   Manager.  The municipal liquor store shall be in the
immediate charge of a Liquor Store Manager selected by the Council and paid
compensation as is fixed by the Council. The Manager shall not be a person
who would be prohibited by law or any provision of this chapter from being
eligible for an intoxicating liquor license. The Manager shall furnish a
surety bond to the city, conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the
duties of the office, in a sum as specified by the Council. The bond premium
may be paid by the city or the Manager, in the discretion of the Council. The
Manager shall operate the municipal liquor store under the Council's
direction and shall perform those duties in connection with the store as may
be established by the Council. The Manager shall be responsible to the
Council for the conduct of the store in full compliance with this chapter and
with the laws relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent
malt liquor.



   (B)   Other employees.  The Council may also appoint additional
employees as may be required and shall fix their compensation. All employees,
including the Manager, shall hold their positions at the pleasure of the
Council.  No person under the age of 18 shall be employed in the store. 
The Council may require the employees to furnish surety bonds conditioned for
the faithful discharge of their duties in a sum as specified by the
Council.  The premium on the bond may be paid by the city or the employees,
as the Council determines.



   (C)   Municipal liquor store fund.  All of the revenues received
from the operation of a municipal liquor store shall be deposited in a
municipal liquor store fund from which all ordinary operating expenses,
including compensation of the Manager and employees, shall be paid. 
Surpluses accumulating in the fund may be transferred to the general fund of
the city or to any other appropriate fund of the city by resolution of the
Council, and may be expended for any municipal purpose. The handling of
municipal liquor store receipts and disbursements shall comply with the
procedure prescribed by law and charter for the receipts and disbursements of
city funds generally.



   (D)   Financial statement.  The Council shall provide within 90
days following the end of the calendar year for publication a balance sheet
using generally accepted accounting procedures and a statement of operations
of the municipal liquor store for that year. The balance sheet and statement
shall be published in accordance with the provisions of M.S. § 471.6985, as
it may be amended from time to time.



   (E)   Hours of operation.  The hours during which the sale of
intoxicating liquor may be sold shall be as provided in M.S. § 340A.504,
Subd. 4. No person, other than the Manager, a vendor, or a store employee,
may remain in the municipal liquor store longer than one-half hour after the
time when the sale of intoxicating liquor must cease.



(Ord. 571, passed 4-11-2017)  Penalty, see § 91.999



§ 91.084  PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   The city shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility required
by licensees of retail intoxicating liquor establishments under the
provisions of M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time.



§ 91.085  ISSUANCE OF OTHER LICENSES.



   (A)   On-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor. The
Council may issue in its sound discretion on-sale licenses to a club under
M.S. § 340A.404, Subd. 1(4), as it may be amended from time to time. If the
voters have authorized their issuance at a special election called for that
purpose, the Council may issue on its sound discretion on-sale liquor
licenses to hotels and restaurants. The number of on-sale licenses irssued
under this section is governed by M.S. § 340A.413, as it may be amended from
time to time, as limited by the provisions of this chapter. The issuance of
these licenses is governed by the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Off-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor.  State
law does not authorize the issuance of off-sale licenses for the sale of
intoxicating liquor by cities which operate a municipal liquor dispensary.



   (C)   On- and off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses.  The
Council may issue 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses in its sound discretion as
provided in this chapter.



§ 91.999  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or M.S.
Ch. 340A as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated
under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law.



   (B)   The Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for
each violation of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, and
of this chapter.  Conviction of a violation in a court of law is not
required in order for the Council to impose the civil penalty.  A hearing
under the Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may
be amended from time to time, is not required before the penalty is imposed,
but the Council shall hold a hearing on the proposed violation and the
proposed penalty and hear any person who wishes to speak.  Non-payment of
the penalty is grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. The
following is the minimum schedule of presumptive civil penalties which must
be imposed in addition to any suspension unless the licenses is revoked:



      (1)   For the first violation within any 3-year period, $500.



      (2)   For the second violation within any 3-year period,
$1,000.



      (3)   For the third and subsequent violations within any
3-year period, $2,000.



   (C)   The term “violation” as used in this section includes any
and all violations of the provisions of this chapter, or of M.S. Ch. 340A, as
it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that
chapter as they may be amended from time to time. The number of violations
shall be determined on the basis of the history of violations for the
preceding 3-year period. Revocation shall occur within 60 days following a
violation for which revocation is imposed.



   (D)   Beer licensing.  Any person who violates any of the
provisions of §§ 91.015et seq. shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 6-50)



CHAPTER 92:  NUISANCES



Section



   92.01   Findings, purpose and definition



   92.02   Definitions



   92.03   Public nuisances affecting health



   92.04   Public nuisances affecting public peace and safety



   92.05   Public nuisances affecting environment



   92.06   General policy



   92.07   Inspection of dwelling and premises



   92.08   Service of notice



   92.09   Enforcement



   92.10   Administrative liability



 



   92.99   Penalty



§ 92.01  FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND DEFINITION.



   (A)   A nuisance is public if it annoys, injures, or endangers the
safety, health, comfort, or repose of any considerable number of people (M.S.
609.74, as it may be amended from time to time).



   (B)   It is public if it affects the surrounding community in
general or some local neighborhood.



(Prior Code, § 19-25)  (Ord. 359, passed 12-11-2001)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DETERIORATED STRUCTURES.  Any structure or part of any structure which
is because of fire, wind, or other natural disaster or physical deterioration
no longer habitable nor useful.



   HIGH GRASS.  Any grass or weeds allowed to attain a height in excess
of 7 inches except vegetation on lakeshores, stream banks, wetlands, or other
areas where the ground is encouraged for environmental or erosion control
purposes.



   JUNK or RUBBISH.  Any material or substance stored in the open or not
enclosed in a building which does not serve, nor is it intended to serve any
useful purpose or the purpose for which it was originally intended, including
but not limited to, refuse, empty cans, bottles, debris, used furniture,
appliances, machinery parts, motor vehicle parts, vehicle tires, wood
remnants, dead trees, shrubs or other vegetation, decayed, weathered or
broken construction material no longer usable including metal or other cast
off materials.



   NOXIOUS AND VIRULENT WEEDS.  Any poison ivy, ragweed or any other
weeds, grass, bush or plants which are a fire hazard or otherwise detrimental
to the health or appearance of a neighborhood.



   UNSAFE BUILDINGS.  Any building or structure which is structurally
unsafe, does not provide adequate egress, is dangerous to human life, or
constitutes a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster
damage or abandonment.



(Prior Code, § 19-26)  (Ord. 359, passed 12-11-2001; Am. Ord. 575, passed
7-25-2017)



§ 92.03  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.



   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:



   (A)   The pollution of any public well, cistern, stream, or lake,
canal or body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;



   (B)   The effluence from any cesspool, septic tank, drain field or
sewage disposal system discharging upon the surface of the ground;



   (C)   Accumulations of manure, rubbish, tin cans, or other debris;



   (D)   All diseased animals running at large; carcasses of animals
not buried within 24 hours after death;



   (E)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities;



   (F)   All animals and poultry, except dogs and cats, housed, penned,
stabled, enclosed, tethered or allowed to run within 50 feet from a residence
or other building permanently or temporarily used for human habitation, or
from any public road, alley, sidewalk or highway;



   (G)   Garbage containers which are not rodent free or fly-tight or
which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit a foul
and disagreeable odor; and



   (H)   All other acts, omissions of acts, occupations and uses of
property which are deemed by the Board of Health to be a menace to the health
of the inhabitants of this city or any considerable number thereof.



(Prior Code, § 19-27)  (Ord. 359, passed 12-11-2001)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.04  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY.



   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety.



   (A)   All unnecessary noises by singing, swearing, threatening,
assaulting, striking or fighting or quarreling, cursing or using obscene
language or conversation, or any unusual noise.



      (1)   Radios, tape and disc players, and the like.  The
using, operating, or permitting to be played any radio receiving set, tape or
disc player, musical instrument , phonograph, or other machine or device for
the producing or reproducing of sound in a manner, considering the time and
place and the purpose for which the sound is produced, as to disturb the
peace, quiet or repose of a person or persons of ordinary sensibilities.



         (a)   The play, use or operation of any radio, tape or
disc player, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for
the production or reproduction of sound in a manner as to be plainly audible
at a distance of 50 feet from the machine or device shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section.



         (b)   When sound violating this section is produced or
reproduced by a machine or device that is located in or on a vehicle, the
vehicle's owner is guilty of the violation, provided, however, that if the
vehicle's owner is not present at the time of the violation, the person in
charge or control of the vehicle at the time of the violation is guilty of
the violation.



         (c)   This section shall not apply to sound produced by
the following:



            1.   Amplifying equipment used in connection with
activities which are authorized, sponsored or permitted by the City of Park
Rapids, so long as the activity is conducted pursuant to the conditions of
the license, permit or contract authorizing the activity;



            2.   Church bells, chimes, or carillons;



            3.   School bells;



            4.   Anti-theft devices; or



            5.   Machines or devices for the production of
sound on or in authorized emergency vehicles.



      (2)   Application.  With the exception of the machines or
devices listed in division (c) above, this section shall apply to all radios,
tapes and disc players, musical instruments, phonographs, and machines and
devices for the production or reproduction  of sound, whether on public or
private property.



   (B)   The firing or discharge of any firearms.  This section shall
not preclude the Police Department from establishing and using a firearms
training range at a site or sites established by Council action and located
within the city. Persons using the range must be licensed law enforcement
officers, or be enrolled in a program leading to licensure. The Chief of
Police or the Police Department's Firearms Training Officer (or such other
person as the Chief of Police may from time to time designate, including
representatives from other law enforcement agencies) must be present when the
range is being used.



   (C)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk
which causes large crowds to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of
the sidewalk or streets.



   (D)   All buildings, walls and other structures which have
deteriorated or become unsafe as defined in this section; or have been
damaged by fire, decay or otherwise to an extent exceeding ½ their original
value and which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the public.



   (E)   Any dog who habitually barks, disturbing the peace of a number
of people.



   (F)   Trees, hedges, signs, billboards, fences, or other
obstructions which interfere with maintenance of right-of-way or which hinder
persons using any right-of-way from seeing traffic.



   (G)   The uncovered piling, storing or keeping of old machinery,
wrecked or junked vehicles or vehicle's bodies, cut or uncut lumber, pipes
and other junk and debris, in zoned residential, or in those areas not
presently zoned, but which are predominately residential in nature.



   (H)   Any and all passenger vehicles including trucks in an
inoperative state due to age, damage, or malfunction shall not be parked
outside in any district except in a Heavy Industry District (I-2) for a
period not to exceed 30 days unless they are a permitted use; eg. repair
garage.  INOPERATIVE shall mean incapable of movement under its own power or
in need of repair or junking and shall include vehicles incapable of legal
movement on public roads.  All exterior storage not included as a permitted
use, or included as part of a conditional use permit, or otherwise permitted
by provisions of this chapter shall be considered as refuse.



   (I)   To leave any abandoned basement, well, shaft, wall, cesspool
or septic tank, or other excavation unless covered or filled or otherwise
protected as to prevent any child or other persons from accidentally falling
into the same or being injured thereby.



   (J)   All buildings and all alterations to buildings made or erected
within the fire limits as established by ordinance in violation of the
ordinance concerning manner and materials of construction.



   (K)   To throw, drop, dump, suspend or cause to be thrown, any
object or dangerous material from any bridge or overpass spanning roadways or
waterways within the city.  No person shall jump, swing, fall, or attach any
device on any bridge to cause a person to swing from or repel from any bridge
within the city.  No loitering on top of buildings.



   (L)   All snow and ice must be removed from public sidewalks,
awnings or decks within 12 hours after the snow or other precipitation
causing the condition has ceased to fall. The allowing of rain water, ice or
snow to fall from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk or to
flow across or build up on any sidewalk, that may pose a threat to the
general health, safety or welfare of the public is prohibited.



   (M)  Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of
streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under conditions as are
permitted by this City Code.



   (N)  Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery,
household appliances, automobile bodies, or other material in a manner
conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or the rank
growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating
fire, health, or safety hazards from those accumulations.



   (O)  The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk, or other public
property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which may
injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over a
substance.



   (P)   All other conditions or things which are liable to cause
injury to the person or property of anyone.



(Prior Code, § 19-28)  (Ord. 270, passed 3-11-1996; Am. Ord. 363, passed
5-14-2002; Am. Ord. 359, passed 12-11-2001; Am. Ord. 462, passed 6-13-2006) 
Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.05  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING ENVIRONMENT.



   (A)   The following are declared a nuisance to the environment and a
threat to the character of the community:



      (1)   In all zoning districts, the owner of all land shall be
responsible for keeping land free of noxious and virulent weeds;



      (2)   Brush and yard waste as provided in this section: and



      (3)   Any high grass as defined in § 92.02.



   (B)   Regulation of weeds, brush and grass.



      (1)   Weeds and high grass. All weeds or growing grass upon
any lot or parcel of land in the city to a height greater than seven inches,
or which have gone or are about to go to seed, are hereby declared to be a
nuisance and a detriment to the good order of the city with the following
exceptions:



         (a)   Native prairie and long grass areas shown on a
city approved landscape plan:



         (b)   Native prairie and long grass within a defined
landscape area on a single or two-family residential parcel, provided that
such defined landscape area:



         (c)   Natural wooded areas;



         (d)   Wetlands, ponds or rain gardens;



         (e)   City approved lakescaping areas; and



         (f)   Areas where mowing is prohibited by easement or
law.



      (2)   Brush. All brush piles not properly stored in a closed
container upon any lot of parcel or land in the city are hereby declared to
be a vermin harborage and attractive nuisance and dangerous to the health,
safety and good order of the city with the following exceptions:



         (a)   Brush piles located near the street or other
specific area for pickup or collection for a period of time of less than one
week;



         (b)   Brush accumulations from a large storm event where
it is not reasonable that brush be collected in a week less; and



         (c)   Brush that has fallen in natural wooded or wetland
areas or yards.



   (C)   Notice.



      (1)   When the owner or occupant or both permit a nuisance to
exist in violation of this § 92.05, the inspecting officer of the Park
Rapids Police Department shall serve a notice on the owner, occupant or agent
of the owner of such lot or parcel of land ordering such person to have such
brush, yard waste or weeds or high grass cut/mowed and removed, or cut/mowed
and removed within ten calendar days after the service of such notice; such
notice shall also state that in the event of noncompliance, cutting, mowing
and removal will be done by the city at the owner's expense, and that if such
costs of abatement are not paid when invoiced, the same shall be assessed
against the property. The notice shall also inform the owner of the owner's
right to appeal the determination of the inspecting officer of the Park
Rapids Police Department to the City Administrator. Such appeal must be in
writing and filed with the City Administrator within the ten day notice
period, Failure to timely file an appeal with the City Administrator shall be
deemed a waiver of the right to appeal.



      (2)   Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a
copy thereof is;



         (a)   Delivered personally;



         (b)   Sent by first-class mail addressed to the person
who is listed by the County Auditor as the owner of taxpayer of record. If
the taxpayer's address is different than the address where the violation
exists, then the notice shall also be mailed to the property address where
the violation exists; or



         (c)   If the notice is returned showing that the letter
was not delivered or the property is known to be vacant, a copy thereof shall
be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such
notice.



   (D)   Assessment.



      (1)   If any person fails to comply with the notice provided
in this § 92.05 within ten calendar days after service, or if no owner,
occupant, or agent can be found, the city's designated representative, shall
have such brush, yard, waste, high grass or weeds cut/mowed, and removed or
otherwise eradicated by city personnel or the city's contracted agent. A
record showing the cost of such work attributed to each separate lot or
parcel shall be delivered to the city. The city shall thereafter invoice the
property owner for such abatement cost, which shall be paid by the property
owner within 30 days of the date of the city invoice. Pursuant to M.S. §
429.101, and following notice and hearing in accordance with M.S. § 429.061,
on or before October 15 of each year, the amount so charged, but unpaid,
including the administrative and assessment charges due under divisions (b)
and (c) below, together with interest thereon at the maximum lawful rate
permitted under M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to time, against
said lot or parcel of land, together with a description of the property and
the name of the supposed owner, shall be certified to the County Auditor and
shall be collected in the same manner as property taxes or special
assessments against said property. The charge shall be a perpetual lien on
the property until paid.



      (2)   An abatement administrative charge under § 36.13 shall
be due upon the mailing of the city invoice to the property owner for the
work performed by the city in addition to the cost of the work performed.



      (3)   An assessment charge under § 36.13 shall be due upon
the mailing of the notice of proposed assessment of the property owner.



   (E)   Penalty. Failure or neglect to cut/mow and remove or otherwise
eradicate weeds or high grass or remove yard waste and brush as directed in
this § 92.05, failure, neglect or refusal to comply with any provision of
nay notice provided herein, violation of any provision of this § 92.05, or
resisting or obstructing the inspecting officer, or designed employees and
contractors or agents in the cutting/mowing and removal, or eradication of
weeds or high grass, or removal of yard waste or brush shall be a
misdemeanor. Each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 19-29)  (Ord. 359, passed 12-11-2001; Am. Ord. 575, passed
7-25-2017)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.06  GENERAL POLICY.



   It is hereby determined that the uses, structures, activities and
causes of blight factors described within this chapter, if allowed to exist,
will tend to result in blighted and undesirable neighborhoods so as to be
harmful to the public welfare, health and safety. 



(Prior Code, § 19-30)  (Ord. 359, passed 12-11-2001)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.07  INSPECTION OF DWELLING AND PREMISES.



   It shall be the duty of the Park Rapids Police Department to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.  Officers and members of the Park Rapids
Police Department are authorized to make, or cause to be made, inspections to
determine the conditions of exterior premises of property and may, during the
course of their inspection, take pictures on the premises.



(Prior Code, § 19-31)  (Ord. 359, passed 12-11-2001)



§ 92.08  SERVICE OF NOTICE.



   When the inspecting officer of the Park Rapids Police Department
determines there had been a violation of this chapter or that there are
reasonable grounds to believe there has been a violation, he or she shall
give written notice of the violation or alleged violation to the person or
persons who are responsible therefor.  The notice shall describe the
property involved sufficiently to identify it, shall describe the violation
which exists and the remedial action required, shall allow a reasonable time
for the performance of any act required, and shall be served upon the person
responsible therefor, and upon the record owner in the manner in which a
summons is served in Minnesota in a civil action.



(Prior Code, § 19-32)  (Ord. 359, passed 12-11-2001)



§ 92.09  ENFORCEMENT.



   If the notice described in § 92.08 is not complied with by the
responsible person or persons within the time prescribed, the defendant
either may be prosecuted for the violation of this chapter or the City
Council may authorize the City Attorney to institute appropriate civil action
against the responsible person or persons for abatement of the public
nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 19-33)  (Ord. 359, passed 12-11-2001)



§ 92.10  ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY.



   No officer, agent or employee of the City of Park Rapids shall render
himself or herself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his or her duties under this chapter.  No person who institutes
or assists in the prosecution of a criminal proceeding under this chapter
shall be liable in damages therefor unless he or she acted with actual malice
and without reasonable grounds for believing that the person accused or
prosecuted was guilty of an unlawful act or omission.



(Prior Code, § 19-34)  (Ord. 359, passed 12-11-2001)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   In the discretion of the charging officer, the officer may state upon
the tab charge or complaint that the matter may be treated as a payable
pursuant to any District Court judge's schedule then in effect, thereby
eliminating any threat of jail time for the alleged offender.



(Prior Code, § 19-35)  (Ord. 359, passed 12-11-2001)



CHAPTER 93:  ENVIRONMENT



Section




Tree Standards and Urban Forestry Committee




   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Creation and establishment of the Urban Forestry Committee



   93.03   Terms of office



   93.04   Compensation



   93.05   Duties and responsibilities



   93.06   Tree species to be planted



   93.07   Spacing



   93.08   Distance from curb to sidewalk



   93.09   Distance from street corners to fire hydrants



   93.10   Boulevard trees



   93.11   Boulevard trees damaged by contractor or property owner



   93.12   Utilities



   93.13   Public tree care



   93.14   Pruning standards



   93.15   Pruning and corner clearance



   93.16   Tree topping



   93.17   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property



   93.18   Removal of tree stumps



   93.19   Protection and preservation of trees



   93.20   Interference with Urban Forestry Committee



   93.21   Arborists license and bonding



   93.22   Insurance



   93.23   Review by City Council




Firewood and Stockpiling of Wood




   93.35   Regulations adopted by reference



 



   93.99   Penalty



TREE STANDARDS AND URBAN FORESTRY COMMITTEE



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOULEVARD.  Area between curb or street edge and the private property
line that is publicly owned.



   BOULEVARD TREE.  A tree, shrub, bush, or other woody vegetation on
land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, and
boulevards within the city.



   CITY.  The City of Park Rapids, Minnesota.



   HAZARD TREE.  Any tree or stump with an infectious disease or insect
problem, dead or dying trees, a tree or limb(s) that obstructs street lights,
traffic signs, the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; a tree that poses
a threat to public safety, and the like.



   LARGE TREE.  Any plant material that will grow to a height of over 40
feet.



   MEDIUM TREE.  Any plant material that will grow to a mature height of
20 to 40 feet.



   PARK TREE.  A tree, shrub, bush, or other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city or to which
the public has free access as a park.



   PRIVATE TREE.  Any and all trees growing on private property within
the city limits.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Any area or building publicly owned, including but
not limited to boulevards, parks, playgrounds, school sites, parkways, and
streets.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Portion of property reserved for public use and
accepted for that use by the city to provide circulation and travel to
abutting properties, including, but not limited to, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, provisions for public utilities, cut and fill slopes, and open
public spaces.



   PUBLIC TREE.  All trees growing on any public right-of-way, park, or
any public place owned and or managed by the City of Park Rapids.



   SMALL TREE.  Any plant material that will grow to a height of 20 feet
or less.



   URBAN FOREST.  All woody vegetation in city limits.



(Prior Code, § 22-26)  (Ord.381, passed 4-22-2003)



§ 93.02  CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF THE URBAN FORESTRY COMMITTEE.



   There is hereby created and established an Urban Forestry Committee for
the City of Park Rapids of which shall consist of 5 members who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with approval of the City Council.  The members shall
come from different interest groups and/or members of the community, tree
professionals, the street department and city government.  The Urban
Forestry Committee consists of 3 private citizens, the Park Rapids City
Planner, and 1 person from the Park Rapids City Council.  Ex-officio members
will include the City Forester, 1 DNR Forester, a University of Minnesota
County Extension Agent (UMCEA), 1 representative from the Hubbard County
Natural Resource Management Office, and a representative of the Natural
Resource Conservation Service Office (NRCS).  The Committee shall choose its
own officers to be approved by the Mayor and make its own rules and
regulations.  It shall keep a record of meeting minutes and make sure that
they are distributed to each member in a timely manner.



(Prior Code, § 22-27)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003; Am. Ord. 428, passed
4-12-2005)



§ 93.03  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   The term of all members will be 3 years, except the term of 2 members
appointed to the first Committee, they will serve 2 years and the term of 1
member appointed to the first Committee will be for 1 year.  In the event
that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, the successor shall
be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.  Committee members may
not serve more than 3 consecutive terms.  A Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson
will be elected through the nomination process and serve 1 year.  These
positions will be elected into office the last meeting of the year.



(Prior Code, § 22-28)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)



§ 93.04  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Committee shall serve without compensation.



(Prior Code, § 22-29)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)



§ 93.05  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the Committee to study,
investigate, counsel, develop and administer a written plan for care,
preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees
and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas.  The plan will
constitute the official comprehensive tree plan.  The Committee will provide
the Council with an annual update, preferably in April.



   (B)   The Committee shall promote and supervise the establishment of
a tree inventory for boulevard and park trees.  The inventory shall be
updated with the results of ground inspection annually.



   (C)   The Committee, when requested by the City Council, shall
consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend any special matter
or question coming within the scope of its work.



   (D)   The Committee will:



      (1)   Recommend the adoption and alteration of all rules,
regulations and ordinances which it shall, from time to time, deem in the
public interest and most likely enhance and beautify the urban forest;



      (2)   Recommend policies for the review and approval of
capital projects where trees or other vegetation will be planted on or
removed from city property;



      (3)   Encourage landscaping, installation and maintenance on
private property by providing information on the value of landscaping and on
the proper planting and care of trees and other vegetation;



      (4)   Promote appreciation of trees and the urban forest
through annual Arbor Day observations and other activities in conjunction
with the school district and community organizations; and



      (5)   Review those portions of the city budget allocated for
the planting and care of trees and other vegetation and advise the City
Administrator on the appropriateness of funding levels.



(Prior Code, § 22-30)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)



§ 93.06  TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.



   (A)   The Urban Forestry Committee develops and maintains a list of
desirable trees for planting along streets in 3 size classes based on mature
height:



      (1)   Small -  under 20 feet;



      (2)   Medium - 20 to 40 feet; or



      (3)   Large - over 40 feet.



   (B)   Efforts shall be made to ensure a sufficient diversity of tree
species.



   (C)   List of trees not suitable for planting will also be created
by the Committee.



(Prior Code, § 22-31)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.07  SPACING.



   (A)   The spacing of trees will be in accordance with the 3 species
size classes listed in § 93.06 of this chapter.



   (B)   Except in special plantings designed or approved by a
landscape architect in accordance with the Urban Forestry Committee, no tree
may be planted closer than the following:



      (1)   Small trees - 15 feet;



      (2)   Medium trees - 25 feet; or



      (3)   Large trees - 35 feet.



(Prior Code, § 22-32)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.08  DISTANCE FROM CURB TO SIDEWALK.



   The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and
sidewalks, will be in accordance with the 3 species size classes listed in §
93.06 of this chapter.  No trees may be planted closer to any curb or
sidewalk than 2 feet for small trees, 3 feet for medium or large trees.



(Prior Code, § 22-33)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.09  DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS TO FIRE HYDRANTS.



   No boulevard tree shall be planted within 35 feet of any street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines.  No
street tree shall be planted within 10 feet of any fire hydrant.



(Prior Code, § 22-34)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.10  BOULEVARD TREES.



   (A)   The planting of boulevard trees in residential developments of
any size is required, with the financing and planting of these trees being
the responsibility of the landowner.



   (B)   A boulevard tree planting plan must be drawn up by the
landowner and submitted to the City Planner for approval at the time of the
building permit application.  This plan must follow the specifications in
the Park Rapids city ordinance and the City's Urban Forestry Committee
Technical Manual.  The City will not grant the certificate of occupancy
until the trees are planted.  At the discretion of the City Planner, an
extension of no more than 9 months may be granted due to circumstances beyond
control of the landowner.  Trees not planted within the time frame noted
above, will be planted by the city and the total cost assessed to the
landowner.



   (C)   The tree stock life must be guaranteed for 2 years from time
of planting.  Planting and mulching techniques must follow currently
accepted recommendation.  Watering of the trees is the responsibility of the
landowner after the planting of the tree.



(Prior Code, § 22-34A)  (Ord. 428, passed 4-12-2005)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.11  BOULEVARD TREES DAMAGED BY CONTRACTOR OR PROPERTY OWNER.



   (A)   The replacement of public trees, removed or damaged for any
reason by any person, property owner, or contractor working within the city,
is the full responsibility of that person, property owner, or contractor.



   (B)   Replacement trees will be located on site if possible.  If
impossible to be located on site, replacement trees shall be planted
elsewhere in the city on public property, with the City Forester determining
the site.



   (C)   A planting plan must be drawn up and submitted to the City
Planner for approval.  Replacement tree size, species, and location must be
in accordance with the tree ordinance and technical manual. Trees must be
planted prior to or within 1 year after completion of the project.  The tree
stock life must be guaranteed for 2 years from the time of planting; and
techniques must follow currently accepted recommendation.  Trees not planted
within the time frame noted above will be planted by the city.  The cost
assessed to the person, property owner, or contractor, whichever is
applicable.



   (D)   Replacement tree watering will be the responsibility of the
city and adjacent landowner.



   (E)   Any tree damage occurring during a construction process
involving the trunk, roots, or branches greater than 2 inches in diameter
must be brought to the attention of the City Forester for evaluation
regarding possible tree care or removal.  Recommended care of the trunk,
roots, and branches greater than 2 inches in diameter will either be
performed by the City Forester, the contractor in conjunction with the City
Forester, or by a tree contractor licensed in the city.  The care or
replacement will be at the expense of the contractor.



(Prior Code, § 22-34B)  (Ord. 428, passed 4-12-2005)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.12  UTILITIES.



   (A)   No boulevard tree other than those species accepted as small
trees by the Urban Forestry Committee may be planted under, or within 10 feet
of any overhead utility wire.



   (B)   The Urban Forestry Committee may remove or order to be
removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition, or which
by reason of its nature, is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas
lines, water lines or other public improvements.



   (C)   Tree limbs that grow near high voltage electrical conductors
shall be maintained clear of the conductors by the electric utility company
in compliance with any applicable franchise agreements.  The utility company
and the Urban Forestry Committee should be familiar with each ordinance and
policies regarding these matters.



(Prior Code, § 22-35)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.13  PUBLIC TREE CARE.



   (A)   This chapter provides the Urban Forestry Committee with full
power and authority over all matters regarding trees, plants and shrubs
located within street rights-of-way, parks and public places of the city.



   (B)   The Urban Forestry Committee may remove or order to be
removed, any trees or parts thereof which are in an unsafe condition, due to
factors such as disease, insect infestation or trauma.  This section does
not prohibit the planting of boulevard trees by adjacent property owners
providing that the selection and location of the trees is in accordance with
§§ 93.08 through 93.13 of this chapter and with approval of the City
Forester. The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
all trees, plants, and shrubs within the rights-of-way of all city streets,
alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds as may be necessary to
insure public safety or to preserve or enhance public symmetry and beauty of
the public grounds.



(Prior Code, § 22-36)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)



§ 93.14  PRUNING STANDARDS.



   All tree pruning on public property shall conform to the ANSI A300
Standards for tree care operations:



   (A)   5.2.5.1.  A thinning cut should be the preferred type of cut
to make.



   (B)   4.1.4.3.  A thinning cut shall consist of the removal of a
lateral branch at its point of origin, or the shortening of a branch stem by
cutting to a lateral large enough to assume the terminal role.



   (C)   4.2.1.4.  Not more than 1/4 of the foliage on a mature tree
should be removed within a growing season.



(Prior Code, § 22-37A)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.15  PRUNING AND CORNER CLEARANCE.



   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within
the city shall prune the branches so that the branches shall not severely
obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct view of any street
intersection.  There shall be a clear space 13 feet above street surface or
8 feet above the sidewalk surface.  The owner shall remove all dead,
diseased, dangerous trees, broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace
to the safety of the public.  The city shall have the right to prune any
tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread
of light along the street from a street light, or interferes with visibility
of any traffic control device or sign or sign triangle at intersections, also
along any public driveway access.



(Prior Code, § 22-37B)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.16  TREE TOPPING.



   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city
department to top any boulevard tree, park tree, or other tree on public
property.  TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger than 3 inches in diameter within the tree's crown to a degree as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.  Crown reduction by
qualified personnel, such as the City Forester may be substituted, where
appropriate.  Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain
trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices
are impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the
Urban Forestry Committee.



(Prior Code, § 22-38)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.17  DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or
diseased tree on all property within the city limits, when trees constitute a
hazard to life and property, harbor insects or disease which constitute a
potential threat to other trees within the city. The City Forester will
notify in writing the owners of these trees.  Removal shall be done by the
owners at their own expense within 30 days after the date of notice.  In the
event of failure to comply with these provisions, the city shall have the
authority to remove these trees and assess the cost of removal on the owner's
property tax notice.  In the event the tree is deemed public, refer to §
93.13.  For the removal of public trees, the cost will be shared by the city
and landowner on a 50% basis.



(Prior Code, § 22-39)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003; Am. Ord. 441, passed
7-12-2005)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.18  REMOVAL OF TREE STUMPS.



   All stumps of boulevard and park trees shall be removed, as deemed
necessary by the City Forester, below the surface of the ground so that the
top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground.



(Prior Code, § 22-40)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.19  PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF TREES.



   (A)   In order to maintain the overall forest, reasonable efforts
shall be made to replace trees that are removed and to protect quality trees
that are endangered.  Trees removed by decision of the Urban Forestry
Committee or by natural causes shall be replaced somewhere in the forest on a
1 for 1 basis within 2 years.  The location and species of any replacement
tree shall be determined by the Urban Forestry Committee.



   (B)   Trees of desirable species and good health shall be protected
as much as possible from damage during construction, sidewalk repair, utility
work (above and below ground) and other similar activities. The zone of
protection shall include the ground beneath the canopy of the tree.



   (C)   The Urban Forestry Committee shall provide applicable
information to developers and private residents regarding the protection and
preservation of trees before commencement of construction.  A tree plan
should be developed as part of the preliminary plan stage with the counsel of
the Urban Forestry Committee.



(Prior Code, § 22-41)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.20  INTERFERENCE WITH URBAN FORESTRY COMMITTEE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with
the Urban Forestry Committee or any of its agents, while engaging in and
about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of
any boulevard trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds as authorized in
this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 22-42)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.21  ARBORISTS LICENSE AND BONDING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or any firm to engage in the
business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing boulevard or park
trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a license. 
The license fee shall be $25 annually in advance; provided, however, that no
license shall be required of any public service company including electric
utilities and their agents and contractors or city employee doing the work in
the pursuit of their public service endeavors.  Before any license shall be
issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability
insurance in the minimum amounts of $300,000 for bodily injury and $100,000
property damage indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged 
resulting from the pursuit of the endeavors as herein described.



(Prior Code, § 22-43)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.22  INSURANCE.



   Any contractor hired by the city must file evidence of possession of
liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $300,000 for bodily injury or
death and $100,000 property damage indemnifying the City of Park Rapids or
any person injured or damage resulting from the pursuit of the endeavors as
herein described.



(Prior Code, § 22-44)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.23  REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.



   The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and
decisions of the Urban Forestry Committee.  The City Council may modify,
affirm, or reserve any determination of the Urban Forestry Committee.  Any
person aggrieved by any ruling or order of the Urban Forestry Committee may
appeal to the City Council, which shall hear the matter and make final
decisions.



(Prior Code, § 22-45)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)




FIREWOOD AND STOCKPILING OF WOOD




§ 93.35  REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   MCAR §§ 1505.0010 through 1505.0600, Department of Agriculture, Shade
Tree Program (1978) together with amendments thereof to date, are hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this code as if set out here in full,
except as hereinafter provided.  A copy of  the agency rules herewith
incorporated is on file in the City Administration office.



(Prior Code, § 22-47)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.



   (B)   Tree standards and Urban Forestry Committee.



      (1)   The costs the city incurs as a result of the property
owners failure to comply pursuant to §§ 93.01et seq. are hereby made a lien
upon the lot or premises served, and all the charges which are on October 31
of each year past due and delinquent, shall be certified to the County
Auditor as taxes or assessments on the real estate.  Nothing in this
division shall be held or construed as in any way stopping or interfering
with the right of the city to levy as taxes or assessments against any
premises affecting any delinquent or past due costs.



      (2)   Any person, firm, contractor or corporation who violates
any provision of §§ 93.01et seq. shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may
be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than
90 days, or both.  In addition thereto, the cost of prosecution may be
imposed upon the defendant and the court may order restitution to the city
for damage to the tree or public property.



(Prior Code, § 22-46)  (Ord. 381, passed 4-22-2003)



CHAPTER 94:  STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES



Section




Street Excavations




   94.001   Permit required



   94.002   Application and regulations



   94.003   Bond



   94.004   General regulations for excavations



   94.005   Refilling excavations



   94.006   Pavement; city to replace



   94.007   Excavations on state or federal highways



   94.008   Map of subsurface installations




Street Lighting




   94.020   System established



   94.021   Billing; billing units



   94.022   Assessment of unpaid bills




Obligation of Property Owners




   94.035   Definitions



   94.036   Personal liability



   94.037   Assessment



   94.038   Civil action



   94.039   Snow, ice, dirt and rubbish



   94.040   Public health and safety standards



   94.041   Repair of sidewalks and alleys




Streets, Alleys and Boulevards




   94.055   Streets and alleys



   94.056   Boulevards




Liability of City




   94.070   Actions against city; notice



   94.071   Receipt of notice



   94.072   Record of notices



 



   94.999   Penalty




STREET EXCAVATIONS




§ 94.001  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person, except an authorized city employee or a contractor
performing work under a contract with the city, shall make any excavation in
a street, alley, sidewalk, or public ground without first having secured a
permit therefor from the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 46-26)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.002  APPLICATION AND REGULATIONS.



   The City Clerk shall prepare the necessary application forms and
permits required under § 94.001.  He or she shall also prepare the rules
and regulations with respect to excavations as he or she finds necessary to
protect the public from injury, prevent damage to public or private property,
and minimize interference with the public use of streets, alleys, sidewalks,
and public grounds.  Any person making an excavation covered by this
subchapter shall agree prior to the issuance of the permit to comply with the
rules and regulations set forth in this part.



(Prior Code, § 46-27)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.003  BOND.



   (A)   Any permittee, except a public utility corporation shall file
with the City Clerk a plumbing contractor’s bond in the sum of $25,000
conditioned that the permittee will:



      (1)   Perform work in connection with the excavation in
accordance with applicable ordinances and regulations;



      (2)   Indemnify the city and hold it harmless from all damage
caused in the execution of the work; and



      (3)   Pay all costs and damages suffered by the city by reason
of the failure of the permittee to observe the terms of applicable ordinances
and regulations or because of negligence in the execution of the work.



   (B)   Any permittee except a public utility corporation shall
furnish proof that the permittee has in existence an insurance policy
protecting him or her from liability to the public, including the city, to an
amount equal to the maximum claim the city might be required to pay under
M.S. Chapter 466, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 46-28)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.004  GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR EXCAVATIONS.



   Street openings shall be made in a manner that will cause the least
inconvenience to the public.  The work shall be as directed by the Public
Works Superintendent.  Provision shall be made for the passage of water
along the gutters and at least ½ of the traveled portion of the street shall
be left open and in good condition for the safe passage of vehicles.  Open
excavations shall be guarded with substantial barriers and marked with red
flags and at night with red lights or flashing devices.  Pipes or mains
exposed to freezing temperatures shall be protected so as to prevent
freezing.  Any person responsible for exposing a city main or pipe so that
it might be damaged by freezing shall be liable to the city for all damages
caused by the freezing and all damages sustained by others by the freezing
for which the city may be liable.



(Prior Code, § 46-29)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.005  REFILLING EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   Every street excavation shall be refilled as soon as possible
after the work is completed to the satisfaction of the Public Works
Superintendent.  All dirt and debris shall be removed immediately.



   (B)   Any person who fails to comply with these requirements within
24 hours after notice from the city shall be liable to the city for the full
cost incurred by the city in remedying the defect and restoring the street,
sidewalk, alley, or public ground to its proper condition.  The cost shall
be an obligation of the surety on the bond of the permittee.



(Prior Code, § 46-30)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.006  PAVEMENT; CITY TO REPLACE.



   (A)   On all streets where the excavation must be made through
bituminous surfacing, concrete or other paving, the surface will be repaired
or replaced by the city at the expense of the property served. 



   (B)   After the surfacing has been repaired or replaced, the cost of
making the repair or replacement will be billed to the applicant.



(Prior Code, § 46-31)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.007  EXCAVATIONS ON STATE OR FEDERAL HIGHWAYS.



   When surfacing on a state or federal highway is to be disturbed, a
permit must be obtained from the Highway Department and their rules and
regulations will govern.



(Prior Code, § 46-32)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.008  MAP OF SUBSURFACE INSTALLATIONS.



   The Water/Sewer Department shall maintain a map showing the location of
city utilities and other installations made beneath the surface of any public
street, grounds, or right-of-way.  The information on the map shall be
sufficiently complete and accurate to permit anyone making an excavation in a
public place having any underground installation to avoid damage to any
existing underground installation and to properly locate the same.  Any new
underground facilities shall be recorded on the map as soon as practicable
upon the issuance of an excavation permit or the completion of a contract for
the installation of city underground installations by the City Engineering
Department.



(Prior Code, § 46-33)




STREET LIGHTING




§ 94.020  SYSTEM ESTABLISHED.



   The city street lighting system is established and continued.  The
system consists of street lighting facilities, whether owned by the city or
otherwise, for which the city purchases and supplies electrical energy from a
public utility.



(Prior Code, § 46-40)



§ 94.021  BILLING; BILLING UNITS.



   (A)  Unit defined.  For purposes of this subchapter, a BILLING UNIT
is any commercial property with frontage abutting the target area affected by
the downtown street lighting excluding common public areas.  A BILLING UNIT
will be based upon the front footage of the property along with 50% of the
side footage in the case of corner lots.



   (B)   Billing.  The service charge will be set by the City Council
on a per foot basis and divided among the billing units according to the
proportion of each unit's footage.  The billing clerk is to send bills to
each billing unit on a bi-monthly basis and directed to the same person to
whom city sewer and water billings are sent for that unit.  If a billing
unit is not connected to the city water or sewer system the bill is to be
sent to the owner of the billing unit.  Bills are to be sent to all the
units whether occupied or unoccupied.



   (C)   Advance payment.  Each billing unit will have the option of
making an advance payment equivalent to their total utility billing over 10
years with a reduction for a cost of money calculation.  This amount will be
determined by the City Treasurer.



(Prior Code, § 46-41)



§ 94.022  ASSESSMENT OF UNPAID BILLS.



   On or before October 1 of each year, the Clerk must list the total
unpaid charges for street lighting service against each separate lot or
parcel to which they are attributable.  The Council will then spread the
charges against property benefitted as a special assessment under M.S. §
429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and other pertinent statutes
for certification to the director of property taxation of Hubbard County and
collection the following year along with the current taxes.



(Prior Code, § 46-42)  (Ord. 280, passed 1997)




OBLIGATION OF PROPERTY OWNERS




§ 94.035  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CURRENT SERVICE.  One or more of the following: snow, ice, or rubbish
removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots adjacent to
sidewalks or from private property; removal or elimination of public health
or safety hazards from private property, excluding any hazardous building
included in M.S. §§ 463.15 to 463.261, as it may be amended from time to
time; installation or repair of water service lines; street sprinkling,
street flushing, light street oiling, or other dust treatment of streets;
repair of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of trees and removal of
unsound and insect-infected trees from the public streets or private
property; and the operation of a street lighting system.



(Prior Code, § 46-51)



§ 94.036  PERSONAL LIABILITY.



   The owner of property on which or adjacent to which a current service
has been performed shall be personally liable for the cost of the service. 
As soon as the service has been completed and the cost determined, the City
Clerk, or other designated official, shall prepare a bill and mail it to the
owner and thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the
office of the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 46-52)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.037  ASSESSMENT.



   (A)   On or before September 1 of each year, the Clerk shall list
the total unpaid charges for each type of current service against each
separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this subchapter. 



   (B)   The Council may then spread the charges against property
benefitted as a special assessment under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, and other pertinent statutes for certification to
the County Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year
or in annual installments, not exceeding 10, as the Council may determine in
each case.



(Prior Code, § 46-53)



§ 94.038  CIVIL ACTION.



   The Clerk may bring a civil suit in any court of competent jurisdiction
to recover the charges for the current service from the person benefitted by
the current service.



(Prior Code, § 46-54)



§ 94.039  SNOW, ICE, DIRT AND RUBBISH.



   (A)   Duty of owners and occupants.  The owner and the occupant of
any property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the
walk safe for pedestrians.  No owner or occupant shall allow snow, ice,
dirt, or rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 24 hours after its deposit
thereon.



   (B)   Removal by city.  The Public works Superintendent shall cause
to be removed from all public sidewalks all snow, ice, dirt and rubbish as
soon as possible beginning 24 hours after any matter has been deposited
thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall.  He or she shall keep a record
showing the cost of the removal adjacent to each separate lot and parcel and
shall deliver the information to the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 46-55)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.040  PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY STANDARDS.



   (A)   When the city removes or eliminates public health or safety
hazards from private property under city ordinance, the administrative
officer responsible for doing the work shall keep a record of the cost of the
removal or elimination against each parcel of property affected and annually
deliver the information to the City Clerk.



   (B)   This section does not apply to hazardous buildings under the
hazardous building law, M.S. § 463.26, as it may be amended from time to
time.



(Prior Code, § 46-56)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.041  REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   Duty of owner.



      (1)   The owner of any property within the city abutting a
public sidewalk or alley shall keep the sidewalk or alley in repair and safe
for pedestrians.



      (2)   Repairs shall be made in accordance with the standard
specifications approved by the Council and on file in the office of the City
Clerk.



   (B)   Inspections; notice.



      (1)   The Public Works Superintendent shall make inspections
as are necessary to determine that public sidewalks and alleys within the
city are kept in repair and safe for pedestrians or vehicles.



      (2)   If he or she finds that any sidewalk or alley abutting
on private property is unsafe and in need of repairs, he or she shall cause a
notice to be served, by registered or certified mail or by personal service,
upon the record owner of the property and the occupant, if the owner does not
reside within the city or cannot be found therein ordering the owner to have
the sidewalk or alley repaired and made safe within  60 days and stating
that if the owner fails to do so, the Public Works Superintendent will do so
on behalf of the city, that the expense thereof must be paid by the owner,
and that if unpaid it will be made a special assessment against the property
concerned.



   (C)   Repair by city.



      (1)   If the sidewalk or alley is not repaired within 60 days
after receipt of the notice, the Public Works Superintendent shall report the
facts to the Council and the Council shall by resolution order the Public
Works Superintendent to repair the sidewalk or alley and make it safe or
order the work done by contract in accordance with law.



      (2)   The Public Works Superintendent shall keep a record of
the  total cost of the repair attributable to each lot or parcel of property
and report the information to the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 46-57)  Penalty, see § 94.999




STREETS, ALLEYS AND BOULEVARDS




§ 94.055  STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   Obstructions.  It shall be unlawful for any person to store,
pile or place upon any alley or street any merchandise, waste material or
other obstruction of any kind, provided it is not unlawful for any person to
place merchandise, which he or she may be receiving or delivering for the
purpose of unpacking or shipping, on that part of the street or alley
adjacent to the building owned or occupied by him or her so long as it does
not obstruct traffic and does not remain on the street or alley longer than
reasonably necessary.



   (B)   Snow and ice, roofs.  No person shall throw snow or ice from
a building roof into a street or alley or otherwise cause snow or ice to be
put upon any street or alley.



(Prior Code, § 46-71)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.056  BOULEVARDS.



   (A)   Definition.  A BOULEVARD is that area of ground between the
curb or boundary of a road used for vehicular traffic and the sidewalk.  If
there is no sidewalk, the boundary shall be the designated sidewalk line. 
If there be no sidewalk and no designated sidewalk line, the boundary shall
be the property line.



   (B)   Signs or structures.  No person shall erect or place, or
permit to be erected or placed upon a boulevard any sign or structure except
official signs or structures erected or placed thereon by public authority.



(Prior Code, § 46-72)  (Ord. 242, passed 1989; Am. Ord. 438, passed
6-28-2005)  Penalty, see § 94.999




LIABILITY OF CITY




§ 94.070  ACTIONS AGAINST CITY; NOTICE.



   (A)   Defects, obstructions.  No civil action shall be maintained
against the City of Park Rapids for damages or injuries to person or property
sustained by reason of any highway bridge or culvert being defective, out of
repair, unsafe, dangerous, or obstructed unless:



      (1)   Written notice of the defective, unsafe, dangerous, or
obstructed condition was received by the Clerk of the governing body or the
County Highway Superintendent; and



      (2)   There was a failure or neglect within a reasonable time
after giving of notice to repair or remove the defect, danger, or obstruction
complained of.



   (B)   Snow or ice.  No action shall be maintained for damages or
injuries to person or property sustained solely in consequence  of the
existence of snow or ice upon any highway, bridge, or culvert, unless:



      (1)   Written notice thereof, specifying the particular place
was actually received by the Clerk of the City of Park Rapids or Public Works
Superintendent; and



      (2)   There was a failure or neglect to cause the snow or ice
to be removed, or to make the place otherwise reasonably safe within a
reasonable time after the receipt of the notice.



(Prior Code, § 46-91)  (Ord. 231, passed 1986)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.071  RECEIPT OF NOTICE.



   The Public Works Superintendent of Park Rapids shall transmit in
writing to the Clerk of the city within 10 days after the receipt thereof all
written notices received by the Clerk pursuant to § 91.070 of this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 46-92)



§ 94.072  RECORD OF NOTICES.



   The Clerk of Park Rapids shall keep an indexed record, in a separate
book, of all written notices, which the Clerk shall receive pursuant to this
subchapter of the existence of a defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed
condition in or upon, or of an accumulation of ice or snow upon any county
highway, bridge or culvert, which record shall state the date of receipt of
the notice, the nature and location of the condition stated to exist, and the
name and address of the person from whom the notice is received.  The record
of each notice shall be preserved for a period of 5 years after the date it
is received.



(Prior Code, § 46-93)  (Ord. 231, passed 1986)



§ 94.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.



   (B)   Obligation of property owners.  Any person who violates any
of the provisions of §§ 94.035et seq. shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 46-58)



   (C)   Streets, alleys and boulevards.  Any person who violates the
provisions of §§ 94.055et seq. shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 46-73)



CHAPTER 95:  RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT



Section




General Provisions




   95.01   Findings, purpose, and intent



   95.02   Election to manage the public rights-of-way



   95.03   Definitions




Administration




   95.15   Administration



   95.16   Utility Coordination Committee



   95.17   Registration and right-of-way occupancy



   95.18   Registration information



   95.19   Reporting obligations




Permits




   95.30   Permit requirement



   95.31   Permit applications



   95.32   Issuance of permit; conditions



   95.33   Action on small wireless facility permit applications



   95.34   Permit fees



   95.35   Right-of-way patching and restoring



   95.36   Joint application



   95.37   Supplemental applications



   95.38   Other obligations



   95.39   Denial or revocation of permit



   95.40   Installation requirements



   95.41   Inspection



   95.42   Work done without a permit



   95.43   Supplementary notification



   95.44   Revocation of permits



   95.45   Mapping data



   95.46   Location and relocation of facilities



   95.47   Pre-excavation facility and facilities location



   95.48   Damage to other facilities



   95.49   Right-of-way vacation



   95.50   Indemnification and liability



   95.51   Abandoned and unusable facilities



   95.52   Appeal



   95.53   Reservation of regulatory and police powers



   95.54   Severability




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 95.01  FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT.



   (A)   To provide for the health, safety, and welfare of its
citizens, and to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use
of the rights of way, the city strives to keep its rights of way in a state
of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances.



   (B)   Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this new chapter of this
code relating to right of way permits and administration. This chapter
imposes reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities
and equipment currently within its rights of way or to be placed therein at
some future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state
and federal agencies. Under this chapter, persons excavating and obstructing
the rights of way will bear financial responsibility for their work. Finally,
this chapter provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from
persons using the public rights of way.



   (C)   This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997
Session Laws, Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16,
237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the "Act") and 2017 Minn.
Laws, Ch. 94, Art. 9, amending the Act, and the other laws governing
applicable rights of the city and users of the right-of-way. This chapter
shall also be interpreted consistent with Minn. Rules Parts
7819.0050-7819.9950 and Minn. Rules, Chapter 7560 where possible. To the
extent any provision of this chapter cannot be interpreted consistently with
the Minnesota Rules, that interpretation most consistent with the Act and
other applicable statutory and case law is intended. This chapter shall not
be interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt
and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the public.



(Prior Code, § 48-1)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.02  ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant to
M.S. § 237.163, Subd. 2(b), to manage rights- of-way within its jurisdiction.



(Ord. 579, passed 1-9-2018)



§ 95.03  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions apply in this chapter of this code.
References hereafter to “sections” are, unless otherwise specified,
references to sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms,
whether or not capitalized.



   ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not
abandoned unless declared so by the right-of-way user.



   APPLICANT.  Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way.



   CITY.  The City of Park Rapids, Minnesota.  For purposes of § 95.50,
CITY means its elected officials, officers, employees and agents.



   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate,
or replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an
existing wireless support structure or utility pole that is owned privately,
or by the city or other governmental unit.



   COMMISSION. The State Public Utilities Commission.



   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the
public right- of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between
existing underground facilities does not allow for construction of new
underground facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing
lateral facilities in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04, Subd. 3, over a
continuous length in excess of 500 feet.



   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND.  Any of the following forms of security
provided at permittees option:



      (1)   Individual project bond;



      (2)   Cash deposit;



      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. §
15.73, subdivision 3;



      (4)   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city; and



      (5)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other
form of construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to
the city.



   DEGRADATION.  A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused
by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct the right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
or disturbance did not occur.



   DEGRADATION COST.  Subject to Minn. Rules, Part 7819.1100, means the
cost to achieve a level of restoration, as determined by the city at the time
the permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1
to 13, set forth in Minn. Rules, Parts 7819.9900 to 77819.9950.



   DEGRADATION FEE.  The estimated fee established at the time of
permitting by the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the
useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals
the degradation cost.



   DELAY PENALTY.  The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays
in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as
established by permit.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Department of Public Utilities of the city.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the Department of Public Works of the city,
or her or his designee.



   EMERGENCY.  A condition that:



      (1)   Poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant
loss of property; or



      (2)   Requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities
in order to restore service to a customer.



   EQUIPMENT.  Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.



   EXCAVATE.  To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT.  The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must
be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way.  An excavation
permit allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described
in the permit.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE.  Money paid to the city by an applicant to
cover the costs as provided in § 95.34.



   FACILITY or FACILITIES.  Any tangible asset in the right-of-way
required to provide utility service.



   FIVE-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for
construction within the next 5 years.



   HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR. A designated portion of the public right-of-way
within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a
common conduit system or other common structure.



   HOLE. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a
length less than the width of the pavement.



   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE.  A local person or persons, or designee of that
person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make
decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this
chapter.



   MANAGEMENT COSTS.  The actual costs the city incurs in managing its
rights-of-way, including the costs, if incurred, as those associated with
registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way
permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during
right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration;
restoring work inadequately performed after proving notice and the
opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right-of-way or small wireless
facility permits.  MANAGEMENT COSTS do not include payment by a
telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way,
unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by the city including fees
tied to or based on customer counts, access lines, or revenues generated by
the right-of-way or for the city, the fees and cost of litigation relating 
to the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123; M.S. §§
237.162 or 237.163;, or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the
city fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to § 95.52 of this
chapter.



   OBSTRUCT.  To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to
hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.



   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT.  The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must
be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder
to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that
right-of-way for the duration specified therein.



   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE.  Money paid to the city by a permittee to
cover the costs as provided in § 95.34.



   PATCH or PATCHING.



      (1)   A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in
nature.



      (2)   A PATCH consists of:



         (a)   The compaction of the subbase and aggregate base;
and



         (b)   The replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement
for a minimum of 2 feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions.



      (3)   A PATCH is considered full restoration only when the
pavement is included in the city's 5-year project plan.



   PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public
right-of-way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous,
concrete, aggregate, or gravel.



   PERMIT. Has the meaning given “right-of-way permit” in M.S. §
237.162.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way has been granted by the city under this chapter.



   PERSON.  An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this
state, however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or
foreign, whether for profit or non-profit, and whether natural, corporate, or
political.



   PROBATION. The status of a person that has not complied with the
conditions of this chapter.



   PROBATIONARY PERIOD. One year from the date that a person has been
notified in writing that they have been put on probation.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a
public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, or public sidewalk in
which the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for
travel purposes and utility easements of the city. A right- of-way does not
include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other
non-wire telecommunications or broadcast service.



   REGISTRANT.  Any person who:



      (1)   Has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located
in any right-of-way; or



      (2)   In any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use
the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment  in the right-of-way.



   RESTORE or RESTORATION.  The process by which an excavated 
right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is
returned to the same condition and life expectancy that existed before
excavation.



   RESTORATION COST.  The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee
to achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission rules.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT.  Either the excavation permit or the obstruction
permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.



      (1)   A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by
M.S. § 237.162, Subd. 4; or



      (2)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the
right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for providing utility
service, and who has a right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the
public right-of-way.



   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE.  Includes:



      (1)   Those services provided by a public utility as defined
in M.S. § 216B.02, subdivisions 4 and 6;



      (2)   Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user,
including transporting of voice or data information;



      (3)   Services of a cable communications systems as defined in
M.S. Chapter 238;



      (4)   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications
services provided by the city;



      (5)   Services provided by a cooperative electric association
organized under M.S. Chapter 308A; and



      (6)   Water, and sewer, including service laterals, steam,
cooling, or heating services.



   SERVICE LATERAL. An underground facility that is used to transmit,
distribute or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a
common source to an end-use customer. A service lateral is also an
underground facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a
customer’s premises.



   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:



      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more
than 6 cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and



      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the small
wireless facility provided such equipment is, in aggregate, no more than 28
cubic feet in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment
concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment.



   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION.  An application made to excavate or
obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit
that had already been issued.



   TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHTS-OF-WAY USER.  A person owning or controlling
a facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in
the right-of-way that is used or is intended to be used for providing
wireless service, or transporting telecommunication or other voice or data
information. For purposes of this chapter, a cable communication system
defined and regulated under M.S. Chapter 238, and telecommunication
activities related to providing natural gas or electric energy services, a
public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, a municipality, a municipal gas
or power agency organized under M.S. Chapters 453 and 453A, or a cooperative
electric association organized under M.S. Chapter 308A, are not
telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of this chapter except to
the extent such entity is offering wireless service.



   TEMPORARY SERVICE. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city’s 2-year plan, in which case it is considered
full restoration.



   TRENCH. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a
length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.



   TWO YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for
construction within the next 2 years.



   UTILITY POLE. A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service.



   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables the
provision of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service
network, including equipment associated with wireless service, a radio
transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and a small wireless facility, but not including wireless support
structures, wireline backhaul facilities, or cables between utility poles or
wireless support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and
directly associated with a specific antenna.



   WIRELESS SERVICE. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, including the use of wi-fi, whether at a fixed location or by means
of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless
service does not include services regulated under Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including cable service.



   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A new or existing structure in a
right-of-way designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless
facilities, as reasonably determined by the city.



(Prior Code, § 48-2)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 95.15  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto. The Director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.



(Prior Code, § 48-3)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.16  UTILITY COORDINATION COMMITTEE.



   The city may create an advisory Utility Coordination Committee. 
Participation on the Committee is voluntary. It will be composed of any
registrants that wish to assist the city in obtaining information and by
making recommendations regarding use of the right-of-way, and to improve the
process of performing construction work therein.  The Director may determine
the size of the Committee and shall appoint members from a list of
registrants that have expressed a desire to assist the city.



(Prior Code, § 48-4)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.17  REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Registration.  Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to
occupy or use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in the
right-of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance
responsibilities by lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the
city.  Registration will consist of providing application information.



   (B)   Registration prior to work.  No person may construct,
install, repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any
facilities or any part thereof in any right-of-way without first being
registered with the city.



   (C)   Exceptions.  Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or
amend the provisions of a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or
maintain boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way
between their property and the street curb.  Persons planting or maintaining
boulevard plantings or gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the
right-of-way, and shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any
other requirements for planting or maintaining the boulevard plantings or
gardens under this chapter.  However, nothing herein relieves a person from
complying with the provisions of the M.S. Chapter 216D, Gopher One Call Law.



(Prior Code, § 48-5)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.18  REGISTRATION INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information required.  The information provided to the city
at the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Each registrant's name, gopher one-call registration
certificate number, address and e-mail address if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers;



      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative.  The local
representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current
information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency
shall be provided at the time of registration;



      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:



         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued
to the registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
State of Minnesota, or a form of self insurance acceptable to the city;



         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against
claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property
damage arising out of the:



            1.   Use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees; and



            2.   Placement and use of facilities and equipment
in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and
permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against liability
arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities, and
collapse of property;



         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to
whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom
defense will be provided as to all such coverages;



         (d)   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in
advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage
term; and



         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage,
automobile liability coverage, Workers Compensation and umbrella coverage
established by the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the
public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter;



      (4)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance
policies;



      (5)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the
certificate required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as it may be amended
from time to time, as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State; and



      (6)   A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of
authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other
authorization or approval from the applicable state or federal agency to
lawfully operate, where the person is lawfully required to have such
authorization or approval from said Commission or other state or federal
agency.



   (B)   Notice of changes.  The registrant shall keep all of the
information listed above current at all times by providing to the city
information as to changes within 15 days following the date on which the
registrant has knowledge of any change.



(Prior Code, § 48-6)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.19  REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Operations.



      (1)   Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and
by December 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan
for underground facilities with the city.  The plan shall be submitted using
a format designated by the city and shall contain the information determined
by the city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in
the frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.



      (2)   The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:



         (a)   The locations and the estimated beginning and
ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year
(in this section, a "next-year project"); and



         (b)   To the extent known, the tentative locations and
estimated beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the 5
years following the next calendar year (in this section, a "5-year project").



      (3)   The term PROJECT in this section shall include both
next-year projects and 5- year projects.



      (4)   By January 1 of each year the Director will have
available for inspection in the city's office a composite list of all
projects of which the city has been informedof the annual plans.  All
registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of the current
status of this list.



      (5)   Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change
any project in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city and
all other registrants of all changes in the list.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of
another registrant listed by the other registrant.



   (B)   Additional next-year projects.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the city will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit
for failure to include a project in a plan submitted to the city if the
registrant has used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan
for the project.



(Prior Code, § 48-7)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



PERMITS



§ 95.30  PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Permit required.  Except as otherwise provided in this code,
no person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way, or install or place
facilities in the right-of-way, without first having obtained the appropriate
right-of-way permit from the rcity to do so.



      (1)   Excavation permit.  An excavation permit is required by
a registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in the
permit and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the
right-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for
the duration specified therein.



      (2)   Obstruction permit.  An obstruction permit is required
by a registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of
right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to
the extent and for the duration specified therein.  An obstruction permit is
not required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the
same project.



      (3)   Small wireless facility permit. A small wireless
facility permit is required by a registrant to erect or install a wireless
support structure, to collocate a small wireless facility, or to otherwise
install a small wireless facility in the specified portion of the
right-of-way, to the extent specified therein, provided that such permit
shall remain in effect for the length of time the facility is in use, unless
lawfully revoked.



   (B)   Permit extensions.  No person may excavate or obstruct the
right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless the
person:



      (1)   Makes a supplementary application for another
right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit; and



      (2)   A new permit or permit extension is granted.



   (C)   Delay penalty.  In accordance with Minn. Rules, Part
7819.1000, subp. 3 and notwithstanding division (B) of this section, the city
shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in
right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay
penalty shall be established from time to time by City Council resolution.



   (D)   Permit display.  Permits issued under this chapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.



(Prior Code, § 48-8)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.31  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   Application for a permit is made to the city.  Right-of-way permit
applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon
compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:



   (A)   Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter;



   (B)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including
all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area
of the proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities;



   (C)   Payment of money due the city for:



      (1)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and other
management costs;



      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations;



      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the
city because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the
rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city; or



      (4)   Franchise or user fees, if applicable.



   (D)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security
or depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110% of the
amount owing.



   (E)   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond
for additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to
install additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction
performance bond inadequate under applicable standards.



(Prior Code, § 48-9)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.32  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Permit issuance.  If the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this chapter, the city shall issue a permit.



   (B)   Conditions.  The city may impose reasonable conditions upon
the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall comply with
all requirements of local, state, and federal laws, including but not limited
to M.S. § § 216D.01 to 216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System)
and Minn. Rules, Chapter 7560.



   (C)   Small wireless facility conditions. In addition to division
(B), the erection or installation of a wireless support structure, the
collocation of a small wireless facility, or other installation of a small
wireless facility in the right-of-way, shall be subject to the following
conditions:



      (1)   A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on
the particular wireless support structure, under those attachment
specifications, and at the height indicated in the applicable permit
application.



      (2)   No new wireless support structure installed within the
right-of-way shall exceed 50 feet in height without the city's written
authorization, provided that the city may impose a lower height limit in the
applicable permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to
protect the right-of-way and its current use, and further provided that a
registrant may replace an existing wireless support structure exceeding 50
feet in height with a structure of the same height subject to such conditions
or requirements as may be imposed in the applicable permit.



      (3)   No wireless facility may extend more than 10 feet above
its wireless support structure.



      (4)   Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless
support structure in the right-of-way, the city may impose separation
requirements between such structure and any existing wireless support
structure or other facilities in and around the right-of-way.



      (5)   Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative
wireless support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support
small wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to
accommodate the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of such
structure.



      (6)   Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless
support structure, the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or
relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure.



   (D)   Small wireless facility agreement.



      (1)   A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on a
small wireless support structure owned or controlled by the city, or any
other city asset in the right-of-way, after the applicant has executed a
standard small wireless facility collocation agreement with the city. The
standard collocation agreement may require payment of the following:



         (a)   Up to $150 per year for rent to collocate on the
city structure;



         (b)   $25 per year for maintenance associated with the
collocation;



         (c)   A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:



            1.   $73 per radio node less than or equal to 100
maximum watts;



            2.   $182 per radio node over 100 maximum watts; or



            3.   The actual costs of electricity, if the
actual cost exceeds the foregoing.



      (2)   The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition
to, and not in lieu of, the required small wireless facility permit,
provided, however, that the applicant shall not be additionally required to
obtain a license or franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small
wireless facility permit does not supersede, alter or affect any
then-existing agreement between the city and applicant.



(Prior Code, § 48-10)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.33  ACTION ON SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Deadline for action. The city shall approve or deny a small
wireless facility permit application within 90 days after filing of such
application. The small wireless facility permit, and any associated building
permit application, shall be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or
deny the application within the review periods established in this section.



   (B)   Consolidated applications.



      (1)   An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless
facility permit application addressing the proposed collocation of up to 15
small wireless facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by a local
government unit, provided that all small wireless facilities in the
application:



         (a)   Are located within a 2-mile radius;



         (b)   Consist of substantially similar equipment; and



         (c)   Are to be placed on similar types of wireless
support structures.



      (2)   In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit
application, the city may approve some small wireless facilities and deny
others, but may not use denial of 1 or more permits as a basis to deny all
small wireless facilities in the application.



   (C)   Tolling of deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small
wireless facility permit application may be tolled if:



      (1)   The city receives applications from 1 or more applicants
seeking approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless facilities within
a 7-day period. In such case, the city may extend the deadline for all such
applications by 30 days by informing the affected applicants in writing of
such extension.



      (2)   The applicant fails to submit all required documents or
information and the city provides written notice of incompleteness to the
applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application. Upon submission of
additional documents or information, the city shall have 10 days to notify
the applicant in writing of any still-missing information.



      (3)   The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree
in writing to toll the review period.



(Ord. 579, passed 1-9-2018)



§ 95.34  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall impose an excavation
permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:



      (1)   The city management costs;



      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.



   (B)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall impose an obstruction
permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the city management costs.



   (C)   Small wireless facility permit fee. The city shall impose a
small wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover:



      (1)   Management costs, and;



      (2)   City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs
associated with collocation of small wireless facilities.



   (D)   Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction
permit shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit
fees. The city may allow applicant to pay such fees within 30 days of billing.



   (E)   Non-refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that
the city has revoked for a breach as stated in § 95.44 are not refundable.



   (F)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a
franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to
the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.



(Prior Code, § 48-11)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.35  RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and
the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under §
95.38.



   (B)   Patch and restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The
city may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to
restore the right-of-way itself.



      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way,
permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If,
following such restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's improper
backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing,
all costs associated with correcting the defective work.



      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the
right-of-way itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation
permit post a construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions
of Minn. Rules, Part 7819.3000.



      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of
right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation
fee. However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and
the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these
responsibilities.



   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation,
backfilling, patching, and restoration according to the standards and with
the materials specified by the city and shall comply with Minn. Rules, Part
7819.1100.



   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects
in patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The
permittee upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work
to the extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work
shall be completed within 5 calendar days of the receipt of the notice from
the city, not including days during which work cannot be done because of
circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as
unseasonable or unreasonable under § 95.38.



   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the
right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or
fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the
city, the city at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee
shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the
right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise
its rights under the construction performance bond.



(Prior Code, § 48-12)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.36  JOINT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits
to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.



   (B)   Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a
joint permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each
will pay and indicate the same on their applications.



   (C)   With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled
obstruction or excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint
application by 2 or more registrants or a single application, are not
required to pay the excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the
permit fee, but a permit would still be required.



(Prior Code, § 48-13)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.37  SUPPLEMENTAL APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the area of the right of way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any
work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater
area (i) make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby, and (ii) be granted a new permit or permit extension.



   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the
permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the
end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it
must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the
new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end
date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted
before the permit end date.



(Prior Code, § 48-14)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.38  OTHER OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Compliance with other laws.  Obtaining a right-of-way permit
does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits,
licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other
applicable rule, law or regulation.  A permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state and federal laws, including M.S. §§
216D.01-.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and Minn. Rule ch.
7560.  A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable
codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work
done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the
work.



   (B)   Prohibited work.  Except in an emergency, and with the
approval of the city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done
when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for this work.



   (C)   Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so
obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water
through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with.  Private
vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or
next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance with city parking
regulations.  The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within
the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the permit.



   (D)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable
permits, permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including but
not limited to horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all requirements
set forth in M.S. Chapter 216D and Minn. Rules, Chapter 7560 and shall
require potholing or open cutting over existing underground utilities before
excavating, as determined by the Director.



(Prior Code, § 48-15)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.39  DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Reasons for denial. The city may deny a permit for failure to
meet the requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the city
determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the public or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its
current use.



   (B)   Procedural requirements. The denial or revocation of a permit
must be made in writing and must document the basis for the denial. The city
must notify the applicant or right-of-way user in writing within 3 business
days of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application is denied,
the right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the
city and resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within
30 days of receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee
shall be imposed. The city must approve or deny the resubmitted application
within 30 days after submission.



(Prior Code, § 48-16)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.40  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other
work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn.
Rules, Parts 7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements,
in so far as they are not inconsistent with M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163.
Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minn.
Rules, Chapter 7560 and these ordinances. Service lateral installation is
further subject to those requirements and conditions set forth by the city in
the applicable permits and/or agreements referenced in § 95.44(B).



(Prior Code, § 48-17)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.41  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Notice of completion.  When the work under any permit
hereunder is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate
in accordance Minn. Rules, Part 7819.1300.



   (B)   Site inspection.  Permittee shall make the work-site
available to the city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection
at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the
work.



   (C)   Authority of Director.



      (1)   At the time of inspection the Director may order the
immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life,
health, safety, or well-being of the public.



      (2)   The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any
work that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable
standards, conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to
correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within 10
days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the
Director that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been
presented within the required time, the Director may revoke the permit
pursuant to § 95.44.



(Prior Code, § 48-18)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.42  WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   (A)   Emergency situations.



      (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the Director of
any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The
registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to
the emergency. Excavators' notification to Gopher State One Call regarding an
emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within 2 business days
after the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the
necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of
the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter
for the actions it took in response to the emergency.



      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a
registrant's facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local
representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the
emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary
to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the
registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency.



   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person
who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or
excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty,
pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees
required by the city code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to
correct any damage to the right- of-way, and comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 48-19)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.43  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.



   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or
ends sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the
Director of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.



(Prior Code, § 48-20)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.44  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Substantial breach.  The city reserves its right, as provided
herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is
a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance,
rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit.  A substantial
breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the
right-of-way permit;



      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of
the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;



      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for a right-of-way permit;



      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner;
unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work
is due to reasons beyond the permittee's control; or



      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that
does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
95.41.



   (B)   Written notice of breach.  If the city determines that the
permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the city
shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy the violation.  The
demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of
the permit.  A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at
its discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to
mitigate and remedy the breach.



   (C)   Response to notice of breach.  Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach.  Permittee's failure to
so contact the city, or the permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan,
or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, permittee’s failure
to so contact the city, or permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable
plan, or permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan,
shall automatically place the permittee on probation for 1 full year.



   (D)   Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish
a list of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically
place the permittee on probation for 1 full year, such as, but not limited
to, working out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way
grossly outside of the permit authorization.



   (E)   Automatic revocation. If a permittee, while on probation,
commits a breach as outlined above, permittee’s permit will automatically
be revoked and permittee will not be allowed further permits for 1 full year,
except for emergency repairs.



   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs.  If a permit is revoked, the
permittee shall also reimburse the city the city's reasonable costs,
including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable
attorney’s fees incurred in connection with the revocation.



(Prior Code, § 48-21)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.45  MAPPING DATE.



   (A)   Information required. Each registrant and permittee shall
provide mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minn.
Rules, Parts 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within 90 days following completion of
any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the Director
accurate maps and drawings certifying the "as-built" location of all
equipment installed, owned, and maintained by the permittee. Such maps and
drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all facilities
and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city's electronic
mapping system, when practical or as a condition imposed by the Director.
Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this section shall be
grounds for revoking the permit holder's registration.



   (B)   Service laterals. All permits issued for the installation or
repair of service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn.
Rules, Part 7560.0150, subp. 2, shall require the permittee's use of
appropriate means of establishing the horizontal locations of installed
service laterals and the service lateral vertical locations in those cases
where the Director reasonably requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors
shall submit to the Director evidence satisfactory to the Director of the
installed service lateral locations. Compliance with this division (B) and
with applicable Gopher State One Call law and Minnesota Rules governing
service laterals installed after Dec. 31, 2005, shall be a condition of any
city approval necessary for:



      (1)   Payments to contractors working on a public improvement
project, including those under M.S. Chapter 429; and



      (2)   City approval under development agreements or other
subdivision or site plan approval under M.S. Chapter 462. The director shall
reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such information to
the city. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information on the service
laterals installed may result in the revocation of the permit issued for the
work or future permits to the offending permittee or its subcontractors.



(Prior Code, § 48-22)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.46  LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply
with the act, with other applicable law, and with Minn. Rules, Parts
7819.3100, 7819.5000, and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit
authority otherwise available to cities.



   (B)   Corridors.



      (1)   The city may assign specific area within the
right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each
type of facility that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects
will someday be located within the right-of-way.  All excavation,
obstruction, or other permits issued by the city involving the installation
or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the
facilities at issue.



      (2)   Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in
a position at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no
later than at the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area
where the facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned
position within the right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the
city for good cause shown, upon consideration of factors such as the
remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer service
needs, and hardship to the registrant.



   (C)   Nuisance.  One year after the passage of this chapter, any
facilities found in a right-of- way that have not been registered shall be
deemed to be a nuisance.  The city may exercise any remedies or rights it
has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance
or taking possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a
useable condition.



   (D)   Limitation of space.  To protect health, safety, and welfare
of the public, or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current
use, the city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new
or additional facilities within the right-of-way.  In making such decisions,
the city shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and
potential users of the right- of-way, but shall be guided primarily by
considerations of the public interest, the public's needs for the particular
utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with
respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the
right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development
projects which have been determined to be in the public interest.



(Prior Code, § 48-23)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.47  PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.



   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01-.09
(One Call Excavation Notice System) before the start date of any right-of-way
excavation, each registrant who has facilities or equipment in the area to be
excavated shall mark the horizontal and vertical placement of all facilities.



   Any registrant whose facilities are less than 20 inches below a
concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation
contractor to establish the exact location of its facilities and the best
procedure for excavation.



(Prior Code, § 48-25)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.48  DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.



   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move a registrant's facilities to protect it, the city
shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible. 
The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be
paid within 30 days from the date of billing.  Each registrant shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way
which it or its facilities damages.  Each registrant shall be responsible
for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant
caused during the city's response to an emergency occasioned by that
registrant's facilities.



(Prior Code, § 48-26)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.49  RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.



   Reservation of right. If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains
the facilities of a registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated
right-of-way are governed by Minn. Rules, Part 7819.3200.



(Prior Code, § 48-27)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.50  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this
chapter, a registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in
accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rules, Part 7819.1250.



(Prior Code, § 48-28)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.51  ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES.



   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide
information satisfactory to the city that the registrant’s obligations for
its  facilities in the right-of-way under this chapter have been lawfully
assumed by another registrant.



   (B)   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any
right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in
conjunction with other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction,
unless this requirement is waived by the city.



(Prior Code, § 48-29)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.52  APPEAL.



   (A)   A right of way user that:



      (1)   Has been denied registration;



      (2)   Has been denied a permit;



      (3)   Has had a permit revoked;



      (4)   Believes that the fees imposed are not in conformity
with M.S. § 237.163, Subd. 6; or



      (5)   Disputes a determination of the Director regarding §
95.45(B) of this chapter may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or
decision reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council.



   (B)   The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its
next regularly scheduled meeting, provided the right-of-way user has
submitted its appeal with sufficient time to include the appeal as a regular
agenda item. A decision by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation,
or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by written findings
establishing the reasonableness of the decision.



(Prior Code, § 48-30)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.53  RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.



   A permittee’s rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers
of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances as necessary to protect
the health, safety, and welfare of the public.



(Prior Code, § 48-31)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 95.54  SEVERABILITY.



   If any portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions thereof. Nothing in this chapter precludes
the city from requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed
by law, in addition to requirements set forth herein.



(Prior Code, § 48-32)  (Ord. 299, passed 5-11-1999; Am. Ord. 579, passed
1-9-2018)



CHAPTER 96:  PUBLIC PROPERTY/FACILITIES REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   96.001   Permits



   96.002   Provisions of application



   96.003   Processing of application for permits



   96.004   Procedures for review; waivers



   96.005   Fees



   96.006   Duration of permit



   96.007   Transfers



   96.008   Inspection



   96.009   Duties of permittee



   96.010   Revocation



   96.011   Postings and circulations prohibited




Dances




   96.025   Purpose



   96.026   Definitions



   96.027   Special event dance permit required; exceptions



   96.028   Permit application; verification and consideration



   96.029   Permit fees



   96.030   Permit restrictions




Outdoor Concerts/Music Events




   96.045   Purpose



   96.046   Definitions



   96.047   Permit required



   96.048   Permit application



   96.049   Permit fees



   96.050   Exemptions from permit fee and application




Parades




   96.065   Definitions



   96.066   Permit required



   96.067   Exceptions



   96.068   Application



   96.069   Review by Police Chief



   96.070   Standards for issuance



   96.071   Notice of rejection



   96.072   Alternative permit



   96.073   Notice to other officials



   96.074   Public conduct during parades




Park Regulations




   96.090   Purpose



   96.091   Definitions



   96.092   General conduct



   96.093   Protection of natural resources and wildlife



   96.094   Camping



   96.095   Swimming



   96.096   Boating



   96.097   Horseback riding



   96.098   Bicycling



   96.099   Meetings, speeches, demonstrations and parades



   96.100   Vehicles



   96.101   Motorized recreation vehicle



   96.102   Park operation



 



   96.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 96.001  PERMITS.



   (A)   General rule.  Except as otherwise provided in this code, all
permits granted by the city shall be governed by the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   Acts prohibited.  No person shall conduct any activity or use
any property for which a permit is required by law or this code without a
currently valid permit for the activity or use.



   (C)   Application.  Every application for a permit shall be made to
the City Clerk on a form provided by him or her.  It shall be accompanied by
payment to the Clerk of the prescribed fee. If, after investigation, the City
Clerk is satisfied that all requirements of law and this code have been met,
he or she shall present the application to the Council for action or, if the
permit does not require Council approval, he or she shall issue the permit. 
All permits required under this chapter must be submitted no less than 14
days prior to the event.  Failure to submit a permit application within this
timeframe shall result in a double fee.  If the event involves more than 1
location, a separate application will be required for each location. 



   (D)   Bond.  Where a bond is required for any permit, the bond
shall be a corporate surety bond executed on a form approved by the city and
shall be filed with the Clerk before the permit is issued.  Except where
otherwise provided, a bond shall be conditioned that the permittee shall
comply with the applicable ordinance and laws pertaining to the permitted
activity and that the permittee will indemnify the city and save it harmless
from all loss or damage by reason of inadequate work performed by him or her
or by reason of accident caused by the negligence of the permittee, his or
her agents or employees.



   (E)   Insurance.  Applicant shall provide the city with a
certificate from an insurer evidencing liability insurance coverage prior to
applicant's use of city property as part of the application process.  The
certificate shall also provide that the insurer shall give the city
reasonable advance notice of insurer's intent to cancel the insurance
coverage provided.



      (1)   Commercial or organizational applicants shall procure
and maintain at all times during its use of city facilities property,
liability insurance coverage in the amount of $300,000 and shall name the
City of Park Rapids as an additional insured thereunder.  A certificate of
liability insurance shall be required for all organizations and contractors
involved in the public event.



      (2)   Applicants for personal/private use, such as a wedding
or family reunion, shall provide a certificate of insurance from the
applicant's homeowner's policy.  The policy should include host liquor
liability coverage.  The requirement for naming the city as an additional
insured shall be waived for these personal uses. 



   (F)   Permit required.  A permit is required to reserve public
property/facilities to conduct any public or private activities on/in public
property/facilities that meet any of the following criteria:



      (1)   An event involving more than 100 individuals;



      (2)   To conduct a parade on city streets;



      (3)   To circulate, distribute, display or post any leaflets,
handbills, notices, pamphlets, books, placards, circulars, documents or
papers/writing containing commercial advertising matter of any kind in any
indoor facility, event center, city administration building, public parks or
streets, or other special facility within the city;



      (4)   Conduct any exhibit, music or dramatic performance,
craft fair, circus, concert, play, sales event, commercial sporting event,
radio or television broadcast (other than a news transmission);



      (5)   Exhibit or display any motion picture, television
program, light, laser light or fireworks display, or similar event;



      (6)   Use of any electrical or electronic devise or equipment
requiring outdoor auxiliary power or the creation or emission of any
amplified sound for the purpose of a street dance or public gathering;



      (7)   Station or erect any building, tent, canopy, stand,
bandstand, stage, tower, scaffold, sound stage, platform, rostrum or other
structure; and



      (8)   Exhibit on public property any tame, non-domestic
supervised and controlled or restrained animal for limited non-commercial or
promotional purposes.



   (G)    Permit limitations.  No activity involving more than 500
individuals shall be held within 2,500 feet or within 2 hours of any other
activity involving more than 500 individuals.



   (H)   Security deposit.



      (1)   For any activity described in this chapter, no
application for permit shall be granted unless the applicant has paid, within
the time prescribed by the City Clerk, the security deposit in an amount in
accordance with the schedule of fees set by the City Council and found in
Chapter 36 of the City Code.



      (2)   The amount of the security deposit will include, but is
not limited to the following:



         (a)   The estimated cost of policing; and



         (b)   The estimated costs of cleaning up and restoring
the area upon the conclusion of the use or activity.



      (3)   The security deposit shall be deposited by the City
Clerk.



      (4)   Promptly after the conclusion of a permitted activity,
the city shall inspect the premises and equipment used by the permittee. 



         (a)   If it is determined that there has been no damage
to the city property or equipment, beyond reasonable wear and tear, the
security deposit shall be refunded, minus city incurred costs for policing or
cleaning up the area, within 30 days of the conclusion of the permitted event.



         (b)   If it is determined by the inspection, that the
permitted event proximately caused damage to city property in excess of
normal wear and tear and which requires repairs in excess of routine
maintenance or determined that fines shall be assessed against the permittee
pursuant to this chapter, § 96.005 (D), the city shall retain the security
deposit or any portion thereof, necessary to pay for the cost of repair or
any fines assessed against the permittee.  The City Clerk or his or her
designee shall give written notice of the assessment of damages or fines and
retention of the security deposit to the permittee by personal delivery or by
deposit in the United States mail, with proper postage prepaid to the name
and address set forth in the application for permit.  Any assessment of
damages or fines in excess of the security deposit shall be paid to the city
within 10 days after notice of the assessment of damages or fine is sent. 
Retention of all or a portion of a security deposit above any actual city
costs shall be subject to the appeal procedures contained in § 96.005.  An
assessment of damages or fines in excess of the security deposit shall be
subject to the appeal procedures contained in § 96.005.



(Prior Code, § 47-1)



§ 96.002  PROVISIONS OF APPLICATION.



   Applicant shall provide the city with information and adequate proof
that the following provisions have been addressed:



   (A)   Name, address and applicable phone numbers of the event
coordinator.  Provide name and phone number of a person who can respond to
concerns before and during the event.



   (B)   Event overview including intent or purpose of the event,
number of persons expected to attend, type and number of organizations
involved, attendance fees, public or private event, event sponsor(s), and
types of activities taking place.



   (C)   Site map and plan.  A separate site map must be attached
illustrating buildings, driveways, streets, alleys, parking locations,
location of temporary structures, temporary restrooms or any cordoned off
areas.



   (D)   Location and number of any off-site parking, if necessary. 
Written permission from property owners is required.  If off-site parking is
not within walking distance, include transportation arrangements. 



   (E)   Copies of additional permits that are required for the event,
these permits may include but are not limited to transient merchant
license(s), gambling permit, temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor or
intoxicating liquor license or fireworks permit.



   (F)   Documentation from the Chief of Police that there will be
adequate security for the event, either privately provided or provided by the
Park Rapids Police Department.  The decision on the type, number of security
officers shall be decided by the Chief of Police for the City of Park Rapids.



   (G)   In the case where a public street is to be closed for an
event, the event coordinator shall also provide documentation that all
affected property owners abutting the street that is proposed to be closed
have been notified and have been given an opportunity to comment on the
application.



(Prior Code, § 47-2)



§ 96.003  PROCESSING OF APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.



   (A)   Order.  Application for permits shall be processed in order
of receipt, and the use of a particular area shall be allocated in order of
receipt of fully executed applications accompanied by the application fee.



   (B)   Conditional approval.  Applications for permits for
activities or events which require insurance, approval or permits from other
governmental entities, or compliance with other terms or conditions, will be
reviewed and, if the application otherwise conforms to all other
requirements, a conditional approval will be issued.  If, within the time
frame prescribed by the City Council, any required fee or security deposit is
not paid, or an insurance certificate evidencing the requisite insurance is
not filed with the City Clerk, or the approval or permit of other
governmental entities has not been received, or the other terms and
conditions have not been met, the conditional approval will automatically
expire, the application for permit will be deemed denied and written notices
of denial will be sent to the applicant.  No permit shall be issued unless
all applicable fees and security deposits are paid within the times
prescribed by the City Council.  Failure to pay fees or security deposit
within that time frame shall cause the application to be deemed denied and
further notice sent to the applicant. 



   (C)   Written denials.



      (1)   Notice of denial of an application for permit shall
clearly set forth the grounds upon which the permit was denied and, where
feasible, shall contain a proposal by the city for measures by which the
applicant may cure any defects in the application for permit or otherwise
procure a permit.



      (2)   To the extent permitted by law, the City Clerk may deny
an application for permit if the applicant or the person on whose behalf the
application for permit was made has on prior occasions made material
misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of an event or activity
previously permitted or has violated the terms of prior permits issued to or
on behalf of the applicant.  The City Clerk may also deny an application for
permit on any of the following grounds:



         (a)   The application for permit (including any required
attachments and submissions) is not fully completed and executed;



         (b)   The applicant has not tendered the required
application fee, indemnification agreement, insurance certificate, or
security deposit as required by this chapter;



         (c)   The application for permit contains a material
falsehood or misrepresentation;



         (d)   The applicant is legally incompetent to contract
or to sue and be sued;



         (e)   The applicant or the person on whose behalf the
application for permit was made has on prior occasions damaged city property
and has not paid in full for the damage, or has other outstanding and unpaid
debts to the city;



         (f)   A duly executed prior application for permit for
the same time and place has been received, and a permit has or will be
granted to a prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not
reasonably permit multiple occupancy of the particular area;



         (g)   The use or activity intended by the applicant
would conflict with previously planned programs organized and conducted by
the city and previously scheduled for the same time and place;



         (h)   The proposed use or activity is prohibited or
inconsistent with the classifications and uses of the area designated
pursuant to this chapter and the inventory maintained by the City Clerk;



         (i)   The use or activity intended by the applicant
would present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the
applicant, or other users of the area, employees or of the public;



         (j)   The applicant has not complied or cannot comply
with applicable licensure requirements, ordinances or regulation of the city
concerning the sale or offering for sale of any goods or services; or



         (k)   The use or activity intended by the applicant is
prohibited by law, by this code and ordinances of the city, or by regulations
of the City Council.



   (D)   Issuance of a permit.  If the application is complete
(including any required attachments and submission) and properly executed,
the City Clerk may issue a permit under this chapter for any permitted use. 
If the proposed activity or event requires that a public street be closed,
the application shall be forwarded to the City Council for their approval or
denial.



(Prior Code, § 47-3)



§ 96.004  PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW; WAIVERS.



   (A)   Review by City Administrator.



      (1)   Any applicant who is denied a permit, or a permittee who
has had all or a portion of their security deposit retained because they were
assessed damages or a fine pursuant to this chapter may, within 7 days of the
service of notice of the determination, file a written appeal from the
determination with the City Administrator;



      (2)   The City Administrator shall have 7 days from the date
on which the appeal was received in which to serve upon the applicant a
notice that he or she has affirmed, modified or reversed the denial of a
permit or the retention of the security deposit;



      (3)   The notice shall be deemed served upon that applicant or
permittee when it is personally delivered, or when it is sent by United
States mail, with proper postage prepaid, to the name and address set forth
on the application for permit.



   (B)   Review by City Council.  If, after receipt of the decision by
the City Administrator, any applicant who is denied a permit or a permittee
who has had all or a portion of their security deposit retained because they
were assessed damages or a fine pursuant to this chapter may appeal the City
Administrator's decision to the City Council within 7 days.



   (C)   Form of appeals.  Any appeals filed pursuant to this section
shall state succinctly the grounds upon which it is asserted the
determination should be modified or reversed and shall be accompanied by
copies of the application for permit, the written notice of the determination
of the city and any other papers material to the determination.



   (D)   Fines.



      (1)   Civil penalties.  The violation by a permittee of the
terms of his or her permit or the laws and regulations of the City of Park
Rapids shall subject the permittee to a civil fine of up to $500 per day. 
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation. 
The fines may be assessed against any security deposit held by the city on
behalf of the permittee, pursuant to this chapter, § 96.001 (H).  Any
assessment of fines in excess of any security deposit shall be subject to the
procedures contained in § 96.001 (H)(2).



      (2)   Petty misdemeanor penalties.  Violations may also be
charged as petty misdemeanors, each day that a violation continues will be
deemed a separate violation.  Law enforcement officers, in their discretion,
may issue citation for the violation and may take into custody those
violators who refuse to cease activities after being issued a citation by law
enforcement officers.



(Prior Code, § 47-4)



§ 96.005  FEES.



   (A)   Fee established.  Permit fees are in the amounts established
in the governing sections of this chapter or as otherwise provided in this
code.  The permit fees as set forth in the various sections of this code are
the official and controlling provisions.



   (B)   Prorated fees.  Permit fees shall not be prorated unless
otherwise specified by this code or by law.



   (C)   Refunds.  Permit fees shall not be refunded in whole or in
part unless otherwise specified by this code or by law.



(Prior Code, § 47-5)



§ 96.006  DURATION OF PERMIT.



   A permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for the time period
specified on the permit application.



(Prior Code, § 47-6)



§ 96.007  TRANSFERS.



   No permit issued under this code may be transferred to any other
person.  Where a permit relates to specific premises, the permit shall not
be changed to another location without approval of the Council or other
permitting authority.



(Prior Code, § 47-7)



§ 96.008  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Authorized personnel.  Any city official or employee having a
duty to perform with reference to a permit under this code and any police
officer may inspect and examine any permit, his or her business, or premises
to enforce compliance with applicable provisions of this code.  Subject to
the provisions of division (B) below, he or she may, at any reasonable time,
enter any permitted premises or premises for which a permit is required in
order to enforce compliance with this code.



   (B)   Search warrants.  If the permittee objects to the inspection
of his or her premises, the city official or employee with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this code shall procure a valid search warrant
before conducting the inspection.



(Prior Code, § 47-8)



§ 96.009  DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.



   (A)   Compliance required.  Every permittee shall have the duties
set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   Inspection.  He or she shall permit at reasonable times
inspections of his or her business and examination of his or her books and
records by authorized officers or employees.



   (C)   Compliance with law.  He or she shall comply with laws,
ordinances and regulations applicable to the permitted business, activity, or
property.



   (D)   Display of permit.



      (1)   He or she shall display the permit in a conspicuous
place on the premises, vehicle, or device to which the permit relates.



      (2)   If the permit is not so related, the permit shall be
carried on the permittee's person whenever he or she is carrying on the
permitted activity.



   (E)   Unlawful disposition.  The permittee shall not lend or give
to any other person his or her permit or permit insignia.



(Prior Code, § 47-9)



§ 96.010  REVOCATION.



   The Council may revoke any permit for violation of any provision of
law, ordinance, or regulation applicable to the permitted activity or
property.  Except where mandatory revocation is provided by law without
notice and hearing, the holder of the permit shall be granted a hearing upon
at least 10 days notice before revocation is ordered.  The notice shall
state the time and place of the hearing and the nature of the charges against
the permittee.



(Prior Code, § 47-10)



§ 96.011  POSTINGS AND CIRCULATIONS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall attach any ribbons, pictures, tokens, leaflets,
handbills, notices, pamphlets, circulars, or any other written materials, on
any publically owned street light or electrical pole within the city limits.



(Ord. 549, passed 5-13-2014)




DANCES




§ 96.025  PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds that public dances can potentially pose crowd
control and noise problems to city law enforcement officials and to the
public at large.  In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of
citizens, the City Council adopts this subchapter regulating public dances in
the City of Park Rapids.



(Prior Code, § 47-30)



§ 96.026  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ISSUING AUTHORITY.  The City of Park Rapids



   PERSON.  One or more natural persons; a partnership, including a
limited partnership; a corporation, including foreign, domestic or nonprofit
corporation; a trust; a political subdivision of the state; or any other
business organization.



   PUBLIC DANCE.  Any dance wherein the general public may participate,
whether or not an admission fee, membership fee or price for dancing is
charged and occurs on public property or within a public facility.  All
private dances, wherein the general public is excluded, shall not be deemed
included in this definition.



(Prior Code, § 47-31)



§ 96.027  SPECIAL EVENT DANCE PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   Any person who conducts a public dance in the city shall procure a
special event dance permit from the issuing authority pursuant to this
subchapter.  A separate permit shall be required for each dance conducted
and the fee for the permit shall be as set forth in Chapter 36 of this code.



(Prior Code, § 47-32)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.028  PERMIT APPLICATION; VERIFICATION AND CONSIDERATION.



   The application for a special event dance permit shall conform to the
provisions found in §§ 96.001, 96.002, and 96.003 of this code.



(Prior Code, § 47-33)



§ 96.029  PERMIT FEES.



   Permit fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 36 of this code and shall
be submitted with the application.



(Prior Code, § 47-34)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.030  PERMIT RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Posting of permit.  A permit issued under this subchapter
must be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises in which the public
dance is taking place.



   (B)   Maintenance of order.  A permittee under this subchapter
shall be responsible for the conduct of the public dance and shall maintain
conditions of sobriety and order.



   (C)   Permitted premises.  A permit issued under this subchapter is
effective only for the compact and contiguous space specified in the approved
permit application.



   (D)   Illegal activities.  A permittee under this subchapter shall
not allow any person to engage in prostitution to sell or use illegal drugs
in the permitted premises.



   (E)   Hours of dance.  No public dance shall be held or conducted
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.



   (F)   Private security.  Security shall be arranged in accordance
with § 96.002 (F) of this chapter.  The issuing authority and City Police
Department may require the permittee to have, at the permittee's expense,
officers of the law present at the special event dance.  The estimated cost
for the security shall be included in the security deposit as required by §
96.001 (H).



   (G)   Traffic and noise suspension.  A holder of a special event
dance permit shall comply with all traffic and noise requirements placed on
the dance by city officials pursuant to their authority under state law and
this City Code.



   (H)   Minimum insurance.  All holders of a special dance permit
shall submit proof to the issuing authority that general liability insurance
in the following minimum amounts has been obtained for the special event
dance:



 


Claim

 

Minimum Amount



Personal injury
 
$200,000 (claim)


 
 
$600,000 (aggregate)


Property damage
 
$50,000



 



(Prior Code, § 47-35)  Penalty, see § 96.999




OUTDOOR CONCERTS/MUSIC EVENTS




§ 96.045  PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds that outdoor concerts can potentially create
traffic problems, noise concerns, and crowd control issues.  In order to
further the health and safety of the community, the City Council enacts this
permitting subchapter regulating these events.



(Prior Code, § 47-40)



§ 96.046  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OUTDOOR CONCERT OR MUSIC EVENT.  A specific event held in the open and
not within an enclosed structure including but not limited to events held
outdoors or in temporary structures such as tents, sound stages, pavilions
and amphitheaters during which sound waves are produced, whether by voice or
instruments, amplified or acoustic, and the sound waves produce musical tones
ranging from 20 Hertz to 20,000 Hertz.



   PERSON.  One or more natural persons; a partnership, including a
limited partnership; a corporation, including foreign, domestic or nonprofit
corporation; a trust or any other business organization.



   SCHOOL.  An institution or place for instruction or education where 25
or more persons receive a full course of educational instruction with an
organized body of teachers associated for pursuit and dissemination of
knowledge.



(Prior Code, § 47-41)



§ 96.047  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall conduct an outdoor concert or music event without first
obtaining a permit pursuant to this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 47-42)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.048  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   The application for an outdoor concert/music event permit
shall conform to the provisions found in §§ 96.001, 96.002, and 96.003 of
this code.



   (B)   In addition to the information requested in those sections,
the applicant will also note the type of music (i.e., symphonic, folk), the
method of amplification (i.e., acoustic, electric) and the steps taken to
minimize the noise and nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 47-43)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.049  PERMIT FEES.



   Permit fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 36 of this code and shall
be submitted with the application.



(Prior Code, § 47-44)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.050  EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMIT FEE AND APPLICATION.



   (A)   City Council findings on exemptions.  The City Council makes
the following findings regarding the need to exempt certain persons from
paying a permit fee and submitting a permit application for outdoor concerts
and music events:



      (1)   Schools may conduct and sponsor several outdoor concerts
and music events on a regular basis, including marching band events, sporting
events with musical components, art festivals, and student fund-raisers.  A
permit application and fee for each event would adversely impact the events,
which benefit the community as a whole, and, in most cases, would represent a
transfer of public monies between governmental units without any
corresponding benefit to the community.



      (2)   Religious organizations conduct worship services on a
regular basis and may hold worship services outdoors with musical
components.  A permit application and fee for each worship service would
adversely impact the events and would place a burden on the organization's
freedom of religion guarantees under the federal and state constitutions. 



      (3)   The City of Park Rapids may sponsor outdoor events with
music components.  Payment of permit fee for each city sponsored event would
adversely impact the events and would represent an internal transfer of
public monies for no justifiable reason.



   (B)   Exemptions from permit fees.  In light of the City Council
findings, the following persons are exempt from the fee for an outdoor
concert/music event permit:



      (1)   Schools as herein defined;



      (2)   Religious organization conducting outdoor worship
services; and



      (3)   City of Park Rapids sponsored events.



   (C)   Exemptions from permit application; notification.  Those
persons exempt from a permit fee in division (B) above of this section shall
not be required to complete a permit application, but are subject to the
noise standards of this code and shall provide written notification to the
Park Rapids Police Department prior to each outdoor concert/music event
sponsored or conducted by the exempt organization.  The notice shall include
the name and phone number of the person sponsoring or conducting the event;
the date and time of the event; the type of music and method of
amplification, and the steps taken to minimize the noise and nuisance. 



   (D)   Cost of investigation of noise complaints.  Those persons
exempt from a permit fee in division (B) above of this section may be
required to pay the cost of any noise complaints received and investigated by
the city regarding outdoor concert/music events sponsored or conducted by the
exempt organizations.



(Prior Code, § 47-45)




PARADES




§ 96.065  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.  The City of Park Rapids



   PARADE.  Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or
procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park
or other public place in the city.



   PARADE PERMIT.  A permit as required by this subchapter.



   PERSON.  One or more natural persons; a partnership, including a
limited partnership; a corporation, including foreign, domestic or nonprofit
corporation; a trust or any other business organization



(Prior Code, § 47-50)



§ 96.066  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any
parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 47-51)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.067  EXCEPTIONS.



   This subchapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   Funeral processions;



   (B)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, providing the conduct is under the immediate
direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or



   (C)   A government agency acting within the scope of its functions.



(Prior Code, § 47-52)



§ 96.068  APPLICATION.



   (A)   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an
application in conformance with §§ 96.001, 96.002, and 96.003  of this
code.



   (B)   In addition to the information required in §§ 96.001,
96.002, and 96.003 , the application for a parade permit shall include the
additional following information:



      (1)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the
termination point;



      (2)   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and
vehicles which, will constitute the parade, the type of animals, and
description of the vehicles;



      (3)   The hours when the parade will start and terminate;



      (4)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;



      (5)   The location by streets of any assembly areas for the
parade;



      (6)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to
assemble at any assembly area or areas;



      (7)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of
the parade; and



      (8)   Any additional information which the Chief of Police
shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be issued.



(Prior Code, § 47-53)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.069  REVIEW BY POLICE CHIEF.



   Once an application for a parade permit has been received, the City
Clerk shall forward the application to the Chief of Police for his or her
review.  Any comments or recommendation made by the Chief of Police shall be
forwarded to the City Council at the time the application is considered for
approval or denial.  The City Council shall take the Chief of Police's
comments and recommendations into account when approving or denying a permit
application.



(Prior Code, § 47-54)



§ 96.070  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.



   The City Council shall issue a permit when, from a consideration of the
application and any other information as is available to them, they find as
follows:



   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other traffic within the city contiguous to the
parade route or interfere with the movement of fire fighting equipment;



   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers as to prevent normal police protection to
the city;



   (C)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection and emergency medical services to areas contiguous to the assembly
areas;



   (D)   The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to neither
cause injury to persons or property nor provoke disorderly conduct;



   (E)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to
its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en
route;



   (F)    The parade is not be held for sole purpose of advertising any
products, and it is not designed to be held purely for private profit; and



   (G)   The participants of a parade shall not be allowed to throw
candy, promotional items, and the like from a vehicle or float.  This shall
not preclude participants from walking along the parade route handing these
items to viewers of the parade.



(Prior Code, § 47-55)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.071  NOTICE OF REJECTION.



   The City Council shall act upon any parade application at its next
regularly scheduled meeting.  If the application for a parade permit is
denied, the City Clerk shall notify the applicant in writing within 7 days of
the Council's decision.



(Prior Code, § 47-56)



§ 96.072  ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.



   (A)   The City Council, in denying an application for a private
permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date,
at a time, over a route different from that named by the applicant.



   (B)   Any applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall,
within 3 days after notice of the action of the City Council, file a written
acceptance with the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 47-57)



§ 96.073  NOTICE TO OTHER OFFICIALS.



   Immediately upon the issuance of parade permit, the City Clerk shall
send a copy thereof to the Chief of the Police Department, Chief of the Fire
Department, the Public Works Superintendent, the Minnesota Highway Department
Office at Bemidji, Minnesota, when applicable and emergency medical services.



(Prior Code, § 47-58)



§ 96.074  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.



   (A)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct
impede or interfere with any parade, parade assembly, or person, animal or
vehicle participating in the parade.



   (B)   Driving through parades.  No driver of a vehicle shall drive
between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when the parade is to
motion.



   (C)   Parking on parade route.



      (1)   The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when
reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along
the route of the parade in areas contiguous thereto.



      (2)   The City Engineer after notification from the Chief of
Police shall post signs to that effect and it shall be unlawful for any
person to park or leave a vehicle unattended in violation thereof.



(Prior Code, § 47-59)  Penalty, see § 96.999




PARK REGULATIONS




§ 96.090  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter which is enacted pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes, shall be to secure the quiet, orderly and suitable use of public
parks, trail systems, and public access to lakes established by the city, and
to further the safety, health, comfort and welfare of all persons in the use
thereof.



(Prior Code, § 47-70)



§ 96.091  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DOMESTIC ANIMAL.  A dog, cat or horse.



   DRUGS.  Any substance defined as a controlled substance in M.S.
Chapter 152, as it may be amended from time to time, or other statutes of
federal law or regulation.



   INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Any liquor which is intoxicating pursuant to
Minnesota law and includes ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous,
vinous and malt beverages.



   MOTORIZED RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  Any self propelled, off-the-road, or
all terrain conveyance, including but not limited to, a snowmobile,
mini-bike, amphibious vehicle, motorcycle, go-cart, trail bike, dune buggy,
or 4-wheel drive vehicle.



   PARK.  Any land or water area and all facilities thereon, established
as a park of the city pursuant to Minnesota Statutes.



   PARK DIRECTOR.  The person appointed by the City Council to serve as
the chief administrative officer of the city park system.



   PARK RAPIDS PARKS.  The park organization or system in the City of
Park Rapids.



   PARK VISITOR.  Any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, governmental unit, company or organization of any kind within a
park.



   VEHICLE.  Any motorized, propelled, animal drawn, or human powered
conveyance.



   WEAPON.  Any devise from which shots or projectile of any type can be
discharged by means of explosive gas, compressed air or otherwise propelled,
including but not limited to firearms, bow and arrows, slings, and spring
guns.



   WILDLIFE.  All living creatures, not human, wild by nature, endowed by
sensation and power or voluntary motion, including quadrupeds, mammals,
birds, fish, amphibians, reptiles, crustaceans, and mollusks.



(Prior Code, § 47-71)



§ 96.092  GENERAL CONDUCT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Act in a threatening or abusive manner or to do any act which
constitutes a breach of the public peace in a park;



   (B)   Have in possession or bring into a park intoxicating malt
liquor or beer in kegs or barrels;



   (C)   Consume any alcoholic beverage, whether intoxicating, in a
park after 10:00 p.m. and before the park is open the following day;



   (D)   Disturb, harass, or interfere with any park visitor's property;



   (E)   Deposit, scatter, drop or abandon in a park any bottles, cans,
broken glass, sewage, waste or other material, except in receptacles provided
for those purposes;



   (F)   Dig trenches or make other excavation in a park;



   (G)   Throw, discharge or place on or upon any lake, stream, creek,
pond or other body of water in or adjacent to a park, or tributary, stream,
storm sewer, or drain flowing into the waters any substance, liquid, or gas;



   (H)   Gamble or participate in any game of chance in a park;



   (I)   Use any land or body of water within a park for a starting or
landing field for aircraft, balloons or parachutes without a permit;



   (J)   Start a fire in the park, except for a small fire for culinary
purposes in a designated area, or fail to fully extinguish that fire;



   (K)   Drop, throw or otherwise leave unattended in a park, lighted
matches, burning cigars, cigarettes, tobacco, paper or other combustible
material;



   (L)   Sell, solicit or carry on any business or commercial
enterprise or serve in a park except with a written permit; or



   (M)  Use loudspeakers or other amplifying systems in a park, except
with a written permit.



(Prior Code, § 47-72)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.093  PROTECTION OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND WILDLIFE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Injure, destroy, or remove any tree, flower, shrub, plant,
rock, soil or mineral in a park;



   (B)   Kill, trap, hunt, feed, pursue or in any manner disturb or
cause to be disturbed any species of wildlife within a park except that
fishing may be permitted in designated areas;



   (C)   Shoot any weapon into a park from beyond park boundaries;



   (D)   Bring a dog, cat, horse or other domestic animal into a park
unless under the control of the owners or attendant and the custodian shall
have the responsibility of cleaning up any feces of any animal and shall
dispose of it in a sanitary manner;



   (E)   Bring or permit any dog, cat, horse or other domestic animal
to enter a beach area, nature center, park building, skating rink, or
skateboard park;



   (F)   Permit a dog, cat, horse or other domestic animal to disturb,
harass or interfere with any park visitor or visitor's property;



   (G)   Possess any weapon within a park; or



   (H)   Release within any park any plant, chemical or other agent
potentially harmful to the vegetation or wildlife of the park.



(Prior Code, § 47-73)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.094  CAMPING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp in a park, unless in a
designated camping area.



(Prior Code, § 47-74)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.095  SWIMMING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Wade or swim within a park except at beaches designated for
that purpose, and then only between sunrise and sunset, or the hours as may
be designated by the Park Director.  Any park visitor shall swim or wade at
their own risk;



   (B)   Take bottles or glass of any kind, except eyeglasses, into a
designated beach area;



   (C)   Use air mattresses, inner tubes or other inflatable devices
except in designated beach areas; or



   (D)   To jump off of the old railroad bridge, located as part of the
Heartland Trail, into Fish Hook River.



(Prior Code, § 47-75)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.096  BOATING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Launch or land any boat, yacht, canoe, raft or other water
craft upon any water, lagoon, lake, pond or slough within a park except at
locations and times designated for that purpose;



   (B)   Leave unattended any boat or water craft except in areas
designated for that purpose;



   (C)   Operate any water craft in a designated swimming area or other
prohibited area; or



   (D)   Operate any water craft in a park in violation of M.S. Chapter
86B, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 47-76)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.097  HORSEBACK RIDING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or bring an
un-trailered horse into a park, unless accessing a designated trail.



(Prior Code, § 47-77)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.098  BICYCLING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle within a park,
except on park designated bikeways and roadways, and keep as close to the
right hand side thereof as conditions shall permit.



(Prior Code, § 47-78)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.099  MEETINGS, SPEECHES, DEMONSTRATIONS AND PARADES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct public meetings,
assemblies, entertainment, parades or demonstrations within a park without
first obtaining a written permit, and then only in an area designated by
permit.



(Prior Code, § 47-79)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.100  VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Operate any vehicle within a park except upon designated
roadways and parking areas;



   (B)   Operate a vehicle in a park at a speed in excess of posted
speed limits;



   (C)   Park or leave a vehicle standing within a park except at a
designated parking area;



   (D)   Operate a vehicle which emits excessive or unusual noise,
noxious fumes, dense smoke or other polluting matter;



   (E)    Operate a vehicle in a reckless or careless manner in the
park; or



   (F)   Wash, polish, grease, change oil or repair any vehicle in a
park, except that emergency repairs may be made.



(Prior Code, § 47-80)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.101  MOTORIZED RECREATION VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Operate a motorized recreation vehicle within a park, except
on designated roadways and parking areas; or



   (B)   Operate a snowmobile within a park other than on designated
trails within the park for snowmobile traffic.



(Prior Code, § 47-81)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.102  PARK OPERATION.



   (A)   A person may be granted a permit for temporary exclusive use
of reserved space within a park.  The permit shall be for a maximum of 8
hours.



   (B)   No person shall remain within a park between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.  Exceptions may be granted by the city on a
case-by-case basis. 



   (C)   Any permit granted pursuant to this chapter and subchapter may
be revoked upon the violation by the permittee of any provision of this
chapter, subchapter, or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of parks
adopted by the city.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any facility or
area for which a fee or charge has been established by the city without
payment of the fee or charge.



   (E)   The city shall not be liable for any loss, damage, or injury
sustained by a park visitor.



   (F)   Any park or portion thereof may be declared closed to the
public by the City Council or Park Director at any time and for any interval
of time or to certain uses, as the City Council or Park Director shall find
reasonably necessary.



   (G)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent employees or agents
of the City of Park Rapids from performing their assigned duties.



   (H)   No person shall impersonate any employee of the City of Park
Rapids, nor interfere with, harass, or hinder any employee in the discharge
of his or her duties.



(Prior Code, § 47-82)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Dances.  A violation of any provision of §§ 96.025et seq.
shall be a misdemeanor under Minnesota law.



(Prior Code, § 47-36)



   (B)   Outdoor concerts/music events.  A violation of any provision
of §§ 96.045et seq. shall be a misdemeanor under Minnesota law.



(Prior Code, § 47-46)



   (C)   Parades.  A violation of any provision of §§ 96.065et seq.
shall be a misdemeanor under Minnesota law.



(Prior Code, § 47-60)



   (D)   Park regulations.



      (1)   Misdemeanor.  A person guilty of violating any
provision of §§ 96.090et seq. shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



      (2)   Ejection.  Designated Park Rapids employees may, in
conjunction with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the
provisions of this subchapter and eject from parks, persons acting in
violation of this subchapter.



      (3)   Permit revocation.  The City Administrator shall have
the authority to revoke for good cause any permit or reservation issued by
the city.



(Prior Code, § 47-83)



CHAPTER 97:  ABANDONED PROPERTY



Section




General Provisions




   97.01   Disposition of abandoned property




Abandoned Vehicles




   97.15   Findings and purpose



   97.16   Definitions



   97.17   Violation to abandon motor vehicle



   97.18   Authority to impound vehicles



   97.19   Sale; waiting periods



   97.20   Notice of taking and sale



   97.21   Right to reclaim



   97.22   Operator's deficiency claim; consent to sale



   97.23   Disposition by impound lot



   97.24   Disposal authority



   97.25   Contracts; reimbursement by MPCA



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.01  DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED PROPERTY.



   (A)   Procedure.  Except for abandoned and junked vehicles, all
property lawfully coming into possession of the city shall be disposed of as
provided in this section which is adopted pursuant to M.S. § 471.195, as it
may be amended from time to time.  Abandoned and junked vehicles shall be
disposed of according to the procedures of §§ 97.15 et seq.



   (B)   Storage.  The department of the city acquiring possession of
the property shall arrange for its storage.  If city facilities are
unavailable or inadequate, the department may arrange for storage at a
privately-owned facility.



   (C)   Claim by owner.  The owner may claim the property by
exhibiting satisfactory proof of ownership and paying the city any storage or
maintenance costs incurred by it.  A receipt for the property shall be
obtained upon release to the owner.



   (D)   Sale.  If the property remains unclaimed in the possession of
the city for 60 days, the property shall be sold to the highest bidder at a
public auction conducted by the City Clerk or his or her designee after 2
weeks' published notice setting forth the time and place of the sale and the
property to be sold.



   (E)   Disposition of proceeds.  The proceeds of the sale shall be
placed in the general fund of the city.  If the former owner makes
application and furnishes satisfactory proof of ownership within 6 months of
the sale, the former owner shall be paid the proceeds of the sale of the
property less the costs of storage and the proportionate part of the cost of
published notice and other costs of the sale.



ABANDONED VEHICLES



§ 97.15  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   M.S. Ch. 168B, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7035, as they may be amended from
time to time, are hereby adopted by reference.  Sections 97.15 through 97.25
of this code are adopted under the authority of M.S. § 168B.09, Subd. 2, as
it may be amended from time to time.  If any of these provisions are less
stringent that the provisions of M.S. § 168B or Minn. Rules Ch. 7035, as it
may be amended from time to time, the statute or rule shall take precedence.



§ 97.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.



      (1)   A motor vehicle, as defined in M.S. § 169.01 as it may
be amended from time to time, that:



         (a)   Has remained illegally:



            1.   For a period of more than 48 hours on any
property owned or controlled by a unit of government, or more than 4 hours on
that property when it is properly posted; or



            2.   On private property for a period of time, as
determined under § 97.18(B), without the consent of the person in control of
the property; and



         (b)   Lacks vital component parts or is in an inoperable
condition that it has no substantial potential for further use consistent
with its usual functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage
building.



      (2)   A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. §
168.10 as it may be amended from time to time, is not considered an abandoned
vehicle.



      (3)   Vehicles on the premises of junk yards and automobile
graveyards that are defined, maintained, and licensed in accordance with M.S.
§ 161.242 as it may be amended from time to time, or that are licensed and
maintained in accordance with local laws and zoning regulations, are not
considered abandoned vehicles.



      (4)   A vehicle being held for storage by agreement or being
held under police authority or pursuant to a writ or court order is not
considered abandoned, nor may it be processed as abandoned while the police
hold, writ or court order is in effect.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Minnesota Department of Public Safety.



   IMPOUND.  To take and hold a vehicle in legal custody.  There are 2
types of impounds: public and nonpublic.



    IMPOUND LOT OPERATOR or OPERATOR.  A person who engages in impounding
or storing, usually temporarily, unauthorized or abandoned vehicles. 
OPERATOR includes an operator of a public or nonpublic impound lot,
regardless of whether tow truck service is provided.



   JUNK VEHICLE.  A vehicle that:



      (1)   Is 3 years old or older;



      (2)   Is extensively damaged, with the damage including things
as broken or missing wheels, motor, drive train or transmission;



      (3)   Is apparently inoperable;



      (4)   Does not have a valid, current registration plate; and



      (5)   Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the
approximate value of the scrap in it.



   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE.  Has the meaning given "motor vehicle" in
M.S. § 169.01, as it may be amended from time to time.



   MOTOR VEHICLE WASTE.  Solid waste and liquid wastes derived in the
operation of or in the recycling of a motor vehicle, including such things as
tires and used motor oil, but excluding scrap metal.



   MPCA or AGENCY.  The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   NONPUBLIC IMPOUND LOT.  An impound lot that is not a public impound
lot.



   PUBLIC IMPOUND LOT.  An impound lot owned by or contracting with a
unit of government under § 97.24.



   UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE.  A vehicle that is subject to removal and
impoundment pursuant to § 97.18(B), or M.S. § 169.041 as it may be amended
from time to time, but is not a junk vehicle or an abandoned vehicle.



   UNIT OF GOVERNMENT.  Includes a state department or agency, a special
purpose district, and a county, statutory or home rule charter city, or town.



   VITAL COMPONENT PARTS.  Those parts of a motor vehicle that are
essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including such things
as the motor, drive train and wheels.



§ 97.17  VIOLATION TO ABANDON MOTOR VEHICLE.



   Any person who abandons a motor vehicle on any public or private
property, without the consent of the person in control of the property, is
guilty of a misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.18  AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.



   (A)   Abandoned or junk vehicles.  The City Clerk or his or her
designee or any peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for
by the city may take into custody and impound any abandoned or junk vehicle
if the vehicle is on public property.  If the abandoned or junk vehicle is
located on private property, the vehicle shall not be removed or impounded
until the provisions of § 97.18(C) are complied with.



   (B)   Unauthorized vehicles.  The City Clerk, or his or her
designee or any peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for
by the city may take into custody and impound any unauthorized vehicle under
M.S. § 169.041 as it may be amended from time to time.  A vehicle may also
be impounded after it has been left unattended in 1 of the following public
or private locations for the indicated period of time:



      (1)   In a public location not governed by M.S. § 169.041 as
it may be amended from time to time:



         (a)   On a highway and properly tagged by a peace
officer, 4 hours;



         (b)   Located so as to constitute an accident or traffic
hazard to the traveling public, as determined by a peace officer,
immediately; or



         (c)   That is a parking facility or other public
property owned or controlled by a unit of government, properly posted, 4
hours; or



      (2)   On private property, only with the express permission of
the owner of the property, a resident or other person in control of the
premises:



         (a)   That is single-family or duplex residential
property, immediately;



         (b)   That is private, nonresidential property, properly
posted, immediately;



         (c)   That is private, nonresidential property, not
posted, 24 hours; or



         (d)   That is any residential property, properly posted,
immediately.



      (3)   If under division (B)(2) of this section, permission is
not granted, then the city shall not remove and impound any vehicle until the
procedure established in division (B)(2) of this section have been followed.



   (C)   If the vehicle is on private property, the City Clerk or his
or her designee or any peace officer employed or whose services are
contracted for by the city may take into custody and impound any abandoned or
junk vehicle on private property only with the permission of the owner of the
property, a resident, or other person in control of the premises. If
permission is denied, the city may declare the existence of the abandoned or
junk vehicle to be a nuisance and proceed to abate the nuisance.  Once the
abatement procedure has been completed, the city may apply for an order from
a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing the removal and impoundment of
the vehicle and, after the order has been granted, the city may then remove
and impound the vehicle.



§ 97.19  SALE; WAITING PERIODS.



   (A)   Sale after 15 days.  An impounded vehicle is eligible for
disposal or sale under § 97.23, 15 days after notice to the owner, if the
vehicle is determined to be:



      (1)   A junk vehicle, except that it may have a valid, current
registration plate and still be eligible for disposal or sale under this
subdivision; or



      (2)   An abandoned vehicle.



   (B)   Sale after 45 days.  An impounded vehicle is eligible for
disposal or sale under § 97.23, 45 days after notice to the owner, if the
vehicle is determined to be an unauthorized vehicle.



§ 97.20  NOTICE OF TAKING AND SALE.



   (A)   Contents; notice given within 5 days.  When an impounded
vehicle is taken into custody, the city or impound lot operator taking it
into custody shall give notice of the taking within 5 days.  The notice
shall:



      (1)   Set forth the date and place of the taking; the year,
make, model and serial number of the impounded motor vehicle if the
information can be reasonably obtained; and the place where the vehicle is
being held;



      (2)   Inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to
reclaim the vehicle under § 97.21; and



      (3)   State that failure of the owner or lienholders to
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents within the
appropriate time allowed under § 97.19 shall be deemed a waiver by them of
all right, title and interest in the vehicle and contents and a consent to
the transfer of title to and disposal or sale of the vehicle and contents
pursuant to § 97.23.



   (B)   Notice by mail or publication.  The notice shall be sent by
mail to the registered owner, if any, of an impounded vehicle and to all
readily identifiable lienholders of record.  The Department makes this
information available to impound lot operators for notification purposes. 
If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and
address of the registered owner and all lienholders, the notice shall be
published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the
motor vehicle was towed from or abandoned.  Published notices may be grouped
together for convenience and economy.



   (C)   Unauthorized vehicles; notice.  If an unauthorized vehicle
remains unclaimed after 30 days from the date the notice was sent under
division (B) of this section, a second notice shall be sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the registered owner, if any, of the
unauthorized vehicle and to all readily identifiable lienholders of record.



§ 97.21  RIGHT TO RECLAIM.



   (A)   Payment of charges.  The owner or any lienholder of an
impounded vehicle shall have a right to reclaim the vehicle from the city or
impound lot operator taking it into custody upon payment of all towing and
storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 or
45 days, as applicable under § 97.19, after the date of the notice required
by § 97.20.



   (B)   Lienholders.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
impair any lien of a garagekeeper under the laws of this state, or the right
of a lienholder to foreclose.  For the purposes of this section,
GARAGEKEEPER is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator
of a motor vehicle storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for
the servicing, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles.



§ 97.22  OPERATOR'S DEFICIENCY CLAIM; CONSENT TO SALE.



   (A)   Deficiency claim.  The nonpublic impound lot operator has a
deficiency claim against the registered owner of the vehicle for the
reasonable costs of services provided in the towing, storage and  inspection
of the vehicle minus the proceeds of the sale or auction.  The claim for
storage costs may not exceed the costs of:



      (1)   25 days storage for a vehicle described in § 97.19(A);
and



      (2)   55 days storage for a vehicle described in § 97.19(B).



   (B)   Implied consent to sale.  A registered owner who fails to
claim the impounded vehicle within the applicable time period allowed under
§ 97.19 is deemed to waive any right to reclaim the vehicle and consents to
the disposal or sale of the vehicle and its contents and transfer of title.



§ 97.23  DISPOSITION BY IMPOUND LOT.



   (A)   Auction or sale.



      (1)   If an abandoned or unauthorized vehicle and contents
taken into custody by the city or any impound lot is not reclaimed under §
97.21, it may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale when eligible
pursuant to §§ 97.20 and 97.21.



      (2)   The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form
prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles which shall be sufficient title
to dispose of the vehicle.  The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to
register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of
all liens and claims of ownership.  Before a vehicle is issued a new
certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety check.



   (B)   Unsold vehicles.  Abandoned or junk vehicles not sold by the
city or public impound lots pursuant to division (A) of this section shall be
disposed of in accordance with § 97.24.



   (C)   Sale proceeds; public entities.  From the proceeds of a sale
under this section by the city or public impound lot of an abandoned or
unauthorized motor vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for the cost of
towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative, notice
and publication costs incurred in handling the vehicle pursuant to this
chapter.  Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the
owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days and then shall be
deposited in the treasury of the city.



   (D)   Sale proceeds; nonpublic impound lots.  The operator of a
nonpublic impound lot may retain any proceeds derived from a sale conducted
under the authority of division (A) of this section.  The operator may
retain all proceeds from sale of any personal belongings and contents in the
vehicle that  were not claimed by the owner or the owner's agent before the
sale, except that any suspected contraband or other items that likely would
be subject to forfeiture in a criminal trial must be turned over to the
appropriate law enforcement agency.



§ 97.24  DISPOSAL AUTHORITY.



   The city may contract with others or may utilize its own equipment and
personnel for the inventory of impounded motor vehicles and abandoned scrap
metal and may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the collection,
storage and transportation of these vehicles and abandoned scrap metal.  The
city may utilize its own equipment and personnel only for the collection and
storage of not more than 5 abandoned or unauthorized vehicles without
advertising for or receiving bids in any 120-day period.



§ 97.25  CONTRACTS; REIMBURSEMENT BY MPCA.



   (A)   MPCA review and approval.  If the city proposes to enter into
a contract with a person licensed by the MPCA pursuant to this section or a
contract pursuant to § 97.24, the MPCA may review the proposed contract
before it is entered into by the city, to determine whether it conforms to
the MPCA's plan for solid waste management and is in compliance with MPCA
rules.  A contract that does so conform may be approved by the MPCA and
entered into by the city.  Where a contract has been approved, the MPCA may
reimburse the city for the costs incurred under the contract that have not
been reimbursed under § 97.23.  Except as otherwise provided in § 97.24,
the MPCA shall not approve any contract that has been entered into without
prior notice to and without a request for bids from all persons duly licensed
by the MPCA to be a party to a disposal contract pursuant to M.S. § 116.07,
as it may be amended from time to time; nor that does not provide for a full
performance bond; or does not provide for total collection and transportation
of abandoned motor vehicles, except that the MPCA may approve a contract
covering solely collection or transportation of abandoned motor vehicles
where the MPCA determines total collection and transportation to be
impracticable and where all other requirements herein have been met and the
unit of government, after proper notice and request for bids, has not
received any bid for total collection and transportation of abandoned motor
vehicles.



   (B)   The city may perform work.  If the city utilizes its own
equipment and personnel pursuant to its authority under § 97.24, and the use
of the equipment and personnel conforms to the MPCA's plan for solid waste
management and is in compliance with MPCA rules, the city may be reimbursed
by the MPCA for reasonable costs incurred which are not reimbursed under §
97.23.



   (C)   The city required to contract work.  The MPCA may demand that
the city contract for the disposal of abandoned motor vehicles and other
scrap metal pursuant to the MPCA's plan for solid waste disposal.  If the
city fails to contract within 180 days of the demand, the MPCA, through the
Department of Administration and on behalf of the city, may contract with any
person duly licensed by the MPCA for the disposal.



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      111.   COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS



      112.   GARAGE SALES



      113.   PAWNBROKERS, SECOND-HAND GOODS, AND JUNK DEALERS



      114.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



      115.   PLUMBERS



      116.   MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS



      117.   WRECKING YARDS AND JUNK YARDS



      118.   BACKHOE OPERATORS



      119.   ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS



      120.   TREE CONTRACTORS



      121.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   110.01   Permits



   110.02   Fees



   110.03   Duration of permit



   110.04   Transfers



   110.05   Inspection



   110.06   Duties of permittee



   110.07   Suspension or revocation



§ 110.01  PERMITS.



   (A)   General rule.  Except as otherwise provided in this code, all
permits granted by the city shall be governed by the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   Acts prohibited.  No person shall conduct any activity or use
any property for which a permit is required by law or this code without a
currently valid permit for the activity or use.



   (C)   Application.  Every application for a permit shall be made to
the City Clerk on a form provided by him or her.  It shall be accompanied by
payment to the Clerk of the prescribed fee.  If, after investigation, the
City Clerk is satisfied that all requirements of law and this code have been
met, he or she shall present the application to the Council for action or, if
the permit does not require Council approval, he or she shall issue the
permit.



   (D)   Bond.  Where a bond is required for any permit, the bond
shall be a corporate surety bond executed on a form approved by the city and
shall be filed with the Clerk before the permit is issued.  Except where
otherwise provided, a bond shall be conditioned that the permittee shall
comply with the applicable ordinance and laws pertaining to the permitted
activity and that the permittee will indemnify the city and save it harmless
from all loss or damage by reason of inadequate work performed by him or her
or by reason of accident caused by the negligence of the permittee, his or
her agents or employees.



   (E)   Insurance.  When a permittee is required to have in force a
policy of insurance, the policy shall be approved as to substance and form by
the city.  The policy shall provide that it is non-cancellable without 15
days' notice to the city, and the coverage shall be for the term of the
permit.  Satisfactory evidence of coverage by insurance shall be filed with
the Clerk before the permit is issued.  Each permit shall terminate upon
termination of the required insurance coverage.



(Prior Code, § 18-1)



§ 110.02  FEES.



   (A)   Fee established.  Permit fees are in the amounts established
in the governing sections of this chapter or as otherwise provided in this
code.  The permit fees as set forth in the various sections of this code are
the official and controlling provisions.



   (B)   Prorated fees.  Permit fees shall not be prorated unless
otherwise specified by this code or by law.



   (C)   Refunds.  Permit fees shall not be refunded in whole or in
part unless otherwise specified by this code or by law.



(Prior Code, § 18-2)



§ 110.03  DURATION OF PERMIT.



   Unless otherwise specified, a permit shall be valid for a calendar year
or the part of the year for which it is issued and shall expire on December
31.



(Prior Code, § 18-3)



§ 110.04  TRANSFERS.



   No permit issued under this code may be transferred to any other
person.  Where a permit relates to specific premises, the permit shall not
be changed to another location without approval of the Council or other
permitting authority.



(Prior Code, § 18-4)



§ 110.05  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Authorized personnel.



      (1)   Any city official or employee having a duty to perform
with reference to a permit under this code and any police officer may inspect
and examine any permit, his or her business, or premises to enforce
compliance with applicable provisions of this code.



      (2)   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, he or
she may, at any reasonable time, enter any permitted premises or premises for
which a permit is required in order to enforce compliance with this code.



   (B)   Search warrants.  If the permittee objects to the inspection
of his or her premises, the city official or employee with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this code shall procure a valid search warrant
before conducting the inspection.



(Prior Code, § 18-5)



§ 110.06  DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.



   (A)   Compliance required.  Every permittee shall have the duties
set forth in this section.



   (B)   Inspection.  He or she shall permit at reasonable times
inspections of his or her business and examination of his or her books and
records by authorized officers or employees.



   (C)   Compliance with law.  He or she shall comply with laws,
ordinances, and regulations applicable to the permitted business, activity,
or property.



   (D)   Display of permit.  He or she shall display the permit in a
conspicuous place on the premises, vehicle, or device to which the permit
relates.  If the permit is not so related, the permit shall be carried on
the permittee's person whenever he or she is carrying on the permitted
activity.



   (E)   Unlawful disposition.  The permittee shall not lend or give
to any other person his or her permit or permit insignia.



(Prior Code, § 18-6)



§ 110.07  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   The Council may suspend for a period not exceeding 60 days or revoke
any permit for violation of any provision of law, ordinance, or regulation
applicable to the permitted activity or property.  Except where mandatory
revocation is provided by law without notice and hearing and except where
suspension may be made without a hearing, the holder of the permit shall be
granted a hearing upon at least 10 days notice before revocation or
suspension is ordered.  The notice shall state the time and place of the
hearing and the nature of the charges against the permittee.



(Prior Code, § 18-7)



CHAPTER 111:  COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   111.01   Purpose



   111.02   Definitions



   111.03   Permit required



   111.04   Permit application



   111.05   Permit fee



   111.06   Permit application, execution, verification and
consideration



   111.07   Persons and locations ineligible for a permit



   111.08   Health and welfare regulations



   111.09   Sanctions for permit violations



   111.10   Permit regulations



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds that commercial animal establishments can
present health, safety, and sanitation problems if not properly and locally
regulated.  The City Council therefore enacts the following permitting
requirements to govern commercial animal establishments.



(Prior Code, § 18-40)



§ 111.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL.  Every non-human species of organism, except plant and
bacterium, both domestic and wild.



   AQUARIUM.  A building or institution in which aquatic animals are kept
for commercial exhibition or display.



   CLEAN.  The absence of dirt, grease, rubbish, garbage, animal and
bodily excretions, and other offensive, unsightly, or extraneous matter.



   COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any aquarium, pet shop, riding
school or stable, zoological park, or performing animal exhibition.



   GOOD REPAIR.  Free of corrosion, breaks, cracks, chips, pitting,
excessive wear and tear, leaks, obstructions, and similar defects so as to
constitute a good and sound condition.



   PERFORMING ANIMAL EXHIBITION.  Any commercial spectacle, display, act,
or event, in which performing animals are used.



   PERSON.  One or more natural persons; a partnership, including a
limited partnership, a corporation, including a foreign, domestic, or
nonprofit corporation; a trust; a political subdivision of the state; or any
other organization.



   PET SHOP.  Any person, whether operated separately or in connection
with another business enterprise, that buys, exhibits, or sells any species
of animal.



   RIDING SCHOOL OR STABLE.  Any place that has available for hire,
boarding, and/or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule, llama, or
burro; or any place that regularly buys, sells, or trains the above animals
including a trotting track or rodeo.



   ZOOLOGICAL PARK.  Any permanent facility operated by a person, or
government agency, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting
1 or more species or animals.



(Prior Code, § 18-41)



§ 111.03  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate a commercial animal establishment without first
obtaining a permit in compliance with this chapter of the City Code.



(Prior Code, § 18-42)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.04  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   The application for a permit under this chapter shall be made on a form
supplied by the City Clerk and shall request the following information:



   (A)   The full legal name, current address, home and business phone
of the applicant;



   (B)   Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation,
partnership or other form of organization;



   (C)   Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are
due and payable for the premise to be permitted have been paid, and if not
paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid;



   (D)   The location where the commercial animal establishment will be
operated; and



   (E)   Any other information as the city deems necessary



(Prior Code, § 18-43)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.05  PERMIT FEE.



   The annual fee for a commercial animal establishment permit shall be as
set forth in Chapter 36 of this code.



(Prior Code, § 18-44)



§ 111.06  PERMIT APPLICATION, EXECUTION, VERIFICATION AND CONSIDERATION.



   (A)   Execution.  All application for a permit under this chapter
shall be signed and sworn to.  If the application is that of a natural
person, it shall be signed and sworn to by that person; if that of a
corporation, by an officer thereof; if that of a partnership, by one of the
general partners; and it that of an unincorporated association, by the
manager or managing officer thereof.



   (B)   Verification.  All applications shall be referred to the City
Clerk for verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the
application.  The City of Park Rapids is empowered to conduct any and all
investigations to verify the information on the application, including
ordering a computerized criminal history and/or a driver's license history
inquiry on the applicant. 



   (C)   Consideration.  Within a reasonable period after the
completion of the license verification process by the City of Park Rapids,
the City Clerk shall accept or deny the license application in accordance
with this chapter.  If the application is denied, the City Clerk shall
notify the applicant of the determination in writing.  The notice shall be
mailed regular mail to the applicant at the address provided in the
application and it shall inform the applicant of the applicant's right,
within 20 days after receipt by the applicant, to request an appeal of the
City Clerk's determination to the City Council.  If an appeal to the City
Council is timely received by the City Clerk, the hearing before the City
Council shall take place within a reasonable period of time.



(Prior Code, § 18-45)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.07  PERSONS AND LOCATIONS INELIGIBLE FOR A PERMIT.



   (A)   Persons ineligible.  No permit under this chapter shall be
issued to an applicant if the applicant:



      (1)   Is not 18 years of age or older on the date the permit
application is submitted to the City Clerk;



      (2)   Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the
occupation permitted, including but not limited to cruelty to animals, as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, subdivision 2, as it may be amended from time
to time, and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation
and present fitness to perform the duties of the permitted occupation as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, subdivision 3, as it may be amended from time
to time;



      (3)   Is not a citizen of the United States, a resident alien,
or does not have the legal authority to be employed in the United States;



      (4)   Is not of good moral character or repute;



      (5)   Has knowingly falsified or misrepresented information on
the permit application;



      (6)   Owes taxes and assessments to the state, county, school
district, or city that are due and delinquent; or



      (7)   Is not the real party in interest of the business being
permitted.



   (B)   Location ineligible.  The following locations shall be
ineligible for a permit under this chapter:



      (1)   Taxes due on property.  No permit shall be granted or
renewed on any property on which taxes, assessments, or other financial
claims of the state, county, school district, or city are due, delinquent, or
unpaid.  In the event a suit has been commenced under M.S. §§
278.01-278.14, as it may be amended from time to time, questioning the amount
or validity of taxes, the City Council may on application waive strict
compliance with this provision; no waiver may be granted, however, for taxes
or any portion thereof which remain unpaid for a period exceeding 1 year
after becoming due.



      (2)   Improper zoning.  No license shall be granted if the
property is not properly zoned for a pet shop under Title XV of this code
unless the pet shop is a legal, non-conforming use.



(Prior Code, § 18-46)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.08  HEALTH AND WELFARE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Diseased animals.  No person shall bring into his or her
place of business, commercial animal establishment, or into the city, or have
in his or her possession for sale or otherwise, any animals afflicted with an
infectious disease.



   (B)   Floor requirements.  The floors of a commercial animal
establishment shall be non-absorptive, monolithic construction and must be
kept in a clean and sanitary condition and in good repair.  For large
animals where it would be detrimental to the animal's health to stand for
prolonged periods on hard non-absorbent floors, alternate approved flooring
may be allowed.



   (C)   Walls and ceilings.  Walls and ceilings of a commercial
animal establishment shall be kept clean, sanitary, and in good repair.



   (D)   Confinement.  All cages, pens, benches, boxes, tanks, or
receptacles in which animals are confined shall be easily cleanable, durable
and constructed of non-corrosive material and maintained in good repair. 
These cages and pens shall also be properly sufficient and humane in size for
the confinement of animals.



   (E)   Ventilation.  All rooms in a commercial animal establishment
shall be mechanically ventilated and provide the minimum cfm per foot in
accordance with the Uniform Mechanical Code.  A negative pressure must be
maintained to prevent odors and organisms from entering the adjacent
businesses or departments.  Provisions shall be made for pre-heated
replacement air.



   (F)   Delivery requirements.  All delivery trucks transporting
animals to and from the commercial animal establishment shall be kept clean
and sanitary.



   (G)   Feeding of animals.  All utensils used in the preparation of
food and the feeding of animals shall be kept clean, sanitary and in good
repair; and the use of the utensils for the purpose which are badly worn,
rusted, or corroded, or in a condition that they cannot be clean and sanitary
is prohibited.



   (H)   Humane treatment of animals.  All animals in the commercial
animal establishment shall be handled and treated in a humane manner by the
owner, operator and employees of the commercial animal establishment.  All
state laws governing cruelty to animals and humane treatment of animals shall
be adhered to and all operations must enhance or maintain the health and
welfare of all animals in the establishment.



   (I)   Location of animals.  Where the licensee keeps animals for
sale or display, all animals shall be kept entirely within an enclosed
building and no animals shall be kept or maintained outdoors.  Exterior
walking or exercise areas shall be maintained free of wastes and other
litter, and all wastes should be removed and disposed of in an approved
manner immediately.



   (J)   Infectious diseases.  All animals subject to distemper and
infectious hepatitis acquired by the commercial animal establishment owner or
operator must have been inoculated prior to delivery at the commercial animal
establishment by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the State of
Minnesota.  Monkeys must have a yearly tuberculin test.



   (K)   Size requirements. The commercial animal establishment must
include a room of sufficient size to contain an approved sink with hot and
cold running water under pressure, for the purpose of storing janitorial
supplies, and equipment used to maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary
manner.



   (L)   Disposal of wastes.  All animal wastes must be disposed of in
a timely and approved sanitary manner.  In no event shall there be an
accumulation of waste beyond 24 hours.  In public areas during exhibition,
all wastes must be disposed of immediately or, at minimum, the waste to be
stored in an approved container with tight fitting lids and disposed of in an
approved sanitary manner at the end of the day.



(Prior Code, § 18-47)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.09  SANCTIONS FOR PERMIT VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Suspension or revocation.  The City Council may suspend or
revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for a violation of:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained
in a permit application or a renewal application;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the
course of carrying on the permitted occupation or business;



      (3)   Any violation of this chapter or state law;



      (4)   A permittee's criminal conviction that is directly
related to the occupation or business permitted, including but not limited to
cruelty to animals, as defined by M.S. § 364.03, subdivision 2, as it may be
amended from time to time, provided that the permittee cannot show competent
evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the
duties of the permitted occupation of business as defined by M.S. § 364.03,
subdivision 3, as it may be amended from time to time; and



      (5)   Conducting the permitted business or occupation in an
unlawful manner or in a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
community.



   (B)   Notice and hearing.  A revocation or suspension by the City
Council shall be preceded by written notice to the permittee and a hearing. 
The notice shall give at least 8 days' notice of the time and place of the
hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the permittee. 
The notice shall be mailed by regular and certified mail to the permittee at
the most recent address listed on the permit application.



(Prior Code, § 18-48)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.10  PERMIT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Posting of permit.  The permit issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be conspicuously displayed at the commercial animal
establishment.



   (B)   Insurance.  No permit shall be issued or continued in
operation unless there is in full force and effect a liability insurance
policy in the amount of at least $500,000 per occurrence for bodily injury.



   (C)   Permitted premises.  A permit issued pursuant to this chapter
is effective only for the compact and contiguous space specified in the
approved permit application.  Any temporary animal exhibition or sales
events are subject to temporary conditional use permit requirements of this
code.



   (D)   Transfer of permit prohibited.



      (1)   A permit issued pursuant to this chapter is for the
person and the persons named on the approved permit application.



      (2)   No transfer of a permit shall be permitted from place to
place or from person to person without complying with the requirements of an
original permit application.



(Prior Code, § 18-49)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor under Minnesota law.



(Prior Code, § 18-50)



CHAPTER 112:  GARAGE SALES



Section



   112.01   Purpose



   112.02   Definition



   112.03   Limitations



 



   112.99   Penalty



§ 112.01  PURPOSE.



   Limitation of the number and duration of garage sales within the city
is intended to maintain the residential nature of the neighborhoods, prevent
an increase in traffic in residential areas at times and frequencies which
may adversely impact other residents, and provide the city with a method to
regulate business activities undertaken in areas not zoned for retail sales.



(Prior Code, § 18-57)  (Ord. 238, passed 1989)



§ 112.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARAGE SALE.  An offering of goods to the public on a temporary basis
by a person or organization at a sale site which is not principally used for
the purpose of retail sales and where no other permit has been issued by the
city authorizing these sales.  As used in this chapter, the term GARAGE SALE
encompasses yard sales, estate sales, moving sales, block sales, rummage
sales, and related sales where second-hand or other goods are sold or
displayed to members of the public on a temporary basis.  GARAGE SALE as
used in this chapter does not include an estate sale or auction held at
decedent's residence or at the residence of a party holding the sale,
provided the number of sales in any calendar year does not exceed the
limitations imposed by this chapter, and further provided that the sale is
conducted by a permitted auctioneer.



(Prior Code, § 18-58)  (Ord. 238, passed 1989)



§ 112.03  LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Number of sales per year.  No person shall hold more than 2
garage sale occasions in the course of any calendar year without having first
applied for a permit to conduct a sale at the office of the City Clerk. 
Permits for third or subsequent sales shall not be granted without a showing
of hardship or necessity or without proof that the applicant has a Minnesota
sales tax number when conducted in an area zoned for retail sales.



   (B)   Other limitations.  All garage sales held within the city
limits of the City of Park Rapids shall abide by the following provisions:



      (1)   No garage sale shall last for more than 3 days in
succession;



      (2)   Garage sales shall not be commenced earlier than 8:00
a.m. and shall not transact business beyond 6:00 p.m; and



      (3)   Signs advertising garage sales must comply with existing
city ordinances and must be retrieved by 6:00 p.m. on the day following the
last day of the sale.



(Prior Code, § 18-59)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Any person or organization violating the provisions of this chapter is
guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 18-60)



CHAPTER 113:  PAWNBROKERS, SECOND-HAND GOODS AND JUNK DEALERS



Section



   113.01   Purpose



   113.02   Definitions



   113.03   Exceptions



   113.04   Permit required



   113.05   Bonds



   113.06   Permit application



   113.07   Restrictions



   113.08   Suspension and revocation



   113.09   Records required



   113.10   Receipts required



   113.11   Reports to police



   113.12   Identification requirements



   113.13   Holding and redemption periods



   113.14   Hours and days of operation



   113.15   Unlawful acts



 



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds that adequate protection of the public health,
safety and welfare required that the business of pawnbrokers and dealers in
second-hand goods, gold, silver, coins, or junk be regulated and controlled.



(Prior Code, § 18-76)



§ 113.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PAWNBROKER.  A person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal
property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal
property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again
at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on
personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so
mortgaged.



   SECOND-HAND GOODS DEALER.  A person engaging in the business of buying
second-hand goods of any kind, including but not limited to coins, gold,
silver, jewelry, metals, wrecked or dismantled motor vehicles or motor
vehicles intended to be wrecked or dismantled, but excepting goods and
merchandise taken as part or full payment for new goods and merchandise.



(Prior Code, § 18-77)



§ 113.03  EXCEPTIONS.



   The following business purchases shall not be covered by this chapter:



   (A)   Purchases from a garage sale of personal property conducted
from a residence;



   (B)   The purchase of used clothing where no single item has a value
of greater than $50;



   (C)   Consignment sales from an established place of business;



   (D)   Auction sales;



   (E)   Used cars sales involving vehicles with title registered
through the Department of Motor Vehicles;



   (F)   The purchase of used books where no single book has a value of
greater than $50;



   (G)   Any purchase of property from merchants, manufacturers or
wholesale dealers having an established place of business, or of goods
purchased at open sale from any bank or from stock, or of goods purchased at
salvaged.  This property and goods must be accompanied by a bill of sale or
other evidence of open or legitimate purchase, which must be shown to any
police officer when demanded;



   (H)   Recycling centers (e.g. aluminum recycling center);



   (I)   Any purchaser of property at a flea market or swap meet
sponsored by a local non-second-hand goods dealer or pawnbroker or by a
community, and conducted on property with the consent of the owner of the
property; where the purchaser is not otherwise required to be permitted by
this chapter; or



   (J)   Any purchase or sale of scrap metal.  SCRAP METAL means any
metallic item, other than precious metal, which is no longer suitable for its
intended use and which cannot be repaired, and which is intended to be
refabricated.



(Prior Code, § 18-78)



§ 113.04  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of pawnbroker
without a pawnbroker's permit under this chapter; nor in the business of
dealer in second-hand goods or junk without a second-hand goods dealer's
permit or a pawnbroker's permit shall be as set by the City Council by
resolution.



(Prior Code, § 18-101)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.05  BONDS.



   (A)   Bonds required.  Before a permit shall be issued, bonds in
the following amounts and upon the following conditions shall be filed with
the City Clerk:



 

Pawnbroker
 
$2,000 bond


Second-hand goods dealer or junk dealer with established place of business
 
$1,000 bond



 



   (B)   Conditions of bond.  All bonds shall be conditioned that the
principal named therein will observe all laws in relation to pawnbrokers,
dealers in second-hand goods and junk dealers, and conduct his or her 
business in conformity thereto, and that he or she will account for and
deliver to any person legally entitled thereto, any goods, wares or
merchandise, article or thing, which may have come into his or her hands
through his or her business as the pawnbroker, dealer in second-hand goods or
junk dealer, or in lieu thereof will pay in money to the person or persons
the reasonable value thereof.



(Prior Code, § 18-102)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.06  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Any applicant for a permit as a dealer in second-hand goods shall
specify in his or her application the type of goods, wares or merchandise
which he or she desires to deal in and the permit, if issued, shall limit the
dealer to the type of goods, wares, or merchandise specified in the
application.



(Prior Code, § 18-103)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.07  RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Business at only 1 place.  Any permit issued under this
chapter shall authorize the permittee to carry on the business only at the
place designated in the permit, excepting the estimating of the value of
goods for purchase and the picking up of goods.



   (B)   Criminal record.  No permit shall be issued to any person
previously convicted of a misdemeanor, gross misdemeanor or felony, provided
that any applicant convicted of a misdemeanor may apply to the Council for
waiver of this provision.  The Council may, at its discretion, grant a
waiver upon demonstration by the applicant that the conviction does not bear
a substantial relationship to the character or ability of the applicant to
conduct the business of pawn broking consistent with the provisions of the
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 18-104)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.08  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
may be suspended for up to 60 days or revoked for good cause by the Council
at a regular or special meeting of the Council.  Written notice shall be
served upon the permittee 21 days prior to the date of the hearing.



   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, GOOD CAUSE shall include but
not be limited to:



      (A)   Conviction of permittee or any of his or her employees
of any crime relating to the operation of a pawn broking business;



      (2)   Violation by the permittee or his or her employees of
any of the provisions of this chapter or any other article of the City Code
or statute relating to the operation of a pawn broking business or
second-hand goods business;



      (3)   Failure to cooperate fully with any lawful police
investigation;



      (4)   Falsely stating any material fact on the permit
application; or



      (5)   Submitting a false or incomplete record to the police.



(Prior Code, § 18-105)



§ 113.09  RECORDS REQUIRED.



   Every person who shall be engaged in the business of pawnbroker or
dealer in second-hand goods or junk shall maintain a record system whereby at
the time of each loan or purchase, an accurate account or description, in the
English language, of the goods, articles or other things pawned, pledged or
purchased, the amount of money loaned or paid therefor, the time of the
receipt of the same and description of the person pawning, pledging or
selling the same.  These records shall be kept separate from any other
records maintained by the business. Separate pages in the record system shall
be pre-numbered and any gap in numbering shall be noted and explained on the
next numbered sheet.  The description of any item of personal property shall
include serial numbers or any other identification numbers where ever
possible.  The description of a person shall include compliance with any of
the alternative identification requirements of § 113.12 of this division. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to dealers in precious metals
permitted under Minnesota State Statute, insofar as they purchase precious
metal bullion, ingots, or coins.



(Prior Code, § 18-121)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.10  RECEIPTS REQUIRED.



   Every pawnbroker, dealer in second-hand goods, and junk dealer
purchasing or receiving on deposit for a loan any article or personal
property shall give to the person selling or depositing the article or
personal property a receipt with a description of the item.  Every
pawnbroker, dealer in second-hand goods, and junk dealer purchasing or
receiving on deposit for a loan any article of personal property shall daily
make available to the police a copy of the record maintained under § 113.09
of this chapter.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to dealers
in precious metals permitted under Minnesota State Statute, insofar as they
purchase precious metal bullion, ingots, or coins.



(Prior Code, § 18-122)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.11  REPORTS TO POLICE.



   Every pawnbroker, dealer in second-hand goods, or junk dealer shall
give to the Police Department, before 12:00 p.m. of the first and fifteenth
of the month, a legible and correct copy, of the record required by § 113.09
of this chapter of all personal property or other valuable things received or
deposited or purchased during the preceding day, together with the time when
received or purchased and description of the person or person from whom left
in pledge or from whom the same were purchased.  This copy shall be kept by
the Police Department for its records.  The provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to dealers in precious metals permitted under Minnesota State
Statute, insofar as they purchase precious metal bullion, ingots, or coins.



(Prior Code, § 18-123)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.12  IDENTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Each person pawning, pledging, or selling items in an
establishment permitted pursuant to this chapter shall identify himself or
herself as provided herein to the permittee or permittee's agent accepting
the pawn, pledge, or sale.  Neither the permittee nor any of his or her
agents shall transact any business with any person who fails to identify
himself or herself as provided herein.



   (B)   Identification shall be made as follows:



      (1)   By a showing of a Minnesota driver's permit or
non-qualification certificate which was duly issued to the person presenting
it by the State of Minnesota.  The permittee or agent shall stamp or record
the information contained on the face of the driver's permit or
non-qualification certificate on the record required by § 113.09 of this
chapter;



      (2)   In the event the person has no Minnesota driver's permit
or non-qualification certificate, then by showing of some other form of
identification issued him or her by a governmental body or a recognized
organization which shows either his or her picture or a physical description
of him or her or both.  The permittee or agent shall record the type of
identification, and the name and physical description on the identification
in the record required by § 113.09 of this division; or



      (3)   By a statement by the permittee that the person is
personally known to the permittee and a recording of his or her full name.



   (C)   The permittee or permittee's agent transacting the pawn,
pledge, or sale shall have the affirmative duty to compare all pictures,
physical descriptions and signatures on the identification presented with the
physical features and signatures of the person presenting the identification
and shall not transact any business with any person who appears to be
presenting false identification. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to dealers in precious metals permitted under Minnesota State Statute,
insofar as they purchase precious metal bullion, ingots, or coins.



(Prior Code, § 18-124)



§ 113.13  HOLDING AND REDEMPTION PERIODS.



   (A)   Redemption period.  Any person pledging an article shall have
45 days to redeem the same before the pledge becomes forfeitable.



   (B)   Required holding period.  No personal property received on
deposit by any pawnbroker shall be redeemed from the place of business of the
pawnbroker for the space of 48 hours not counting Saturday, Sunday or
holidays next after the delivery to the Police Department of the copy and
statement relating thereto as required by § 113.10 of this chapter and no
personal property purchased by any pawnbroker, dealer of second-hand goods,
or junk dealer shall be sold or disposed of in any way within 48 hours not
counting Saturday, Sunday, or holidays after 12:00 p.m. of the day for the
giving notice as provided in § 113.11 of this chapter to the Police
Department of a copy and statement relating thereto as required in this
section.  These requirements shall not apply to precious metals, coins,
bullion, or ingots.



   (C)   Police order to hold property.  Whenever the Chief of Police,
or any member of the police force shall have probable cause to suspect that
property listed pursuant to this chapter shall be stolen property, or
constitute evidence of a crime, or that possession of the property is
criminal, or that the property shall constitute evidence that an individual
has committed a crime, he or she shall notify the dealer or dealers not to
sell any property so received on deposit or purchased by them, or permit the
same to be redeemed, for a period of at least 48 hours in addition to the
time period provided for in division (A) of this section, not counting
Saturday, Sunday, and holidays.



(Prior Code, § 18-125)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.14  HOURS AND DAYS OF OPERATION.



   No property shall be received as a pledge or purchase by any dealer;
nor shall any property except personal wearing apparel be sold before 7:00
a.m. nor after 9:00 p.m. on Sunday.  Further, no pawnbroker or dealer in
second-hand goods shall be open for business of any kind on the following
days:  New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day, and Christmas Day.



(Prior Code, § 18-126)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.15  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   Dealing with minors, and the like.  It is unlawful for any
pawnbroker, dealer in second-hand goods or junk dealer to purchase or receive
on deposit any personal property, goods, wares, merchandise, article or
thing, from a person under 18 years of age without the written consent of his
or her parent or guardian, persons of unsound mind, or intoxicated persons.



   (B)   Misconduct of pawnbrokers.  It is unlawful for any permitted
pawnbroker to:



      (1)   Have goods in his or her possession and refuse to permit
a law enforcement officer examine them during usual business hours;



      (2)   Sell pledged goods before the time to redeem has
expired; or



      (3)   Make a loan on a pledge to a person under lawful age,
without the written consent of his or her parent or guardian.



   (C)   Misconduct of junk or second-hand dealers.  It is unlawful
for any dealer of junk or second-hand goods to:



      (1)   Have goods in his or her possession and refuse to permit
a law enforcement officer to examine them during usual business hours; or



      (2)   Purchase property from a person under lawful age,
without the written consent of his or her parent or guardian.



   (D)   Minor, prohibitions.  No person under the age of 18 years
shall sell, pawn, or pledge any personal property or other valuable thing to
or with any person permitted to do business under this chapter.  It is
unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to represent to any person
permitted under the provisions of this chapter, at the time of his or her
selling, pawning, attempting to pawn, or pledging of any personal property,
that he or she is 18 years of age or over.



(Prior Code, § 18-127)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   Any violation of the various provisions of this chapter is a
misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 18-79)



CHAPTER 114:  PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



Section



   114.01   Definitions and interpretation



   114.02   Exceptions to definitions



   114.03   Permitting



   114.04   Fees



   114.05   Procedure



   114.06   Duration



   114.07   Permit exemptions



   114.08   Ineligibility for permit



   114.09   Suspension and revocation



   114.10   Notice of revocation or suspension



   114.11   Public hearing



   114.12   Emergency



   114.13   Appeals



   114.14   Transferability



   114.15   Registration



   114.16   Prohibited activities



   114.17   Exclusion by placard



   114.18   Effective date



 



   114.99   Penalty



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions.  The singular shall
include the plural and the plural shall include the singular.  The masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter, and vice-versa.  The term SHALL
means mandatory and the term MAY is permissive.  The following terms shall
have the definitions given to them.



   PEDDLER.  A person, whether a resident of the City of Park Rapids or
not, who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business,
street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose of
offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or attempting to
sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares, products,
merchandise, or other personal property, that the person is carrying or
otherwise transporting.  The term PEDDLER shall mean the same as the term
HAWKER.



   PERSON.  Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership, or association.  As applied to groups, organizations,
corporations, partnerships, and associations, the term shall include each
member, officer, partner, associate, agent, or employee.



   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY.  Any day during which the city hall is normally
open for the purpose of conducting public business.  Holidays defined by
state law shall not be counted as regular business days.



   SOLICITOR.  A person, whether a resident of the City of Park Rapids or
not, who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business,
street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose of
obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products,
merchandise, other personal property, or services, of which he or she may be
carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by
other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later
time.  The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the
scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to
obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above.  The term SOLICITOR
shall mean the same as the term canvasser.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  A person, whether a resident of the City of Park
Rapids or not, who temporarily sets up business out of any building
structure, vacant lot, parking lot, a vehicle, trailer, tent, or other
portable shelter, or empty store front for the purpose of exposing or
displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering goods,
wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property, and who does not
remain or intend to remain in any 1 location permanently.   



(Prior Code, § 18-146)



§ 114.02  EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter the terms
peddler, solicitor, and transient merchant shall not apply to:



      (1)   Any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale
any goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property, to a
retailer of the item(s) being sold by the wholesaler;



      (2)   The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes
initial contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying
to establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable
food and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to
any person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the
customers on his or her established regular delivery route;



      (3)    Persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as
garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons
participating in any organized multi-person bazaar, flea market or farmer's
market;



      (4)    Anyone conducting an auction as a properly permitted
auctioneer, or any officer of the court conducting a court ordered sale or
persons selling goods or wares related to the main business at the location;
and



      (5)   Any person participating in a sponsored event in town,
so long as the person has registered with the event sponsor as an approved
vendor. 



   (B)   Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this chapter
shall not excuse any persons from complying with any other applicable
statutory provision or local ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 18-147)



§ 114.03  PERMITTING.



   (A)  County permit required.  No person shall conduct business as a
peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant within the city limits without
first having obtained the appropriate permit from the county as required by
M.S. Chapter 329, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   City permit required.  Except as otherwise provided for by
this chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler or a
transient merchant without first having obtained a permit from the city. 



   (C)   Application.  Application for a city permit to conduct
business as a peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular
business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting business. 
Failure to meet the required 14 day timeframe will result in a double fee.
Applications for a permit shall be made on a form approved by the City
Council and available from the office of the City Clerk.  All applications
shall be signed by the applicant.  All applications shall include the
following information:



      (1)   Applicant's full legal name;



      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts
business or to which applicant officially answers;



      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye
color, height, weight, distinguishing  marks and features, and the like);



      (4)   Full address of applicant's permanent residence;



      (5)   Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence;



      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operation(s)
owned, managed, or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an
employee or agent;



      (7)   Full address of applicant's regular place of business
(if any);



      (8)   And all business related telephone number(s) of the
applicant;



      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying
for a license;



      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or
daily license;



      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct
business, and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of
days he or she will be conducting business in the city;



      (12)   Any and all address(es) and telephone number(s) where
the applicant can be reached while conducting business within the city,
including the location where a transient merchant intends to set up business;



      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted within the last 5 years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or
misdemeanor for violation of any state or federal statute or any local
ordinance, other than traffic offenses;



      (14)   A list of the most recent locations where the applicant
has conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant;



      (15)   Proof of any required county permit;



      (16)   Written permission of the property owner or the
property owner's agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant;



      (17)   A general description of the items to be sold or
services to be provided; and



      (18)   All additional information deemed necessary by the city.



(Prior Code, § 18-148)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.04  FEES.



   All applications for a permit under this chapter shall be accompanied
by the fee established in the city's Fee Schedule, Chapter 36, as adopted
from time to time by a resolution passed by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 18-149)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.05  PROCEDURE.



   Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of the permit
fee, the City Clerk and the City Administrator, or the City Administrator's
designee, shall within 2 regular business days of receipt, issue the permit
or inform the applicant of the reasons for denial of the application.  An
application shall be determined to be complete only if all required
information is provided.  If the Clerk determines that the application is
incomplete, the Clerk shall inform the applicant of the required necessary
information which is missing.  The City Clerk shall inform the City Council,
at its next regular meeting date of applications received and permits issued
or denied.  In the event of denial of the permit, the applicant will be
notified in writing of the denial and the reasons therefor and further be
notified of his or her right to appeal the denial by requesting a hearing
within 10 days of receiving notice of rejection.  Upon receipt of a request
for a hearing, the City Clerk will schedule the hearing within 10 days.  The
hearing will be conducted by 3 people including the Mayor or 1 of the Council
whom the Mayor may designate, the Director of the Park Rapids Area Chamber of
Commerce and 1 other person appointed by the Director of the Chamber of
Commerce.  The final decision of the hearing body will be issued within 5
days, shall be in writing, and shall state its findings.  The decision of
the 3 member body is viewed as the city's "final decision" and shall be
appealable by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of
certiorari.



(Prior Code, § 18-150)



§ 114.06  DURATION.



   An annual permit granted under this chapter shall be valid for 1
calendar year from the date of issue.  A seasonal permit granted under this
chapter shall be valid for no more than 4 months from the date of issue. 
All other permits granted under this chapter shall be valid only during the
time period indicated on the permit.



(Prior Code, § 18-151)



§ 114.07  PERMIT EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   No permit shall be required for any person who sells or
attempts to sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product
grown, produced, cultivated, or raised on any farm by the person. 



   (B)   No permit shall be required of any person going from
house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or type
of place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose of exercising that
person's state or federal constitutional rights (i.e., freedom of speech,
press, religion and the like) except that this exemption may be lost if the
person's exercise of constitutional rights is merely incidental to a
commercial activity.



   (C)   (1)   No permits shall be required for any person who sells
or attempts to sell, or take or attempt to take orders for any product or
service supplied to the person by a tax-exempt non-profit organization, the
person being a member of the organization, and the proceeds generated by the
sales becoming the property of the non-profit organization.



      (2)   Professional fund raisers working on behalf of an
otherwise exempt person or group shall not be exempt from the permitting
requirements of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 18-152)



§ 114.08  INELIGIBILITY FOR PERMIT.



   The following shall be grounds for denying a permit under this chapter:



   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of
having obtained any required county permit;



   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the
failure to sign the application, or the failure, to pay the required fee at
the time of application;



   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past 5 years from
the date of application, for any violation of any federal or state statute or
regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the
person's ability to conduct the business for which the permit is being sought
in an honest and legal manner or that will not adversely affect the health,
safety, and welfare of the residents of the city.  These violations shall
include, but not be limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud,
unlawful business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical
harm against another person;



   (D)   The revocation within the past 5 years of any permit issued to
the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor,
or transient merchant; and



   (E)   The applicant is determined to have a bad business
reputation.  Evidence of a bad business reputation shall include, but not be
limited to, the existence of more than 2 complaints(s) against the applicant
with the Better Business Bureau, the Attorney General's Office, or other
similar business or consumer rights office or agency, within the preceding 12
months, or 4 complaints filed against the applicant within the preceding 5
years.



(Prior Code, § 18-153)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.09  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Any permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or
revoked at the discretion of the City Clerk for violation of any of the
following:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statements on the
application form;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made
during the course of the permitted activity;



      (3)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a permit
could have been denied under § 114.08 of this chapter; and



      (4)   Violation of any provision of this chapter.



   (B)   The suspension or revocation of any permit issued for the
purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct business as a peddler or
transient merchants on behalf of the permittee, shall serve as a suspension
or revocation of each authorized person's authority to conduct business as a
peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the permittee whose permit is
suspended or revoked.



(Prior Code, § 18-154)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.10  NOTICE OF REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   Prior to revoking or suspending any permit issued under this chapter,
the city shall provide the permit holder with written notice of the alleged
violation(s) and inform the permittee of his or her right to a hearing on the
alleged violation.  Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the
permanent residential address listed on the permit application, or if no
residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the permit
application.



(Prior Code, § 18-155)



§ 114.11  PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   Upon receiving the notice provided in § 114.10, the permittee
shall have the right to request a public hearing.  If no request for a
hearing is received by the City Clerk within 10 regular business days
following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with the suspension
or revocation.



   (B)   For the purpose of mailed notices, service shall be considered
complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail.  If a public
hearing is requested within the stated timeframe, a hearing shall be
scheduled within 20 days from the date of request.



   (C)   Within 3 regular business days of the hearing, the City
Council shall notify the permittee of its decision.



(Prior Code, § 18-156)



§ 114.12  EMERGENCY.



   If in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to the health
or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a peddler or
transient merchant permitted under this chapter, the Council may immediately
suspend the person's permit and provide notice of the right to hold a
subsequent public hearing as prescribed in § 114.11 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 18-157)



§ 114.13  APPEALS.



   Any person whose permit is suspended or revoked under this chapter
shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.



(Prior Code, § 18-158)



§ 114.14  TRANSFERABILITY.



   No permit issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the permit was issued.



(Prior Code, § 18-159)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.15  REGISTRATION.



   All solicitors, and any person exempt from the permitting requirements
of this chapter under § 114.07, shall be required to register with the
city.  Registration shall be made on the same form required for a permit
application, but no fee shall be required.  Immediately upon completion of
the registration form, the City Clerk shall issue to the registrant a
certificate of registration as proof of the registration.  Certificates of
registration shall be non-transferable.



(Prior Code, § 18-160)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.16  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall conduct business in
any of the following manners:



   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold
by means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by
any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed
structure;



   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian
traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way;



   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the
health, safety, and welfare of any individual or the general public;



   (D)   Conducting business before 7:00 a.m. in the morning, or after
9:00 p.m.;



   (E)   Failing to provide proof of permit or registration, and
identification, when requested, or using the permit or registration of
another person;



   (F)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or
service being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement.  No peddler,
solicitor, or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the
city solely based on the city having issued a permit or certificate of
registration to the person; or



   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave,
or to otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find
obscene, threatening, intimidating, or abusive.



(Prior Code, § 18-161)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.17  EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.



   No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant, unless invited to do so
by the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the
purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant
when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least 3-3/4 inches long
and 3-3/4 inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating "No
Peddler, Solicitors, or Transient Merchants," or "Peddlers, Solicitors, and
Transient Merchants Prohibited," or other comparable statement.  No person
other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface, or otherwise
tamper with any sign or placard under this section.



(Prior Code, § 18-162)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.18  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall take effect upon publication in the city's official
newspaper.



(Prior Code, § 18-166)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.  Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
violation for the purposes of this chapter.  The city reserves the right to
use its administrative penalties ordinance in lieu of criminal penalties.



(Prior Code, § 18-163)



CHAPTER 115:  PLUMBERS



Section



   115.01   Permit



   115.02   State license



   115.03   Exemption from state master plumbers license requirement



   115.04   Applications



   115.05   Bond



   115.06   Insurance



   115.07   Worker's Compensation



   115.08   Permits, fees and exceptions



§ 115.01  PERMIT.



   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of plumbing
in this city without first having obtained a regular annual plumber's permit,
furnished the necessary bond, and given proof as to adequate insurance
coverage.



(Prior Code, § 18-201)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.02  STATE LICENSE.



   Plumbers licensed by the State Commissioner of Health shall be
permitted to engage in the business of plumbing in this city.  No person,
firm or corporation shall engage in or work at the business of a master
plumber or journeyman plumber unless licensed to do so by the State
Commissioner of Health.  A master plumber may also work as a journeyman
plumber.  The plumbers must, however, obtain the annual city plumbers permit
and furnish the necessary bond and insurance coverage.  Anyone not so
licensed by the state may do plumbing work which complies with the provisions
of the minimum standard prescribed by the State Commissioner of Health, on
premises, owned and actually occupied by the worker as a residence.



(Prior Code, § 18-202)  (Am. Ord. 450, passed 1-10-2006)



§ 115.03  EXEMPTION FROM STATE MASTER PLUMBERS LICENSE REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Individuals exempt from the requirements of § 115.02 are
listed below.



 

Qualified reduced pressure zone valve installers


Qualified back flow preventor valve installers


Qualified water conditioner installers



 



   (B)   Any additional work performed in the plumbing realm requires
compliance with § 115.02.



(Prior Code, § 18-203)  (Am. Ord. 450, passed 1-10-2006)



§ 115.04  APPLICATIONS.



   Application for a plumber's permit shall be made to the City Clerk,
accompanied by a fee as determined by the City Council.  The City Council
reserves the right to revoke any plumber's permit in case of violation of any
rules and regulations set forth or which may be made to govern the management
of the city water or sewer systems or for incompetence or neglect.  The
permit shall be renewed each and every year before January 1.



(Prior Code, § 18-204)  (Am. Ord. 450, passed 1-10-2006)



§ 115.05  BOND.



   The applicant shall furnish the city with proof of a good and
sufficient code compliance bond issued by a company authorized to do business
in Minnesota, to protect, indemnify and save harmless the city from any and
all loss, claim, suit or damage, direct or consequential, that the city may
sustain by reason of the violation of any rules or regulations.  The amount
of the bond shall meet the requirements of the State of Minnesota.



(Prior Code, § 18-205)  (Am. Ord. 450, passed 1-10-2006)



§ 115.06  INSURANCE.



   The plumbers shall furnish evidence to the city that, with respect to
the operations he or she performs, he or she carries regular contractor's
liability insurance providing for a limit of not less than $500,000 for all
damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of 1 person and subject to
that limit for each person, a total limit of $1,000,000 for all damages
arising out of bodily injuries to or death of 2 or more persons in any 1
accident, and regular contractor's property damage insurance providing for a
limit of not less than $50,000 for all damages arising out of injury to or
destruction of property in any  1 accident and subject that limit per
accident, a total of $50,000 for all damages arising out of injury to or
destruction of property during the policy period.  If any part of the work
is sublet, similar insurance shall be provided by or in behalf of the
subcontractors to cover their operations.  Policies must include overage for
underground hazards.



(Prior Code, § 18-206)



§ 115.07  WORKER'S COMPENSATION.



   The attention of the plumber is directed to the provisions of the state
statutes relating to Worker's Compensation insurance, which laws shall be
applicable.



(Prior Code, § 18-207)



§ 115.08  PERMITS, FEES AND EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No plumbing systems, equipment or fixtures shall be installed
contrary to this chapter within or on any building, structure or premises,
publicly or privately owned, nor shall any alteration or addition thereto or
to existing fixtures, equipment or systems be made without first securing a
permit therefor from the City Clerk.  No permit will be required to execute
any of the classes of plumbing work specified in the following:



      (1)   Public service corporations shall not be required to
obtain permits or inspection for work upon or in connection with their own
properties; or



      (2)   Manufacturers shall not be required to obtain permits or
inspection for work incorporated within equipment as a part of product
manufacturing.  Application for the permit, describing the work to be done,
shall be made in writing to the Plumbing Inspector by the person, firm, or
corporation installing the work.  The application shall be accompanied by
plans, specifications and schedules as may be necessary to determine whether
the installations as described will be in conformity with the requirements of
this chapter.  If it shall be found that the installation as described will
conform with all legal requirements and if the applicant has complied with
all provisions of this chapter, a permit for the installation shall be issued.



   (B)   Plumbing inspection permit fees shall be established by the
Council and listed in the Fee Schedule located in Chapter 36 of this code. 
Notification for inspection must be made in compliance with the Minnesota
Plumbing Code, Section M.H.D. 134(b).



(Prior Code, § 18-208)



CHAPTER 116:  MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS



Section



   116.01   Purpose



   116.02   Definitions



   116.03   Permit required



   116.04   Permit application



   116.05   Duration of permit



   116.06   Renewal



   116.07   Eligibility for permit



   116.08   Permit fee



   116.09   Bond requirement



   116.10   Restriction regarding permit transfer



   116.11   Sanctions for permit violations



 



   116.99   Penalty



§ 116.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter of the City Code is to permit and regulate
mechanical contractors operating within the City of Park Rapids in order to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the general public.



(Prior Code, § 18-220)



§ 116.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR.  Any person who is in the business of providing
or contracting for the service, erection, construction, alteration, change,
or repair of any heating, ventilating, air conditioning system or any person
who is in the business of erecting, constructing, altering, extending,
repairing, or changing any natural gas piping or natural gas burning device. 



(Prior Code, § 18-221)



§ 116.03  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No mechanical contractor shall operate or perform services within the
City of Park Rapids without first procuring a permit and a bond pursuant to
this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 18-222)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.04  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Application for a permit under this chapter shall be made in writing to
the City Clerk and shall be on a form provided by the City of Park Rapids.



(Prior Code, § 18-223)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.05  DURATION OF PERMIT.



   A mechanical contractor permit issued under this chapter shall
terminate on December 31 of each year.



(Prior Code, § 18-224)



§ 116.06  RENEWAL.



   An application for the renewal of an existing mechanical contractor
permit shall be made prior to the expiration date on the permit and shall be
made in a form as the City of Park Rapids may require.



(Prior Code, § 18-225)



§ 116.07  ELIGIBILITY FOR PERMIT.



   No person shall be granted a mechanical contractor's permit without
demonstrating to the City Clerk that the applicant has secured necessary
bonds as outlined in § 116.09.



(Prior Code, § 18-226)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.08  PERMIT FEE.



   The fee for a mechanical contractors permit under this chapter shall be
set by the City Council and detailed in Chapter 36.



(Prior Code, § 18-227)



§ 116.09  BOND REQUIREMENT.



   Prior to the issuance of any mechanical contractor permit the City of
Park Rapids shall require that the applicant deposit a bond approved as to
the form in the amount of $25,000 in favor of the city, conditioned upon the
satisfactory observation of all the requirements of this code pertaining to
mechanical contractors.  The bond may be of continuous form with
accumulative liability, and shall be cancellable only after 10 days' written
notice to the city.  The permit shall remain in force only during the term
of a valid bond.



(Prior Code, § 18-228)



§ 116.10  RESTRICTION REGARDING PERMIT TRANSFER.



   The permit granted under this chapter is for the person named on the
approved permit application.  No transfer of a permit shall be permitted
from place-to-place or from person-to-person without complying with the
requirements of an original application.



(Prior Code, § 18-229)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.11  SANCTIONS FOR PERMIT VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Suspension or revocation.  The City Council may suspend or
revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for a violation of:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained
in a permit application or a renewal application;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the
course of carrying on the permitted occupation or business;



      (3)   Any violation of this chapter or state law;



      (4)   A permittee's criminal conviction that is directly
related to the occupation or business permitted as defined by M.S. § 364.03,
subdivision 2, as it may be amended from time to time, provided that the
permittee cannot show competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and
present fitness to perform the duties of the permitted occupation or business
as defined by M.S. § 364.03, subdivision 3, as it may be amended from time
to time; or



      (5)   Conducting the permitted business or occupation in an
unlawful manner or in a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
community.



   (B)   Notice and hearing.  A revocation or suspension by the City
Council shall be preceded by written notice to the permittee and a hearing. 
The notice shall give at least 8 days' notice of the time and place of the
hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the permittee. 
The notice shall be mailed by certified mail to the permittee at the most
recent address on the permit application.



(Prior Code, § 18-230)



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor under Minnesota law.



(Prior Code, § 18-231)



CHAPTER 117:  WRECKING YARDS AND JUNK YARDS



Section



   117.01   Permit required; application; fee



   117.02   Regulation



   117.03   Revocation



 



   117.99   Penalty



§ 117.01  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE.



   Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to establish and/or
maintain a junk yard, general wrecking yard or automobile wrecking yard or
business in the City of Park Rapids, shall make written application to the
Council for a permit setting forth his or her name and address, and the legal
description of the premises upon which it is granted.  The fee for every
permit shall be established by the Council and listed in Chapter 36 of this
code.  All permits shall expire on December 31 following their issuance. 
The permits can be renewed from year to year upon application to the Council
on payment of the fee established in the Fee Schedule, Chapter 36.



(Prior Code, § 18-256)



§ 117.02  REGULATION.



   Any person operating a junk yard or automobile wrecking business shall
keep the premises in a neat and orderly condition.  All premises shall be
enclosed by a tight board fence of even height and at least 7 feet high which
shall be kept in neatly painted condition.  No junk or auto parts shall be
allowed to remain outside the fence.



(Prior Code, § 18-257)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.03  REVOCATION.



   The Council shall have the right to revoke a permit at any time for
cause, but only after a hearing, notice of which shall be served upon the
owner of the business at least 10 days before the hearing.



(Prior Code, § 18-258)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the terms and conditions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 18-241)



CHAPTER 118:  BACKHOE OPERATORS



Section



   118.01   Permit



   118.02   Permitted plumbers



   118.03   Applications



   118.04   Bond



   118.05   Insurance



   118.06   Worker's Compensation



   118.07   Permits; fees; exceptions



   118.08   Inspections



   118.09   Board of Review



 



   118.99   Penalty



§ 118.01  PERMIT.



   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of the
installation or repair of sewer or water lines in the city without first
having obtained a regular annual backhoe operator's permit, furnished the
necessary bond, and given proof as to adequate insurance coverage.



(Prior Code, § 18-281)  Penalty, see § 118.99



§ 118.02  PERMITTED PLUMBERS.



   Plumbers permitted by the City of Park Rapids or by the State Board of
Health pursuant to Chapter 115, Plumbers, of the Park Rapids City Code shall
not be required to obtain a separate permit for the operation of a backhoe in
the installation or repair of sewer or water lines.



(Prior Code, § 18-282)



§ 118.03  APPLICATIONS.



   Application for a backhoe operator's permit shall be made to the City
Clerk, accompanied by permit fee.  The fee for every permit shall be
established by the Council and listed in the Fee Schedule, Chapter 36 of this
code.  The City Council reserves the right to revoke any backhoe operator's
permit in case of violation of any of the rules and regulations set forth or
which may be made to govern the management of the city water or sewer system
or for incompetence or neglect.  The permit shall be renewed each and every
year before January 1.



(Prior Code, § 18-283)



§ 118.04  BOND.



   If the application for a backhoe operator's permit is approved by the
City Council, the applicant shall furnish the city with an unlicensed
plumbing contractor's bond issued by a company authorized to do business in
the State of Minnesota in the sum of $25,000 to protect, indemnify and save
harmless the city from any and all loss, claim, suit or damage, direct or
consequential, that the city may sustain by reason of the violation of any
rules or regulations. The amount of the bond may be increased by Council
resolution to meet the requirements of the State of Minnesota.



(Prior Code, § 18-284)  Penalty, see § 118.99



§ 118.05  INSURANCE.



   The backhoe operator shall furnish evidence to the city that, with
respect to the operations he or she  performs, he or she carries regular
contractor's liability insurance providing for a limit of not less than
$500,000 for damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of 1 person
and subject to that limit for each person, a total limit of $1,000,000 for
all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of 2 or more persons
in any 1 accident, and regular contractor's property damage insurance
providing for a limit of not less than $50,000 for all damages arising out of
injury to or destruction of property in any 1 accident and subject to that
limit per accident, a total of $50,000 for all damages arising out of injury
to or destruction of property during the policy period.  If any part of the
work is sublet, similar insurance shall be provided by or in behalf of the
subcontractors to cover their operations.  Policies must include coverage
for underground hazards.



(Prior Code, § 18-285)  (Ord. 457, passed 4-25-2006)  Penalty, see §
118.99



§ 118.06  WORKER'S COMPENSATION.



   The attention of the backhoe operator is directed to the provisions of
the state statutes relating to Worker's Compensation insurance, which laws
shall be applicable.



(Prior Code, § 18-286)



§ 118.07  PERMITS; FEES; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No sewer or water lines which are attached to or form a part
of the city's system shall be repaired or installed contrary to this chapter
within or on any building or premises whether publicly or privately owned,
nor shall any alteration or addition thereto be made without first securing a
permit from the City Clerk.  No permit will be required by public service
corporations for work upon or in connection with their own properties.



   (B)   Every backhoe operator permitted by a permit under this
chapter shall be held responsible for all acts of his agents or employees,
and any backhoe operator so permitted who refuses or neglects to comply with
the provisions of this code may have his or her permit suspended or canceled
by the City Council, in which case he or she will be debarred from obtaining
a permit to do any work requiring the services of a permitted backhoe
operator, during the time as the Council may deem proper.



   (C)   No person permitted to do backhoe operations in this city
shall allow his or her name to be used by any other person, either for the
purpose of obtaining permits or doing any work under the permit.



(Prior Code, § 18-287)  Penalty, see § 118.99



§ 118.08  INSPECTIONS.



   Any inspections required pursuant to this chapter shall be done by the
City Building Inspector in conformity with those provisions of the City Code
dealing with the permitting of plumbers pursuant to Chapter 115, Plumbers.



(Prior Code, § 18-288)



§ 118.09  BOARD OF REVIEW.



   (A)   The Council in and for the City of Park Rapids, Minnesota,
shall act as a Board of Review under this chapter.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation may register an appeal with
the Council for a review of any decision of the City Building Inspector,
provided that the appeal is made in writing within 5 days after the person,
firm or corporation shall have been notified of the decision by the City
Building Inspector.  Upon receipt of the appeal the Council shall proceed to
determine whether the action of the City Building Inspector complies with
this chapter and at its next regularly scheduled meeting shall make a
decision in accordance with its findings.



(Prior Code, § 18-289)



§ 118.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 18-271)



CHAPTER 119:  ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   119.01   Purpose and intent



   119.02   Definitions



   119.03   Application of this chapter



   119.04   Location



   119.05   Hours of operation



   119.06   Operation



   119.07   Permit



   119.08   Fees



   119.09   Inspection



   119.10   Expiration and renewal



   119.11   Suspension



   119.12   Revocation



   119.13   Transfer of permit



§ 119.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   Findings.  It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate
adult oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the citizens of the City of Park Rapids and to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to:



      (1)   Prevent additional criminal activity within the City of
Park Rapids;



      (2)   Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its
consequent adverse effect on real estate values or properties within the
neighborhood;



      (3)   To locate adult oriented businesses away from
residential areas, schools, churches, and parks and playgrounds; and



      (4)   Prevent concentration of adult oriented businesses
within certain areas of the city.



   (B)   (1)   The provisions of this chapter have neither the
purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of
any communicative materials, including adult oriented materials. 



      (2)   Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this
chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to adult oriented materials
protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by distributors and
exhibitors of adult oriented entertainment to their intended market.



(Prior Code, § 18-300)



§ 119.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT BOOK AND/OR MEDIA STORE.  An establishment which excludes minors
and which has a substantial portion of its stock in trade or stock on display
book, magazines, films describing or relating to specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT CABARET.  An establishment which provides dancing or other live
entertainment, if the establishment excludes minors by virtue of age from all
or part of the establishment and if the dancing or other live entertainment
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the performance,
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT.  Any business which offers its patrons services,
entertainment, or the sale of merchandise characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.  Specifically included in
the term, but without limitation, are adult book and media stores, adult
cabarets, adult hotels or motels, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult
modeling studios, adult motion picture arcades, adult motion picture
theaters, adult novelty businesses, and other adult establishments.



   ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL.  A hotel or motel from which minors are
specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented which
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER.



      (1)   A theater in an enclosed building, from which minors are
excluded from all or part of the establishment, with a capacity for less than
100 persons used for presenting motion pictures, including but not limited to
film, videotape and DVD, having as a dominant theme material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 



      (2)   Any business which present motion pictures, from which
minors are excluded from all or part of the establishment, including films,
videotapes and DVD, having as a dominant theme material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for viewing on the
premises, including but not limited to private booths, viewing by means of
coin operated or other mechanical devices, and the viewing or excerpt of
motion pictures offered for sale or rent.



   ADULT MODELING STUDIO.  An establishment, which excludes minors from
all or part of the establishment, whose major business is the provision, to
customers, or figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing
sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer and who engage in
specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being
observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculpted, photographed or
otherwise depicted by the customers.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE.  Any place which excludes minors from all
or part of the establishment wherein coin or token operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or
motion picture machines, projectors, video machines or other image producing
devices are maintained to show images to 5 or fewer persons per machine at
any 1 time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A theater in an enclosed building, from
which minors are excluded from all or part of the establishment, with a
capacity of 100 or more persons used regularly and routinely for presenting
live entertainment or motion pictures, including but not limited to film and
videotapes, having as a dominant theme material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by
patrons herein.



   ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS.  A business, from which minors are excluded
from all or part of the establishment, which sells, offers to sell, or
displays devices which simulate human genitals or devices which are designed
for sexual stimulation.



   ADULT USE.  Any of the activities and businesses described below
constitute adult oriented businesses which are subject to the regulation of
this chapter.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Any of the following conditions:



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered;



         (a)   Human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair;



         (b)   Buttock; and



         (c)   Female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even
if opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Any of the following conditions:



      (1)   An act of sexual intercourse, normal or perverted,
actual or simulated, including genital-genital, anal-genital, or oral-genital
intercourse, whether between human beings or between a human being and an
animal;



      (2)   Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture
by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing
costume or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically
restricted on the part of 1 so clothed;



      (3)   Masturbation or lewd exhibitions of the genitals
including any explicit, close-up representation of a human genital organ
clothed or unclothed; or



      (4)   Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the
clothed or unclothed pubic areas or buttocks of a human male or female, or
the breasts of a female, whether alone or between members of the same or
opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual
stimulation or gratification.



(Prior Code, § 18-301)



§ 119.03  APPLICATION OF THIS CHAPTER.



   (A)   Except as in this chapter specifically provided, no structure
shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or altered, and no
structure or land shall be used, for any purpose not in any manner which is
not in conformity with this chapter.



   (B)   No adult oriented business shall engage in any activity or
conduct or permit any other person to engage in any activity or conduct in or
about the establishment which is prohibited by any ordinance of the City of
Park Rapids, the laws of the State of Minnesota or the United States of
America.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing or
permitting conduct which is prohibited or regulated by other statutes or
ordinances, including but not limited to statutes or ordinances prohibiting
the exhibition, sale, or distribution of obscene material generally, or the
exhibition, sale or distribution of specified materials to minors.



(Prior Code, § 18-302)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.04  LOCATION.



   Adult oriented businesses may be located only in those zones as set
forth in § 151.066 of the Park Rapids City Code.



(Prior Code, § 18-303)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.05  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No adult oriented business site shall be open to the public from the
hours of 11:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.



(Prior Code, § 18-304)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.06  OPERATION.



   (A)   Off-site viewing.  An establishment operating as an adult
oriented business shall prevent off-site viewing of its merchandise, which if
viewed by a minor, would be in violation of M.S. Chapter 617, as it may be
amended from time to time, or other applicable federal or state statutes or
local ordinances.



   (B)   Entrances.  All entrances to the business, with the exception
of emergency fire exits which are not useable by patrons to enter the
business, shall be visible from a public right-of-way.



   (C)   Layout.  The layout of the display areas shall be designed so
that the management of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel
inside the store can observe all patrons while they have access to any
merchandise offered for sale or viewing including but not limited to books,
magazines, photographs, video tapes, or any other material.



   (D)   Illumination.  Illumination of the premises exterior shall be
adequate to observe the location and activities of all persons on the
exterior premises.



   (E)   Signs.  Signs for adult oriented businesses shall comply with
those sign regulations addressed in § 151.189 of the Park Rapids City Code,
and in addition signs for adult oriented businesses shall not contain
representational depiction of an adult nature or graphic descriptions of the
adult theme of the operation.



(Prior Code, § 18-305)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.07  PERMIT.



   (A)   Permits required. All establishments, including any business
operating at the time this chapter becomes effective, operating or intending
to operate adult oriented business, shall apply for and obtain a permit from
the City of Park Rapids.  A person is in violation of the City Code if he or
she operates an adult oriented business without a valid permit, issued by the
city.



   (B)   Application.  An application for a permit must be made on a
form provided by the city.



      (1)   The application must be accompanied by a sketch or
diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of
total floor space occupied by the business.  The sketch or diagram need not
be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn
with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus
or minus 6 inches.



      (2)   The application must be qualified according to the
provisions of this section and the premises must be inspected and found to be
in compliance with the appropriate state, county, and local law and codes by
the health official, Fire Marshal, and Building Official.



      (3)   Application for permit shall contain the address and
legal description of the property to be used, the names, addresses, phone
numbers, dates of birth, of the owner, lessee, if any, the operator or
manager, and all employees; the name, address, and phone number of 2 persons,
who shall be residents of the State of Minnesota, and who may be called upon
to attest to the applicant's, manager's or operator's character, whether the
applicant, manager, or operator has ever been convicted of a crime or offense
other than a traffic offense, if so, complete and accurate information the
disposition thereof, the names and addresses of all creditors of the
applicant, owner, lessee, or manager insofar as the regarding credit which
has been extended for the purposes of constructing, equipping, maintaining,
operating or furnishing or acquiring the premises, personal effects,
equipment, or anything incident to the establishment, maintenance and
operation of the business.



      (4)   If the application is made on behalf of a corporation,
joint business venture, partnership, or any legally constituted business
association, it shall submit along with its application, accurate and
complete business records showing the names, addresses, and dates of birth of
all individuals having an interest in the business, including partners,
officers, owners, and creditors furnishing credit for the establishment,
acquisition, maintenance, and furnishings of the business and, in the case of
a corporation, the names, addresses, and dates of birth of all officers,
general managers, members of the Board of Directors as well as any creditors
who have extended credit for the acquisition, maintenance, operation, or
furnishing of the establishment including the purchase or acquisition of any
items of personal property for use in the operation.



      (5)   All applicants shall furnish to the city, along with
their applications, complete and accurate documentation establishing the
interest of the applicant and any other person having an interest in the
premises upon which the building is proposed to be located or the furnishings
thereof, personal property thereof, or the operation or maintenance
thereof.  Documentation shall be in the form of a lease, deed, contract for
deed, mortgage deed, mortgage credit arrangement, loan agreements, security
agreements, and any other documents establishing the interest of the
applicant or any other person in the operation, acquisition or maintenance of
the enterprise.



      (6)   The permit fee required by this chapter must accompany
the application.



      (7)   An applicant is ineligible for a permit if applicant has
been convicted of a crime involving any of the following offenses:



         (a)   Any obscenity crime as defined by M.S. 617.23
through 617.299 inclusive, as it may be amended from time to time, or as
defined by any ordinance or statute in conformity therewith;



         (b)   Any obscenity crime as define by M.S. 617.23
through 617.299 inclusive, as it may be amended from time to time, or as
defined by any ordinance or statute in conformity therewith; for which:



            1.   Less than 2 years have elapsed since the date
of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense.



            2.   Less than 5 years have elapsed since the date
of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a gross
misdemeanor or felony offense, or



            3.   Less than 5 years have elapsed since the date
of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the first
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of 2 or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any 24 month period.



         (c)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect on disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse



   (C)   Requalification.  Any applicant who has been convicted of an
offense listed in division (B)(7) above may qualify for an adult oriented
business permit only when the time period required by division  (B)(7)(b)
above, has elapsed.



   (D)   Posting. The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the
name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and
the address of the adult oriented business.  The permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the adult oriented business so
that it may be easily read at any time.



   (E)   Council action.  The City Council shall act to approve or
disapprove the permit application within 60 days from the date the
application was submitted, provided that the application contains all of the
information required by this chapter.  If the application is deficient, the
Council shall act on the application within 120 days from the date that the
deficiency has been corrected.



   (F)   Appeals.  Within 90 days after an adverse decision by the
Council, the applicant may appeal to the District Court by serving a notice
upon the Mayor or Clerk of the municipality.



(Prior Code, § 18-306)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.08  FEES.



   Fees shall be set by city pursuant to Chapter 36.  The initial fee is
$500 per year.  Permit fees are non-refundable.



(Prior Code, § 18-307)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.09  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Access. An applicant or permittee shall permit health
officials, representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department, and
Building Inspection Division, to inspect the premises of an adult oriented
business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it
is occupied or open for business.



   (B)   Refusal to permit inspections.  A person who operates an
adult oriented business or his or her agent or employee commits an offense if
he or she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by health
officials, representatives of the Police Department, Fire Department, and
Building Inspection Division at any time it is occupied or open for
business.  Refusal to permit inspections may result in the suspension of the
permit as provided in § 119.11.



   (C)   Exceptions.  The provisions of this section do not apply to
areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for
use as a permanent or temporary habitation.



(Prior Code, § 18-308)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.10  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.



   (A)   Expiration.  Each permit shall expire at the end of the
calendar year and may be renewed only by making application as provided in §
119.07 (B).  Applications for renewal must be made at least 60 days before
the expiration date, and when made less than 60 days before the expiration
date, the expiration of the permit will not be affected.



   (B)   Denial of renewal.  When the city denies renewal of a permit,
the applicant shall not be issued a permit for 1 year from the date of
denial.  If, subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis for denial
of the renewal permit has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be
granted a permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial
became final.



(Prior Code, § 18-309)



§ 119.11  SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Causes of suspension.  The city may suspend a permit for a
period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a permittee or an employee
of a permittee has:



      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of
this chapter;



      (2)   Engaged in the use of alcoholic beverages while on the
adult oriented business premises other than at an adult hotel or motel;



      (3)   Refused to allow an inspection of the adult oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter;



      (4)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult
oriented business premises; or



      (5)   Demonstrated inability to operate or manage an adult
oriented business in a peaceful and  law-abiding manner, thus necessitating
action by law enforcement officers.



   (B)   Notice.  A suspension by the city shall be preceeded by
written notice to the permittee and a public hearing.  The notice shall give
at least 10 days' notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state
the nature of the charges against the permittee.  The notice may be served
upon the permittee personally, or by leaving the same at the permitted
business premises with the person in charge thereof.



(Prior Code, § 18-310)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.12  REVOCATION.



   (A)   Suspended permits.  The city may revoke a permit if a cause
of suspension in § 119.11 occurs and the permit has been suspended within
the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   Causes of revocation.  The city shall revoke a permit if it
determines that:



      (l)   A permittee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted to the city during the application process;



      (2)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;



      (3)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;



      (4)   A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the adult
oriented business during a period of time when the permittee's permit was
suspended;



      (5)   A permittee has been convicted of an offense listed in
§ 119.07 (B)(7) for which the time period required in § 119.07 (B)(7)(b)
has not elapsed;



      (6)   On 2 or more occasions within a 12-month period, a
person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the permitted
premises of a crime listed in § 119.07 (B)(7), for which a conviction has
been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the adult oriented
business at the time the offenses were committed; or



      (7)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation to occur in
or on the permitted premises.



   (C)   Appeals.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect on the revocation of the permit.



   (D)   Exceptions.  Division (B)(7) above does not apply to adult
motels as a ground for revoking the permit unless the permittee or employee
knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public
view.



   (E)   Granting a permit after revocation.  When the city revokes a
permit, the revocation shall continue for 1 year and the permittee shall not
be issued an adult oriented business permit for 1 year from the date
revocation became effective.  If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds
that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may be granted a permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became effective.  If the permit was revoked under division
(B)(5)  above, an applicant may not be granted another permit until the
appropriate number of years required under § 119.07 (B)(7)(b) has elapsed.



   (F)   Notice.  A revocation by the city shall be preceded by
written notice to the permittee and a public hearing.  The notice shall give
at least 10 day's notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state
the nature of the charges against the permittee. The notice may be served
upon the permittee personally, or by leaving the same at the permitted
premises with the person in charge thereof.



(Prior Code, § 18-311)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.13  TRANSFER OF PERMIT.



   A permittee shall not transfer this permit to another, nor shall a
permittee operate an adult oriented business under the authority of a permit
at any place other than the address designated in the application.



(Prior Code, § 18-312)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 120:  TREE CONTRACTORS



Section



   120.01   Tree contractor permit



   120.02   Application



   120.03   Permit fee



   120.04   Duration of permit



   120.05   Insurance



   120.06   Worker's Compensation



   120.07   Sanctions for permit violations



 



   120.99   Penalty



§ 120.01  TREE CONTRACTOR PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business
or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing boulevard or park trees
within the City of Park Rapids without first applying for and procuring a
permit.  The permit fee shall be paid in advance.  No permit shall be
required of any public service company including electric utilities and their
agents and contractors or city employees doing the work in the pursuit of
their public service endeavors.



(Prior Code, § 18-321)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.02  APPLICATION.



   Application for a tree contractor permit shall be made to the City
Clerk, accompanied by the permit fee.



(Prior Code, § 18-322)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.03  PERMIT FEE.



   The fee for the permit shall be established by the City Council and
listed in the Fee Schedule, Chapter 36 of the Park Rapids City Code.



(Prior Code, § 18-323)



§ 120.04  DURATION OF PERMIT.



   All permits issued under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of
the year issued.



(Prior Code, § 18-324)



§ 120.05  INSURANCE.



   Before any permit shall be issued, each applicant shall first file
evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts
of$500,000 for bodily injury or death of 1 person and $1,000,000 aggregate
and$50,000 property damage, indemnifying the city or any person injured or
damaged resulting form the pursuit of the endeavors as herein described.



(Prior Code, § 18-325)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.06  WORKER'S COMPENSATION.



   All laws concerning Worker's Compensation insurance, according to
Minnesota Statutes, shall be applicable.



(Prior Code, § 18-326)



§ 120.07  SANCTIONS FOR PERMIT VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Suspension or revocation.  The City Council may suspend or
revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for a violation of:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained
in a permit application or a renewal application;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the
course of carrying on the permitted occupation or business;



      (3)   Any violation of this chapter or state law;



      (4)   A permittee's criminal conviction that is directly
related to the occupation or business permitted as defined by M.S. § 364.03,
subdivision 2, as it may be amended from time to time, provided that the
permittee cannot show competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and
present fitness to perform the duties of the permitted occupation or business
as defined by M.S. § 364.03, subdivision 3, as it may be amended from time
to time; or



      (5)   Conducting the permitted business or occupation in an
unlawful manner or in a  manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
community.



   (B)   Notice and hearing.  A revocation or suspension by the City
Council shall be preceded by written notice to the permittee and a hearing. 
The notice shall give at least 8 days' notice of the time and place of the
hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the permittee. 
The notice shall be mailed by certified mail to the permittee at the most
recent address on the permit application.



(Prior Code, § 18-327)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 18-328)



CHAPTER 121:  VEHICLES FOR HIRE



Section



   121.01   Definitions



   121.02   License required



   121.03   Application; requirements



   121.04   License fee



   121.05   Duration of license



   121.06   Examination of taxicabs



   121.07   Granting license



   121.08   Limit on number of licenses to be issued



   121.09   Taxicab drivers



   121.10   Insurance



 



   121.99   Penalty



§ 121.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OPERATOR.  Any person owning or having control or use of 1 or more
taxicabs used for hire upon the street or engaged in the business of
operating a taxicab within the city.



   TAXICAB.  Any motor vehicle engaged in the carrying of persons for
hire, whether over a fixed route or not, and whether the same be operated
from a street stand or subject to calls from a garage, or otherwise operated
for hire, but the term shall not include vehicles subject to control and
regulation by the Railroad and Warehouse Commission, or vehicles regularly
used by undertakers in carrying on their business, or vehicles operated by
units of government, or vehicles owned and used by ambulance services,
hospitals, or clinics for the transportation of patients, whether or not fees
are charged for the service.



   TAXICAB DRIVER.  Any person who drives a taxicab, whether the person
be the owner of the taxicab or be employed by a taxicab owner or operator.



(Prior Code, § 58-26)  (Ord. 107, passed 1946; Am. Ord. 331, passed 2000)



§ 121.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No operator shall operate a taxicab within the city limits without
first having obtained a taxicab license.



(Prior Code, § 58-27)  (Ord. 107, passed 1946)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.03  APPLICATION; REQUIREMENTS.



   Each applicant for a taxicab license shall apply to the City Clerk for
the license upon a form to be provided by the city, and must comply with the
following provisions to the satisfaction of the City Council:



   (A)   Must be a citizen of the United States;



   (B)   Must be of the age of 21 years or over if a natural person,
and in the case of any co-partnership, firm or corporation, must be
authorized to operate taxicabs and carry on business in accordance with the
laws of the State of Minnesota; and



   (C)   Must fill out upon the blank form provided by the city a
statement covering each vehicle to be so licensed; giving the full name and
address of the owner; the class and passenger-carrying capacity of each
vehicle for which a license is desired; the length of time the vehicle has
been in use; the make of the car; the engine number; the serial number and
the state license number; whether the same is mortgaged, the name of the
mortgages and the amount of the mortgagees; also the holder of legal title to
the motor vehicle if other than the applicant; or whether the vehicle is
leased, licensed, or under any form of contract permitted to be used and
operated by some other person other than the 1 holding legal title thereto,
and what person, firm or corporation, collects the revenues from the
operation of the taxicab and pays the expense of operating the same.



(Prior Code, § 58-28)  (Ord. 107, passed 1946)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.04  LICENSE FEE.



   Each operator applying for a taxicab license shall, before being issued
a license, pay to the city a license fee.  The fee for every license shall
be established by the Council and listed in the Fee Schedule, Chapter 36, of
this code.  If the license is denied for any reason, the aforesaid fee or
fees shall forthwith be returned to the applicant.



(Prior Code, § 58-29)  (Ord. 256, passed 12-13-1993)  Penalty, see §
121.99



§ 121.05  DURATION OF LICENSE.



   All licenses hereunder shall expire on December 31 in each year.



(Prior Code, § 58-30)  (Ord. 107, passed 1946)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.06  EXAMINATION OF TAXICABS.



   The Council shall cause the city police officers, or other employees on
behalf of the city, thoroughly and carefully to examine each taxicab before a
license is granted to operate the same.  No taxicab shall be licensed which
does not comply with the following:



   (A)   It must be in thoroughly safe condition for the transportation
of passengers; and



   (B)   It must be clean and of good appearance, and well painted;



(Prior Code, § 58-31)  (Ord. 107, passed 1946)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.07  GRANTING LICENSE.



   If the Council is satisfied that the public convenience and good order
will be served thereby, it may grant a license to any applicant.  Each
license granted shall be given a number and shall give the number and an
adequate description of the taxicabs licensed thereunder.



(Prior Code, § 58-32)  (Ord. 107, passed 1946)



§ 121.08  LIMIT ON NUMBER OF LICENSES TO BE ISSUED.



   Licenses for not more than 8 taxicabs shall be in effect at any 1 time
regardless of the number of operators of the taxicabs.



(Prior Code, § 58-33)  (Ord. 107, passed 1946)



§ 121.09  TAXICAB DRIVERS.



   No person, either the operator or employee of any operator, shall drive
a taxicab in this city without first having been specially licensed as a
chauffeur under Minnesota Statutes.  Every driver shall display the
chauffeurs license badge conspicuously upon his or her coat or cap as therein
provided.



(Prior Code, § 58-34)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.10  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Before a license shall be delivered to any operator, he or she
shall deposit with the Clerk a copy or copies of a policy or policies of an
insurance company or companies duly licensed to transact the business in this
state, insuring the operator of any taxicab to be licensed against loss from
the liability imposed by law for injury or damages to persons or property
resulting from the ownership, maintenance or use of any taxicab to be owned
or operated under the license.



   (B)   The policy or policies shall be approved by the City Attorney
as to form and compliance with this chapter.



   (C)   The limits of any liability insurance policy shall not be less
than $500,000 for bodily injuries to or death of 1 person and $1,000,000 on
account of any 1 accident resulting in injuries to or death of more than 1
person, and a total of $50,000 liability for damage to property of others,
arising out of any 1 accident.



(Prior Code, § 58-35)  (Ord. 107, passed 1946)  Penalty, see § 121.99



§ 121.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 58-36)  (Ord. 123, passed 7-12-1954)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



      131.   SOCIAL HOST



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Definitions



   130.02   Noisy parties



   130.03   Loitering



   130.04   Handbills



   130.05   Curfew



   130.06   Public event at fairgrounds



   130.07   Responsibility of parents



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PREMISES.  Any land, lot, parcel, sidewalk, boulevard, street,
highway, alley, thoroughfare, park, playground, restaurant, café, church,
school, car or parking lot or parking space, drive-in, any building used for
business purposes, commercial or industrial purposes, or any other place,
washroom or toilet, apartment hallway, or other location whether public or
private in the City of Park Rapids.



(Prior Code, § 42-7)



§ 130.02  NOISY PARTIES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person or persons to congregate on any
private lands because of, or participate in, any party or gathering of people
from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume or of a nature as to disturb
the peace, quiet, or repose of other persons.  Any owner or person in lawful
possession or control of private lands who has knowledge of the disturbance
and fails to immediately abate the disturbance shall be guilty of a violation
of this section.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person or persons to congregate on any
private lands of another because of, or participate in, any party or
gathering of people in the absence of the owner of the private lands being
present, without first having obtained written permission from the
landowner.  The written permission shall at all times be in the possession
of 1 or more persons at the site of the congregation.  The document
containing the written permission must bear the signature of the landowner
and date of the permitted use.  Failure to display written permission upon
request shall be considered prima facie evidence of an absence of permission
from the owner.



   (C)   A violation of division (A) or (B) above of this section shall
give a police officer the authority to order all persons present, other than
the persons identifying themselves as the owner or persons in lawful
possession or control of the land, to immediately disperse.  Any person who
shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall
be guilty of a violation of this section.



   (D)   It is unlawful for the owner or other person in charge of
rental living units to knowingly or repeatedly permit thereon conduct
prohibited by division (A), (B) or (C) above of this section.



   (E)   A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 42-1)  (Ord. 245, passed 1991)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  LOITERING.



   (A)   A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or prowls in
a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals
under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property
in the vicinity.  Among the circumstances which may be considered in
determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes
flight upon appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or
herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any
object.  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it
impractical, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under
this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which
would otherwise be warranted, by requesting the person to identify himself or
herself and to explain his or her presence or conduct.  No person shall be
convicted of an offense under this section if the police officer did not
comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the
explanation given by the person was true and, if it had been believed by the
police officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.  Any police
officer may arrest any person suspected of being a loiterer or prowler
without a warrant if it reasonably appears that the delay in arresting the
suspect caused by obtaining a warrant would result in the suspect’s escape.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned
by a police officer, or where a “no loitering” sign or signs have been
posted, to loiter, stand, sit, or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public
sidewalk, street, curb, cross-walk, walkway area, mall or that portion of
private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct
unreasonably the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon.  It shall
be unlawful for any person to block, obstruct, or prevent free access to the
entrance to any building open to the public.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any
thoroughfare or place open to the public for the purpose of inducing,
enticing, soliciting, or procuring another to commit an act of
prostitution.  Among the circumstances which may be considered in
determining whether such action is consistent with the intent to induce,
entice, solicit, or procure another to commit an act of prostitution are that
the person is a known prostitute or panderer and repeatedly beckons, in the
attempt to stop or engage male or female passersby in conversation, or
repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicles by engaging their
operators by hailing, waving of arms, or other bodily gestures.  The
violator’s conduct must be such as to demonstrate a specific intent to
induce, entice, solicit, or procure another to commit an act of
prostitution.  No arrest shall be made for a violation of this division
unless the arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to
explain his or her conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating this
division if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and
disclosed a lawful purpose.



   (D)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACEhas the following
definition unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:  an area generally visible to public view, including streets,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots,
automobiles (whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general
public, including those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment,
and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds
enclosing them.



Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  HANDBILLS.



   Whoever unlawfully places upon the windshield, door, handle, or on any
other external part or portion of any motor vehicle any loose paper,
handbills, litter or material of like nature, is guilty of a petty
misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 42-3)  (Ord. 103, passed 1944)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  CURFEW.



   (A)   Purpose.  The curfew for minors established by this section
is maintained for 4 primary reasons:



      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors
committed during the curfew hours;



      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail
during the curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;



      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs
during the curfew hours; and



      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EMERGENCY ERRAND.  A task that if not completed promptly
threatens the health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the
minor’s household.  The term shall include, but shall not be limited to,
seeking urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law
enforcement or Fire Department personnel, and seeking shelter from the
elements or urgent assistance from a utility company due to a natural or
human-made calamity.



      OFFICIAL CITY TIME.  The time of day as determined by reference
to the master clock of the city.



      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT.  Those places
that include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades,
shopping malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.



      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY.  The person who is responsible
for providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the
minor.  The person providing PRIMARY CARE OR CUSTODY to the minor shall not
be another minor.



      SCHOOL ACTIVITY.  An event which has been placed on a school
calendar by public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned
event.



   (C)   Hours.



      (1)   Minors under the age of 16 years.  No minor under the
age of 16 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in
or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any
vacant lot, between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., official city time.



      (2)   Minors ages 16 years to 17 years.  No minor of the ages
of 16 or 17 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in
or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any
vacant lot, between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., official city time.



   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor.  Nothing in
this section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until
the curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody
of the minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the
control of the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.



   (E)   Exceptions.  The provisions of this section shall not apply
in the following situations:



      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian,
or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;



      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the
direction of his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;



      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this
section if in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a
lawful business, trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling
directly to or from the location of the business trade, profession, or
occupation and the minor’s residence.  Minors who fall within the scope of
this exception shall carry written proof of employment and proof of the hours
the employer requires the minor’s presence at work;



      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an event which has been officially designated as a school activity
by public or parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or
traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, school, religious institution,
or similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor and with the
permission of the minor’s parent, guardian, or other adult person having
the primary care and custody of the minor;



      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course
of interstate travel during the hours of curfew;



      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or
from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free
speech, freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion;



      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence
or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not
complain to the city’s designated law enforcement provider about the
minor’s presence; or



      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is
otherwise legally emancipated.



   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor.  No parent,
guardian, or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor
shall permit any violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.



   (G)   Duties of other persons.  No person operating or in charge of
any place of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor
to enter or remain in his or her place of business during the hours
prohibited by this section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian or other adult person having primary care or custody of the
minor, or unless one of the exceptions to this section apply.



   (H)   Penalties.



      (1)   Minors.  Any minor found to be in violation of this
section may be adjudicated delinquent and shall be subject to the
dispositional alternatives set forth in M.S. § 260B.198, as it may be
amended from time to time.



      (2)   Adults.  Any adult person found to be in violation of
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be sentenced up to the
maximum penalty authorized by state law for a misdemeanor.



   (I)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this
section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was
present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused
to leave.



§ 130.06  PUBLIC EVENT AT FAIRGROUNDS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EVENT.  Any auction, dance, sales event, sporting event, race or
other event including but not limited to events which use a loudspeaker or
other sound amplification device, public or private, tending to create a
level of noise which represents an unreasonable disturbance to neighborhoods
in the vicinity of the fairgrounds.



      EXEMPT EVENTS.  Includes the Park Rapids Rodeo, the Hubbard
County Fair, Logging Days and any other events as may be exempted by
resolution of the City Council.



      FAIRGROUNDS.  The part of the City of Park Rapids legally
described as:  east 45 rods of the northeast quarter, Section 26, Township
140, Range 35.



   (B)   Violations.



      (1)   Any event held at the Hubbard County Fairgrounds shall
close no later than  1:00  a.m.  Failure to abide by the terms of this
section is a misdemeanor.



      (2)   Any participant at the event is subject to the criminal
charge.



(Prior Code, § 42-5)  (Ord. 241, passed 1990)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.07  RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS.



   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other adult person
having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 16 years to knowingly
permit the minor to loiter or lurk on any premises as described in this
chapter in the City of Park Rapids.  This restriction shall not apply to a
minor who is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person
having care and custody of the minor or where the minor is upon a legitimate
business activity or errand directly by his or her parent, guardian or
custodian.



(Prior Code, § 42-8)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.



   (B)   Lurking and loitering.  Any person violating any provisions
of § 130.03 is guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 42-10)



CHAPTER 131:  SOCIAL HOST



Section



   131.01   Purpose and findings



   131.02   Authority



   131.03   Definitions



   131.04   Prohibited acts



   131.05   Exceptions



   131.06   Enforcement



   131.07   Severability



 



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   The Park Rapids City Council intends to discourage underage possession
and consumption of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private
residence, and intends to hold persons criminally responsible who host events
or gatherings where persons under 21 years of age possess or consume alcohol
regardless of whether the person hosting the event or gathering supplied the
alcohol. The Park Rapids City Council finds that:



   (A)   Events and gatherings held on private or public property where
alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of twenty-one are
harmful to those persons and constitute a potential threat to public health
requiring prevention or abatement;



   (B)   Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage
persons, as well as the general public, from injuries related to alcohol
consumption, such as alcohol overdose or alcohol-related traffic collisions;



   (C)   Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly,
could have drastic effects on those who use it as well as those who are
affected by the actions of an irresponsible user.



   (D)   Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and
consumption occur outside the presence of parents. However, there are times
when the parent(s) is/are present and, condone the activity, and in some
circumstances provide the alcohol;



   (E)   Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person
is a crime, it is difficult to prove, and an ordinance is necessary to help
further combat underage consumption; and



   (F)   A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person
criminally responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage
possession or consumption occurs.



(Ord. 529, passed 11-9-2010)



§ 131.02  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to M.S. § 145A.05, Subd. 1.



(Ord. 529, passed 11-9-2010)



§ 131.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL.  Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions
and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, or beer, and which
contains 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.



   EVENT OR GATHERING.  Any group of three or more persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.



   HOST.  To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise,
control, or permit a gathering or event.



   PARENT.  Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:



      (1)   As natural, adoptive parent, or step-parent;



      (2)   As a legal guardian; or



      (3)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by
order of the court.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, copartnership, corporation, or
any association of one or more individuals.



   RESIDENCE or PREMISES.  Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or hotel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or
meeting room, park or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether
occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or
specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased,
rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.



   UNDERAGE PERSON.  Any individual under 21 years of age.



(Ord. 529, passed 11-9-2010)



§ 131.04  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person(s) to host or knowingly allow an
event or gathering to take place at any residence, premises, or any other
private or public property in the City of Park Rapids under the following
circumstances:



      (1)   Where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present; and



      (2)   The person knows or reasonably should know that an
underage person will or does:



         (a)   Consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or



         (b)   Possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the
intent to consume it; and



      (3)   The person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent
possession or consumption by the underage person(s).



   (B)   A person is criminally responsible for violating division (A)
of this section if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels,
or conspires with or otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.



   (C)   A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be
present at the event or gathering to be criminally responsible.



(Ord. 529, passed 11-9-2010)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.05  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   This chapter does not apply to conduct solely between an
underage person and his or her parents while present in the parent’s
household.



   (B)   This chapter does not apply to legally protected religious
observances.



   (C)   This chapter does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or
3.2% malt liquor licensees, municipal liquor stores, or bottle club permit
holders who are regulated by M.S. § 340A.503, Subd. 1(a)(1).



   (D)   This chapter does not apply to situations where underage
persons are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during
the course and scope of employment.



(Ord. 529, passed 11-9-2010)



§ 131.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   This chapter can be enforced by any police officer or sheriff’s
deputy in the city.



(Ord. 529, passed 11-9-2010)



§ 131.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or other
portion of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or
invalid, in whole, or in part, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed severable, and such unconstitutionality or invalidity
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this law, which
remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect.



(Ord. 529, passed 11-9-2010)



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of § 131.04 is a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 529, passed 11-9-2010)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   ZONING



      152.   RENTALS



      153.   SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section




Building Code




   150.01   Application, administration, and enforcement



   150.02   Permits and fees



   150.03   Building Code




Uniform Address Plan




   150.15   Purpose



   150.16   Building numbers



   150.17   Location; size; shape



   150.18   Multiple dwelling numbering



   150.19   Maintenance of building numbers



   150.20   Time for compliance



 



   150.99   Penalty




BUILDING CODE




§ 150.01  APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION, AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The application, administration, and enforcement of the code
shall be in accordance with Minnesota Rule Chapter 1300, as it may be amended
from time to time. The code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial
limits permitted by M.S. § 16B.62, subdivision 1, as it may be amended from
time to time, when so established by this chapter.



   (B)   The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the
Park Rapids Building Department.



   (C)   This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified
Building Official designated by the municipality to administer the code (M.S.
§ 16B.65 subdivision 1, as it may be amended from time to time).



(Prior Code, § 14-16)



§ 150.02  PERMITS AND FEES.



   (A)   Fees.  The issuance of permits and the collection of fees
shall be as authorized in M.S. § 16B.62, subdivision 1, as it may be amended
from time to time.



   (B)   Fee schedule.  Permit fees shall be assessed for work
governed by this code in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the
municipality in the city code.



   (C)   Surcharge.  In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected
on all permits issued for work governed by this code in accordance with M.S.
§ 16B.70, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (D)   Late application fee.  The fee for a building permit shall be
doubled for applicant who commences construction without a permit.



(Prior Code, § 14-17)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.03  BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   The Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant to
M.S. § 16B.59 to 16B.75, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted as the building code for this municipality.  The code is hereby
incorporated in this chapter as if fully set out herein.



   (B)   The Minnesota State Building Code includes the following
chapters of the Minnesota Rules, as it may be amended from time to time:



      (1)   1300, Administration of the Minnesota State Building
Code;



      (2)   1301, Building Official Certification;



      (3)   1302, State Building Code Construction Approvals;



      (4)   1303, Minnesota Provisions;



      (5)   1305, Adoption of the 2000 International Building Code;



      (6)   1306, Special Fire Protection Systems;



      (7)   1307, Elevators and Related Devices;



      (8)   1309, Adoption of the 2000 International Residential
Code;



      (9)   1311, Adoption of the 2000 Guidelines for the
Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings;



      (10)   1315, Adoption of the 2002 National Electrical Code;



      (11)   1325, Solar Energy Systems;



      (12)   1330, Fallout Shelters;



      (13)   1335, Floodproofing Regulations;



      (14)   1341, Minnesota Accessibility Code;



      (15)   1346, Adoption of the Minnesota State Mechanical Code;



      (16)   1350, Manufactured Homes;



      (17)   1360, Prefabricated Structures;



      (18)   1361, Industrialized/Modular Buildings;



      (19)   1370, Storm Shelters (Manufactured Home Parks);



      (20)   4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code; and



      (21)   7670, 7672, 7674, 7676, and 7678, Minnesota Energy Code.



(Prior Code, § 14-16)




UNIFORM ADDRESS PLAN




§ 150.15  PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds that for the purpose of providing proper
protection of public and private property in the City of Park Rapids, it is
essential to require visible approved addressing or identification for each
separate public, residential, commercial, or industrial building.



(Prior Code, § 14-31)



§ 150.16  BUILDING NUMBERS.



   (A)   Each primary structure within the city limits shall be
assigned an address.



   (B)   The list of addresses of all primary structures within the
city shall be held at the office of the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 14-32)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.17  LOCATION; SIZE; SHAPE.



   (A)   All owners or occupants of residential, commercial, and
industrial  structures within the city shall display their assigned address
numbers on the outside of their primary structures, near the front door, for
emergency purposes.  The address number must be located on a primary
structure surface facing the public road, clearly visible from the road,
address numbers shall be no smaller than 4 inches, shall be coated with
reflective materials, and colors should be in strong contrast with
background.  No self-adhesive number appliques shall be used.



   (B)   In those cases where the principal building’s address is
obscured from view from the street of address by accessory buildings, trees,
shrubbery or other visual obstruction, the numbers shall be displayed on the
mailbox in numerals not less than 2 inches high, of a light reflective
material and of a contrasting color to the background.  In those cases where
the principal building is obscured from the view from the street address and
the residence does not have a mailbox, the numbers shall be displayed from a
permanent mounting on the property, clearly visible from the street,
displayed prominently in numerals not less than 4 inches high of light
reflective material of contrasting color to the background.  The post should
be within 50 feet of the road and 10 feet of the driveway.  The bottom of
the address sign shall be placed at a height that is no less than 4 feet
above the level of the surface of the road.



(Prior Code, § 14-33)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.18  MULTIPLE DWELLING NUMBERING.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner or manager of every multiple
dwelling building containing 5 or more rental units, and the owner or
occupant of every individually owned dwelling unit in any multiple unit
building to properly identify each dwelling unit by attaching identification
numbers on or adjacent to each entrance to the individual units.



   (B)   The owner or manager of any multiple dwelling building with
common entrances containing 5 units or more, whether the units are rental or
individually owned, shall provide signs, including directional arrows, easily
identifying the location of each dwelling unit in the building.



   (C)   The signs shall be placed in an obvious location inside each
entrance to the building as approved by the Fire Chief.



(Prior Code, § 14-34)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.19  MAINTENANCE OF BUILDING NUMBERS.



   The occupant of the primary structure shall be responsible for keeping
its address numbers in good repair and clear of snow, dirt, debris, or other
obstructions.



(Prior Code, § 14-35)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.20  TIME FOR COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Implementation.  All owners of primary structures in the city
shall comply with this chapter within 45 days.



   (B)   Enforcement.  All city licenses, applications, and permits
may be withheld from the owners or occupants of primary structures if the
address is not placed or maintained in conformance with the chapter.



(Prior Code, § 14-36)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Building Code.  A violation of §§ 150.01et seq. is a
misdemeanor.  See M.S.§ 16B.69, as it may be amended from time to time, and
Minnesota Rules, Chapter 1300, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 14-18)



   (B)   Uniform address plan.  Failure to comply with any section of
§§ 150.15et seq. shall constitute a petty misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 14-37)



CHAPTER 151:  ZONING



Section




General Provisions




   151.001   Statutory authorization



   151.002   Intent and purpose



   151.003   Definitions



   151.004   Jurisdiction



   151.005   Compliance



   151.006   Enforcement



   151.007   Interpretation



   151.008   Severability



   151.009   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   151.010   Effective date




Shoreland Classification System




   151.025   General provisions



   151.026   Natural environment lakes



   151.027   Recreational development lakes



   151.028   Tributaries




Establishment of Zoning Districts




   151.040   Establishment of zoning districts



   151.041   Zoning map



   151.042   Interpretation of zoning map




Zoning District Requirements




   151.055   Averaging setbacks



   151.056   Distance between buildings



   151.057   (C-1) Conservation District



   151.058   (AG-1) Agricultural District



   151.059   (P) Public and Quasi-Public Zone District



   151.060   (R-1) Single-Family Residential District



   151.061   (R-1A) Single-Family Residential in Annexation Area
District



   151.062   (R-2) Single, 2-Family and Townhouse District



   151.063   (R-3) Medium Density Residential District



   151.064   (R-B) Residential-Business Transitional District



   151.065   (B-1) Highway Business District



   151.066   (B-2) General Business District



   151.067   (I-1) Light Industry District



   151.068   (I-2) Heavy Industry District



   151.069   (S-O) Shoreland Overlay District




General Shoreland Requirements




   151.080   Vegetative alterations



   151.081   Topographic alterations/grading and filling



   151.082   Placement and design of roads, driveways, recreational
trails and parking areas



   151.083   Stormwater management standards



   151.084   Special provisions for commercial, industrial, public and
semi-public uses



   151.085   Special provisions for agricultural uses



   151.086   Special provisions for forest management



   151.087   Special provisions for extractive uses




Non-conformities and Substandard Lots of Record




   151.100   Statement of intent



   151.101   Non-conforming uses



   151.102   Non-conforming structures



   151.103   Substandard lots of record



   151.104   (Reserved)




Accessory Uses and Structures




   151.115   Accessory uses and structures




Sanitation Standards




   151.130   (Reserved)



   151.131   (Reserved)



   151.132   (Reserved)



   151.133   (Reserved)



   151.134   Water supply standards




Performance Standards




   151.145   Determination of conformity



   151.146   Home occupations



   151.147   Standards for single-family dwellings



   151.148   Temporary dwellings



   151.149   Exterior storage



   151.150   Moved in structures



   151.151   Screening and/or fencing



   151.152   Maintenance



   151.153   Traffic control



   151.154   Storm water management



   151.155   Driveways



   151.156   Parking standards, traffic control, and storm water
management



   151.157   Site view clearance



   151.158   Mobile home park standards



   151.159   Special provisions for industrial uses



   151.160   Professional/personal service offices



   151.161   General development plan and site plan



   151.162   Exceptions to yard requirements



   151.163   Special provisions applicable to specific permitted and
conditional uses



   151.164   Landscaping




Sign Regulations




   151.175   Findings, purpose and effect



   151.176   Definitions



   151.177   Permit required



   151.178   Exempted signs - no permit



   151.179   Prohibited signs



   151.180   General provisions



   151.181   Dynamic displays and changeable copy signs



   151.182   Illumination and brightness standards



   151.183   Substitution clause



   151.184   Temporary signs



   151.185   Signs permitted in Agricultural (AG-1) District, Public
and Quasi-Public (P) District, and Conservation (C-1) District



   151.186   Signs permitted in Residential (R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3)
Districts



   151.187   Signs permitted in Residential-Business Transitional (R-B)
District



   151.188   Signs permitted in Highway Business (B-1) District



   151.189   Signs permitted in General Business (B-2) District



   151.190   Signs permitted in Light Industry (I-1) and Heavy Industry
(I-2) Districts



   151.191   Street banners



   151.192   Non-conforming sign; compliance



   151.193   Administration and enforcement



   151.194   Severability




Subdivisions and Planned Unit Developments




   151.205   Purpose and interpretation



   151.206   Limits of regulations and scope



   151.207   Definitions



   151.208   General provisions



   151.209   Procedures



   151.210   Necessary data for preliminary plat



   151.211   Qualification governing approval of preliminary plan



   151.212   Necessary data for final plat



   151.213   Minimum subdivision design standards



   151.214   Park dedication, open spaces and public uses



   151.215   Required improvements on the site



   151.216   Development agreement for improvements



   151.217   Optional city construction permitted



   151.218   Modification, exceptions, and variances



   151.219   Building permits



   151.220   Copies of plat



   151.221   Conveyance by metes and bounds



   151.222   Planned unit development review



   151.223   PUD site suitability evaluation



   151.224   Residential and commercial PUD density evaluation



   151.225   PUD maintenance and design criteria



   151.226   Conversions to PUD’s




Administration




   151.240   Zoning Administrator



   151.241   Permits



   151.242   Planning Commission



   151.243   Conditional use permits



   151.244   Board of adjustment



   151.245   Variances and appeals



   151.246   Amendments



   151.247   Public notice and hearing requirements



   151.248   Access to private property



   151.249   Fees



   151.250   Opt-out of Minnesota Statutes § 462.3593



 



   151.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 151.001  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   This Zoning Chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by
the State of Minnesota in the planning and orderly annexation area
legislation contained in M.S. § 414.0325 Subd. 5, as it may be amended from
time to time, M.S. Chapter 103F, as it may be amended from time to time,
Minnesota Regulations, Parts 6120.2500-6120.3900, as it may be amended from
time to time, and the municipal planning and zoning enabling legislation in
M.S. Chapter 462, as it may be amended from time to time, and the subdivision
legislation contained in M.S. Chapters 462 and 505, as it may be amended from
time to time.



(Prior Code, preamble)  (Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007)



§ 151.002  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   This chapter, adopted pursuant to the provisions of the M.S. §
462.357, as it may be amended from time to time, is intended to serve the
following purposes:



   (A)   To protect and promote the public health, safety, convenience,
comfort, and general welfare of the city and orderly annexation area in
Henrietta Township;



   (B)   To guide the further growth and development of the city and
orderly annexation area in Henrietta Township in accordance with the
comprehensive plan adopted by the Planning Commission;



   (C)   To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the city
and orderly annexation area in Henrietta Township and the value of buildings
appropriate to the various districts established by this chapter;



   (D)   To provide adequate light, air and privacy, to secure safety
from fire, flood and other danger, and to prevent overcrowding and undue
congestion of land and population;



   (E)   To bring about the gradual conformity of the uses of land and
buildings throughout the city and orderly annexation area in Henrietta
Township through the comprehensive zoning plan set forth in this chapter, and
to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings;



   (F)   To promote the most beneficial relation between the uses of
land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the city and
orderly annexation area in Henrietta Township;



   (G)   To provide a guide for public policy and action in the
efficient provision of public facilities and services and for private
enterprises in building development, investment and other economic activity
relating to uses of land and buildings throughout the city and orderly
annexation area in Henrietta Township; and



   (H)   For the purpose of preserving and enhancing the quality of
surface waters, preserving the economic and natural environmental values of
shoreland, and providing for the wise utilization of waters and related land
resources.



(Prior Code, preamble)  (Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007)



§ 151.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDON.  The cessation of a specific use of a property or portion of
a property for a period of 12 or more months.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR FACILITY.  Any building, structure or facility
incidental to another structure or facility on the same lot which, because of
its nature, can reasonably be located at or greater than normal structure
setback.  Examples of these structures and facilities include, but are not
limited to: swimming pools; tennis courts; saunas; solar collectors; wind
generators; satellite dishes; detached garages; storage buildings; and
recreational trailers and vehicles.



   ACCESSORY USE.  Any use which is incidental to the principal use of a
lot.



   ACTIVE SOLAR SYSTEM.  A solar energy system that transforms solar
energy into another form of energy or transfers heat from a collector to
another medium using mechanical, electrical, or chemical means.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  The Administrator of the Park Rapids Zoning Office or
its authorized agent or representative.



   ADULT USES or ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS.  Any of the activities and
businesses described in § 119.02 of the Park Rapids City Code.



   ADULT USE/ACCESSORY.  The offering of goods or services which are
classified as adult uses on a limited scale and which are incidental to the
primary activity and goods or services offered by the establishment.



   ADULT USE/PRINCIPAL.  The offering of goods or services which are
classified as adult uses as a primary or sole activity of a business or an
establishment.



   AGRICULTURE.  The use of land for agricultural purposes including:
farming; dairy; pasturage; horticulture; floriculture; viticulture; animal
and poultry husbandry; and the necessary accessory uses for packing, crating
and storing the produce, provided that the operation of any accessory uses
shall be secondary to that of the principal agricultural activities.



   AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE.  Any structure existing or erected and used
principally for agricultural purposes, with the exception of dwelling units.



   AIRPORT.  Any area of land designed and set aside for the landing and
take-off of aircraft, including all necessary facilities for the housing and
maintenance of aircraft.



   ALLEYS.  Any dedicated public way providing a secondary means of
access to land or structures thereon.



   ALTERATION.  Any change, addition, or modification in construction or
use, other than cosmetic or decorative, or any change in the structural
members of buildings such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.



   AWNINGS.  A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall
of a building constructed of non-rigid materials on a supporting framework. 
Compare marquee.



   BALCONIES.  See deck.



   BED AND BREAKFAST.  A building occupied as a more or less temporary
accommodation for individuals who are lodged, with or without meals, in rooms
occupied singly or for remuneration, with or without dining facilities, and
including not more than 4 sleeping rooms intended to provide accommodations.



   BLUFF.



      (1)   A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or
embankment having the following characteristics:



         (a)   Part or all of the feature is located within a
shoreland area;



         (b)   The slope rises at least 25 feet above the
ordinary high water level of the waterbody;



         (c)   The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff
to a point 25 feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages 30%
or greater; and



         (d)   The slope drains toward the waterbody.



      (2)   An area with an average slope of less than 18% over a
distance of 50 feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff.



   BLUFF IMPACT ZONE.  A bluff and land located within 20 feet from the
top of a bluff.



   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.  The Park Rapids Board of Adjustment as appointed
by the Park Rapids City Council.



   BOARDING AND ROOMING HOUSE.  A business establishment which provides
sleeping and living quarters (but not individual cooking facilities) in an
immovable structure on a weekly or monthly commercial basis.  A rooming
house shall not include congregate dining facilities.



   BOATHOUSE.  A structure used solely for the storage of boats or
boating equipment.



   BUILDING.



      (1)   Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a
roof or other covering, and designed or used for the shelter or enclosure of
any person, animal or property of any kind including tents, awnings or
vehicle situated on private property and used for purposes of a building.



      (2)   It is not the intention of the chapter to include any of
the following structures:



         (a)   Temporary storage sheds or tents or awnings
intended for resale or used for display or promotional purposes and having no
permanent footings, slab, or other foundation;



         (b)   Dog houses of less than 25 square feet and
designed for 1 animal and having no permanent footings, run or slab, or other
foundations;



         (c)   Tents or other awnings used only for recreational
purposes;



         (d)   Storage sheds, wood sheds, or awnings having an
overall floor or surface area of less than 25 square feet and having no
permanent footings or slab or other foundation; or



         (e)   Uncovered residential wheelchair ramps that are
compliant with the building code.



   BUILDING LINE.  The perimeter of that portion of a building or
structure nearest a property line, but excluding open steps, terraces,
cornices, eaves, and other ornamental features projecting from the walls of
the building or structure, provided they do not project more than 5 feet into
the required front or rear yard and not more than 3 feet or 50% of the
required side yard, whichever is less.



   CANOPIES.  A rigid multi-sided structure covered with fabric, metal,
or other material and supported by a building at 1 or more points or
extremities and by columns or posts embedded in the ground at other points or
extremities.  May be illuminated by means of internal or external sources.
Compare marquee.



   CARPORT.  An accessory roof-like structure, either attached to or
detached from an allowable primary building, enclosed on not more than 2
sides, designed to provide cover for off-street vehicle parking.



   CAR WASH.  A lot on which motor vehicles are washed or waxed either by
the patrons, or by others, using machinery specially designed for that
purpose. 



   CHURCH.  A building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious
worship, which is used only for that purpose and those accessory activities
as are customarily associated therewith.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The Park Rapids City Council.



   CLEAR CUTTING.  The removal of an entire stand of trees.



   CLINIC.  A place where medical, dental, optometry, chiropractic,
psychiatric, or nursing care is furnished to person on an out-patient basis
by 1 or more licensed professionals.



   COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  Allowed in shoreland only. 
Uses that provide transient, short-term lodging spaces, rooms or parcels with
primarily service-oriented operations located in shoreland areas. 
Hotel/motel accommodations, resorts, recreational vehicles and camping parks,
and other primarily service-oriented activities are examples of COMMERCIAL
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.



   COMMERCIAL USE.  The principal use of land or buildings for the sale,
lease, rental, or trade of products, goods, or services.



   COMMISSIONER.  The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.



   CONDITIONAL USE.  A use that would not be appropriate generally or
without restriction throughout the zone district, but which, if controlled as
to number, area, location, or relation to neighborhood, would not be
injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort,
convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare.  These uses may be
permitted in listed zone districts upon application to the Planning
Commission.



   COOPERATIVE HOUSING.  One or more residential units in a building or
buildings owned or leased by a corporation, association, organizations, or
other legal entity, the shareholders or members of which are entitled, solely
by reason of their ownership of stock or membership certificates in the
entity to occupy the residential units.



   DAY CARE FACILITY.  A facility licensed by the State Department of
Human Services, public or private, which for gain or otherwise regularly
provides 1 or more persons, as defined by the State Human Services Licensing
Act, with care, training, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation or
developmental guidance on a regular basis, for periods of less than 24 hours
per day, in a place other than the person’s own home.  DAY CARE FACILITIES
include, but are not limited to:  family day care homes; group family day
care homes; day care centers; day nurseries; nursery schools; developmental
achievement centers for children; day training and rehabilitation services
for adults; day treatment programs; adult day care centers; and day services.



   DECK.  A horizontal unenclosed platform with or without attached
railings, seats, trellises or other features, attached or functionally
related to a principal use or site and at any point extending more than 6
inches above ground.  All decks are considered a part of the principal
structures and shall, therefore, meet all structure setback provisions.



   DUPLEX, TRIPLEX, AND QUAD.  Dwelling structures on a single lot having
2, 3, and 4 units respectively, being attached by common walls and each unit
having separate sleeping, cooking, eating, living, and sanitation facilities.



   DWELLING SITE.  A designated location for residential use by 1 or more
persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and
recreational vehicle sites.



   DWELLING UNIT.  Any structure, or portion of a structure, or other
shelter, designed as short or long term living quarters for 1 or more
persons, including rental or timeshare accommodations such as motel, hotel,
and resort rooms and cabins.



   EASEMENT.  A grant by a property owner for specified use of land by a
corporation, the public or specified persons.



   ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT WORKSHEET (EAW).  A brief document, in
worksheet format, that helps local governments determine if a proposed action
is a major action with a potential for significant environmental effects, but
also to consider alternatives and to institute methods for reducing
environmental effects.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICES UTILITY STRUCTURE AND FACILITY.  Includes, but is
not limited to, a structure or facility used for the location, maintenance
and/or service of communication lines, natural gas, petroleum pipelines,
television cable, or electrical transmission lines.



   EXTERIOR STORAGE.  The storage of goods, materials, equipment,
manufactured products and similar items not fully enclosed by a building.



   EXTRACTIVE USE.  The use of land for surface or subsurface removal of
sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other non-metallic minerals and peat
not regulated under M.S. §§ 93.44 through 93.51, as it may be amended from
time to time.



   FAMILY.  An individual or group of 2 or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption, together with not more than 3 additional persons not
related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single
housekeeping unit.



   FENCE.  An artificial structure, solid or otherwise, which is a
barrier and used as a boundary or means of protection, confinement, or
concealment.



   FLOOR AREA.  Total gross area of all floors as measured to the outside
surfaces of exterior walls, excluding crawl spaces, garages, carports,
breezeways, and attics without floors, and open porches, balconies and
terraces.



   FLOOR SPACE.  The floor area of all floors as measured from the inside
surfaces of the walls enclosing the portion of a building occupied by a
single-occupant or shared by a distinct group of occupants, excluding common
halls, stairwells, sanitary facilities, storage, and other areas to which
patrons do not have regular access.



   FOREST LAND CONVERSION.  The clear cutting of forested lands to
prepare for a new land use other than re-establishment of a subsequent forest
stand.



   GARAGE.  A fully enclosed building designed or used for the storage of
motor vehicles not including buildings in which fuel is sold or in which
repair or other services are performed.



   GARDEN CENTER.  A place of business or accessory use where retail and
wholesale products and produce are sold to the retail customers.  These
centers which may include a nursery and/or greenhouse, import the majority of
items sold.  These items may include planting materials, fertilizers, and
planting related tools and equipment.



   GAS STATION.  A place where motor vehicle fuel is sold at retail.



   GRADE.  The average elevation of the finished ground at the exterior
walls of the main building.



   GROUP FAMILY HOME.  Any community residential facility, foster home,
family care facility, or other similar home for developmentally disabled
persons.



   GUEST COTTAGE.  A structure used as a dwelling unit that may contain
sleeping spaces and kitchen and bathroom facilities in addition to those
provided in the primary dwelling unit on a lot, in shoreland districts.



   HEIGHT OF BUILDING.  The vertical distance from the highest elevation
of the grade along the face of a budding to the highest point of the roof
surface of flat-roofs, the deck line, of mansard roofs, or the average height
between the eaves and the highest ridge of gable, hip, or gambrel roofs. The
height of a stepped or terraced building shall be the height of the
tallest-segment of the building.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  A use conducted entirely with an enclosed dwelling
or accessory structure which is clearly secondary and incidental to
residential occupancy, and which does not change the character thereof. 
Specifically excluded are any activities which result in an alteration of a
building, window display, construction features, equipment, machinery or
outdoor storage, any of which is visible outside of the lot on which the use
is located.



   HOTEL/MOTEL.  Any building or portion thereof where lodging is offered
to transient guests for compensation and in which there are more than 3
sleeping rooms, with no cooking facilities in an individual room or apartment.



      IMPERMEABLE SURFACE.  (Impervious) A constructed hard surface that
either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil and causes water
to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow
than prior to development.  Area of a parcel of land that is incapable of
being penetrated by rainfall or moisture.  Examples include, but are not
limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, patios, storage areas, roads, streets,
driveways, and parking lots constructed of concrete, asphalt, or compacted
aggregate. 



   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM.  A sewage treatment system, other
than a public or community system, which receives sewage from an individual
establishment.  Unless otherwise indicated, the word SYSTEM, as it appears
in this chapter, means an INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM.



   INDUSTRIAL USE.  The use of land or buildings for the production,
manufacture, warehousing, storage or transfer of goods, products,
commodities, or other wholesale items.



   INTENSIVE VEGETATIVE CLEARING.  The substantial removal of trees or
shrubs in a contiguous patch, strips, row, or block.



   JUNKYARD.  A place maintained for keeping, storing, or piling in
commercial quantities, whether temporary, irregularly or continuously; items
to be bought or sold at retail or wholesale which from its second-hand or
worn condition render it practically useless and commonly classed as junk.



   KENNEL.  Any lot or premises on which 5 or more domestic animals of
any type or combination aged 6 months or older are kept, either owned or
boarded, either permanently or temporarily.



   LAUNDROMAT.  A place where patrons wash, dry or dry clean clothing or
other fabrics in machines operated by the patron.



   LOT.  A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds,
registered land survey, auditors plat or other accepted means and separated
from other parcels or portions by the description for the purpose of sale,
lease or separation.



   LOT AREA.  The area of land within the boundaries of a lot, excluding
that portion of a lot which is below the ordinary high water level.



   LOT COVERAGE PERCENTAGE.  The percentage of lot area included within
the outside lines of exterior walls of all buildings located on the lot
including: porches; decks; breezeways; balconies; and bay windows.  In
shoreland areas, all impermeable surfaces are included in computing ground
coverage percentages.



   LOT LINE.  A line dividing 1 lot from another lot or from a street or
alley.



   LOT LINE, FRONT.  For a riparian lot, the FRONT LOT LINE is that line
indicating the ordinary high water level.  For a non-riparian lot, a FRONT
LOT LINE is a line dividing a lot from any public street.



   LOT LINE, REAR.



      (1)   That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot
line.



      (2)   If the REAR LOT LINE is less than 10 feet in length, or
if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line 10
feet in length within the lot, connecting the side lot lines and parallel to
the front lot line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE.  Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line
or a rear lot line.



   LOT OF RECORD.  Any lot which is 1 unit of a recorded plat designated
by auditors plat, subdivision plat, or other accepted means and separated
from other parcels of portions of the description for the purpose of sale,
lease or separation thereof that has been recorded in the office of the
County Recorder prior to the effective date of this chapter.



   LOT WIDTH.  The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a
lot measured at right angles to the depth.



      MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS or MOBILE HOME PARKS.



      (1)   Any premises on which 2 or more manufactured homes, or
any premises used or held out for the purpose of supplying to the public a
parking space for 2 or more of the manufactured homes. 



      (2)   Sales lots on which automobiles or unoccupied
manufactured homes, new or used are parked for purposes of inspection or sale
are not included in this definition.



      (3)   The minimum MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME PARK shall be no
less than 10 acres.



   MANUFACTURED HOUSING or MOBILE HOMES.



      (1)   A structure transportable in 1 or more sections, which
in the traveling mode, is 8 body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or
more in length, or when erected on-site is 320 or more square feet, and which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling for 1
family, with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems contained therein, except that the term includes any
structure which meets all the requirements with respect to which the
manufacturer voluntarily filed a certification required by the Secretary of
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.



      (2)   No MANUFACTURED HOME shall be moved into the City of
Park Rapids that does not meet the Manufactured Home Building Code as defined
in M.S. Chapter 327.31, subdivision 3, as it may be amended from time to
time.  MANUFACTURED HOMES shall be treated as single-family housing units if
they meet the requirements set forth in § 151.147.



   MANUFACTURING, LIGHT.  A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly
from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, which activities are
conducted wholly within an enclosed building.



   MARQUEES.  A permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid
materials supported by and extending from the façade of a building. 
Compare awning.



   MINING.  The use of land for surface or subsurface removal of metallic
minerals and peat as regulated under M.S. §§ 93.44 through 93.51, as it may
be amended from time to time.



   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING.  A detached building designed and used
exclusively as a dwelling by 3 or more families occupying separate units.



   NON-CONFORMITY.  Any legal use, structure or parcel of land already in
existence, recorded, or authorized before the adoption of official controls
or amendments thereto that would not have been permitted to become
established under the terms of the official controls as now written, if the
official controls had been in effect prior to the date it was established,
recorded, or authorized.



   NURSING HOME.  A structure used for residential occupancy and
providing limited medical or nursing care for occupants on the premises, but
not including a hospital, clinic, or mental health center.



   OFF-SITE ADVERTISING SIGN.  A sign that is located on a lot, tract, or
parcel of land that is a lot, tract or parcel other than the 1 on which the
goods or services being advertised are sold.



   ON-SITE ADVERTISING SIGN.  A sign, free standing, attached, or
painted, located on the property where the goods or services being advertised
are available.



   OPEN SALES LOT.  Land devoted to the display of a variety of goods for
sale, rent, lease, or trade where the goods are not enclosed within a
building and not accessory to the primary business.



   ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL.  The boundary of public waters and wetlands
indicated by an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been
maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial.  For watercourses, the
ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the elevation of the top of the bank of the
channel.  For reservoirs and flowages, the ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the
operating elevation of the normal summer pool.



   OUTLOT.  A remnant from a subdivision that is not a developable piece
of property unless replatted in accordance with city ordinances.



   PASSIVE SOLAR SYSTEM.  A solar energy system that captures solar light
or heat without transforming it to another form of energy or transferring the
energy via a heat exchanger.



   PATIO.  An at-grade ground covering consisting of interlocking brick,
tile, cement, asphalt, wood, or similar material.  Also as area intended for
outdoor lounging and dining.



   PERFORMANCE BOND.  A bond which may be required by the City Council,
Planning Commission, or Board of Adjustment to insure the completion of any
activity falling under the jurisdiction of this chapter.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD).  Allowed in shoreland only.  A type
of development characterized by a united site design for a number of dwelling
units or dwelling sites on a parcel, whether for sale, rent, or lease, and
also usually involving clustering of these units or sites to provide areas of
common open space, density increases, and a mix of structure types and land
uses.  These developments may be organized and operated as condominiums,
time-share condominiums, cooperatives, full fee ownership’s, commercial
enterprises or any combination of these, or cluster subdivisions of dwelling
units, residential condominiums, townhouses, apartment buildings,
campgrounds, recreational vehicle parks, resorts, hotels, motels and
conversions of structures and land uses to these uses.



   PLANNING AGENCY.  The Planning Commission and the Planning Department
as they function together.



   PRINCIPAL USE.  The main use of land or buildings as distinguished
from subordinate or accessory uses.  A PRINCIPAL USE may be either permitted
or conditional.



   PUBLIC USES.  Uses owned or operated by municipal, school districts,
county, state or other governmental units.



   PUBLIC WATERS.  Any waters as defined in M.S. 103G.005, subdivisions
15-17b, as it may be amended from time to time, or any waters so designated
by the city in §§ 151.025et seq. of this chapter.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  Any vehicle or vehicular portable structure
built on a chassis designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreation, or other vacation use.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE CAMPGROUND.  Any area, whether privately or
publicly owned, used on a daily, nightly, weekly, or longer basis for the
accommodation of 5 or more tents or recreational vehicles, either free of
charge or for compensation.



   RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM.  A solar energy wind or energy system.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS do not include passive systems that serve a dual
function, such as a greenhouse or window.



   RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY.  Those activities customarily conducted in
living quarters in an urban setting, and excludes activities such as the
keeping of livestock or fowl, activities resulting in noise which constitutes
a nuisance in a residential area and activities which involve the storage,
visible from off the lot, of motor vehicle parts, machinery or parts, junk or
scrap materials and excludes the keeping on any lot of more than 4 household
pets per family, but this shall not be construed to prevent the keeping of
the litter of a household pet until able to be separated from their mother.



   RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  A use where the nature of
residency is non-transient and the major or primary focus of the development
is not service-oriented.  For example, single-family residences, duplexes,
triplexes, residential apartments, mobile home parks, condominiums,
time-share condominiums, townhouses, cooperatives and conversions of
structures and land uses to these. To qualify as a RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT, a development must contain at least 5 dwelling units or sites.



   RESORT.  A private recreational development which includes multiple
units intended for habitation on a temporary basis for relaxation or
recreational purposes.



   RESTAURANT.  Premises at which food or beverages are cooked or
prepared and offered for sale, and where consumption is permitted on the
premises, whether or not entertainment is offered, including establishments
commonly known as: bars; grills; cafes; taverns; nightclubs; drive-ins, and
fast-food establishments permitting on-site consumption.



   SCHOOL.  A facility that provides a curriculum of elementary or
secondary academic instruction, including kindergartens, elementary schools,
junior high schools, and high schools. 



   SEMI-PUBLIC USE.  The use of land by a private nonprofit organization
to provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside
the regular constituency of the organization.



   SENSITIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT.  The preservation and management of
areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints
such as shallow soils over groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive or
expansive soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding, or occurrence of
flora or fauna in need of special protection.



   SEPTIC TANK.  Any water tight, covered receptacle designed and
constructed to receive the discharge of sewage from a building’s sewer, to
separate solids from liquids, digest organic matters, and store liquids for a
period of detention, and allow the liquids to discharge to a soil treatment
system.



   SETBACK.  The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage
treatment system, or other facility and an ordinary high water level, sewage
treatment system, top of a bluff, road, highway, property line, or other
facility.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM.  A system whereby septic tank effluent is
treated and disposed of below the ground surface by filtration and
percolation through the soil.  This includes those systems commonly known
as: seepage bed; disposal field; and mounds.



   SEWER SYSTEM.  Pipelines, conduits, pumping stations, force main and
all other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for
conducting sewage or industrial or other wastes to a point of ultimate
disposal.



   SHORE IMPACT ZONE.  Land located between the ordinary high water level
of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50% of the
structure setback.



   SHORELAND.  Land located within the following distances from public
waters:  1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond or
flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a
floodplain designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is
greater.  The limits of SHORELANDS may be reduced whenever the waters
involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the
waters for lesser distances and where approved by the Commissioner.



   SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE.  Any archeological site, standing
structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the
National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of
Historic Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under
the provisions of M.S. § 307.08, as it may be amended from time to time.  A
HISTORIC SITE meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either
register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after
review by the Minnesota state archeologist or the Director of the Minnesota
Historical Society.  All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered
to be SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITES.



   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING.  A structure, designated or used for
residential occupancy by 1 family.



   STEEP SLOPES.  Land where agricultural activity or development is
either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness
and the soil characteristics of the site, as mapped and described in
available county soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate
design and construction techniques and farming practices are used in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.  Where specific information
is not available, STEEP SLOPES are lands having slopes over 12%, as measured
over horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, that are not bluffs.



   STREET.  A public way which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property.



   STRUCTURE.  Any building or appurtenance, including decks, but not
including aerial or underground utility lines, such as sewer, electric,
telephone, telegraph, gas lines, towers, poles, or other supporting
facilities.



   SUBDIVIDER.  Any person who undertakes the subdivision of land as
defined herein.  The SUBDIVIDER may be the owner or the authorized agent of
the owner of the land to be subdivided.



   SUBDIVISION.  Land that is divided for the purpose of sale, rent or
lease, including Planned Unit Developments.



   SURFACE WATER-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL USE.  The use of land for commercial
purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral
part of the normal conductance of business.  Marinas, resorts, and
restaurants with transient docking facilities are examples of this use.



   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE.  Any structure which has been erected or moved
onto a lot in order to be utilized for any purpose for a period not to exceed
6 months.  Any structure which is not a TEMPORARY STRUCTURE is considered a
permanent structure and must comply with all provisions of this chapter.



   TOE OF THE BLUFF.  The lower point of a 50 foot segment with an
average slope in excess of 18%.



   TOP OF THE BLUFF.  The higher point of a 50 foot segment with an
average slope in excess of 18%.



   TOWNHOUSE.  A residential building containing two or more dwelling
units with at least one common wall, each unit so oriented as to have all
exits open to the outside. The common wall(s) is/are used to divide the
dwelling units and shall not contain any doors, walkways, or other openings.



   TWINHOME.  A building comprised of no more than two single-family
dwelling units, designed exclusively for, or occupied exclusively by, no more
than two families living independently of each other, with each unit located
on a separate, single parcel of record, divided by a common wall. The common
wall is used to divide the dwelling units and shall not contain any doors,
walkways, or other openings.



   VARIANCE.  A modification or variation of the requirements of this
chapter, authorized by the Board of Adjustment, in accordance with § 151.245.



   WATER RETENTION DEVICE OR AREA.  Any constructed control devise,
ponding area or stormwater pond, or a natural depression or wetland installed
or planned for under a state approved surface water management plan which
provides for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff, with the purpose of
replicating, pre-development hydrologic conditions and retaining sediment
and/or nutrients.



   WATER SUPPLY PURPOSE.  Any use of water for domestic, commercial,
industrial, or agricultural purposes.



   WETLAND.  A surface water feature classified as a wetland in the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 Edition).



   WIND ENERGY FACILITY.  An energy facility that consists of one or more
wind turbines or other such devices and their related or supporting
facilities that produce electric power from wind for onsite use.



   YARD.  The area between any lot line and the setback required
therefrom.



   YARD, FRONT.  A yard extending along the full width of a front lot
line between side lot lines and from the front lot line to the front building
line in depth.  See also lot line, front.



   YARD, REAR.  A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the building.  REAR
YARD depth shall be measured at right angles to the rear line of the lot.



   YARD, SHORELAND.  A yard which is typically a rear yard extending
across a lot and being the required minimum horizontal distance between a
structure and the ordinary high water level of a public water as established
by the city storm drainage plan and Department of Natural Resources.



   YARD, SIDE.  A yard lying between the side line of the lot and the
nearest line of the building and extending from the front yard to the rear
yard, or in the absence of either of front or rear yards, to the front or
rear lot lines.  Side yard width shall be measured at right angles to side
lines of the lot.



   YARD, TRANSITIONAL.  The yard area where a commercial or industrial
district abuts a residential district.



   ZERO LOT LINE.  The location of a building on a lot in a manner that 1
or more of the building’s sides rests directly on a lot line.



   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.  The Zoning Administrator of the City of Park
Rapids, or its authorized agent or representative.



   ZONING LOT.  One or more lots which are used for a single principal
use or planned unit development.



(Prior Code, § 66-1)  (Ord., passed 1994; Am. Ord. 352, passed 8-28-2001;
Am. Ord.417, passed 11-29-2004; Am. Ord. 421, passed 1-25-2005; Am. Ord. 451,
passed 1-24-2006; Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007; Am. Ord. 493, passed
7-24-2007; Am. Ord. 522, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord. 535, passed 1-24-2012;
Am. Ord. 577, passed 9-26-2017)



§ 151.004  JURISDICTION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all land within the City
of Park Rapids and the orderly annexation area in Henrietta Township,
including the shorelands of the public water bodies as classified in §§
151.025et seq. of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 66-2)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007)



§ 151.005  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   The use of any land, the use of shoreland, the size and shape
of lots, the use, size, type, and location of structures on lots, the
installation and maintenance of water supply and waste treatment systems, the
grading and filling of any shoreland area, the cutting of shoreland
vegetation, the erection or placement of signs, and the subdivision of land
shall be in full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.



   (B)   The construction of buildings and sewage treatment systems,
the erection or placement of signs, and grading and filling in shoreland
areas shall require a permit unless specifically excluded by the requirements
of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 66-3)  (Ord. passed 1994)



§ 151.006  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Park Rapids City Council shall bear ultimate
responsibility for the administration and enforcement of this chapter.



   (B)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements, including failure to comply with special
conditions attached to granted conditional uses or variances, shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law.



   (C)   Violations of this chapter can occur regardless of whether or
not a permit is required for a regulated activity pursuant to §§ 151.240et
seq.



(Prior Code, § 66-4)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.007  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the City of Park Rapids and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.



   (B)   Interpretation shall be made by the Zoning Administrator,
subject to appeal to the Board of Adjustment.



(Prior Code, § 66-5)  (Ord. passed 1994)



§ 151.008  SEVERABILITY.



   This chapter and the various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections and
clauses thereof are hereby declared to be severable.  If any part, sentence,
paragraph, section or clause is judged to be unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, the finding
shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 66-6)  (Ord. passed 1994)



§ 151.009  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail.



(Prior Code, § 66-7)  (Ord. passed 1994)



§ 151.010  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter, as amended, shall take effect and be in force on and
after 6-12-2001.



(Prior Code, § 66-8)  (Ord. passed 1994)




SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM




§ 151.025  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The public waters of the City of Park Rapids and the orderly
annexation area in Henrietta Township have been classified below consistent
with the criteria found in Minnesota Regulations, Part 6120.3300, as it may
be amended from time to time, and the protected waters inventory map for the
City of Park Rapids, Minnesota.



   (B)   (1)   The shoreland areas for the water bodies listed in
§§ 151.026 through 151.028 shall be as defined in § 151.003 of this
chapter and as shown on the official zoning map for the City of Park Rapids. 



      (2)   The public waters of the City of Park Rapids and the
orderly annexation area in Henrietta Township have been classified as follows.



(Prior Code, Article II)  (Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007)



§ 151.026  NATURAL ENVIRONMENT LAKES.



 


Lake Identification Number

 

Lake Name




28-250.1

 

Mud Lake




29-167

 

Sill Lake




   



(Prior Code, § 66-31)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007)



§ 151.027  RECREATIONAL DEVELOPMENT LAKES.



 


Lake Identification Number

 

Lake Name



28-242
 
Fish Hook Lake (partial per annexation areas)



 



(Prior Code, § 66-32)  (Ord. passed 11-26-2002)



§ 151.028  TRIBUTARIES.



 


Watercourse

 

From

 

To



Fish Hook River
 
Section 14, (at northern city limits) T140N, R35W
 
Section 36, T140N, R35W (at southern boundary of city limits)



 



(Prior Code, § 66-33)  (Ord. passed 1994)



ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS



§ 151.040  ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The development of the City of Park Rapids and the orderly
annexation area in Henrietta Township, including the shoreland of its public
waters, shall be controlled by means of zoning districts.  The following
zoning districts are created in order to promote the orderly development of
land within the City of Park Rapids and the orderly annexation area in
Henrietta Township.



   (B)   The City of Park Rapids and the orderly annexation area in
Henrietta Township is hereby divided into the following districts which shall
be known by the following respective symbols or names:



 


Symbol

 

Name






C-1

 
Conservation District



AG-1

 
Agricultural District



P

 
Public and Quasi-Public Zone District



R-1

 
Single-Family Residential District



R-1A

 
Single-Family Residential in Annexation Area District



R-2

 
Single, 2-Family and Townhouse District



R-3

 
Medium Density Residential District



R-B

 
Residential-Business Transitional District



B-1

 
Highway Business District



B-2

 
General Business District



I-1

 
Light Industry District



I-2

 
Heavy Industry District



S-O

 
Shoreland Overlay District



IP

 
Industrial Park (See Industrial Park Covenants for regulations.)




 



(Prior Code, § 66-41)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007)



§ 151.041  ZONING MAP.



   The official City of Park Rapids zoning map is located at city hall,
Park Rapids, Minnesota.  This map is hereby adopted by reference.



(Prior Code, § 66-42)  (Ord. passed 1994)



§ 151.042  INTERPRETATION OF ZONING MAP.



   (A)   Where there is uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to
the location of any zoning district boundary line, whether due to scale,
illegibility or lack of detail of the zoning map, the Zoning Administrator
shall make the interpretation and determination.  Any person aggrieved by
the interpretation may appeal the interpretation to the Board of Adjustment
who shall make the final determination, subject to appeal to the District
Court.



   (B)   The Zoning Administrator and the Board of Adjustment, in
interpreting the official zoning map, and in deciding appeals of these
determinations, shall apply the following standards:



      (1)   Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow
lot lines, or to be parallel or perpendicular thereto, or along the
centerline of streets, alleys, rights-of-way, or along the ordinary high
water level of public waters, unless the boundary lines are clearly
designated otherwise on the zoning map;



      (2)   Where zoning district boundary lines are so indicated
that they approximately follow lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to
be the boundary lines; and



      (3)   Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the
location of any zoning district boundary line, unless indicated by dimensions
shown on the zoning map, shall be determined by use of the map scale on the
official zoning map.



(Prior Code, § 66-43)  (Ord. passed 1994)




ZONING DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS




§ 151.055  AVERAGING SETBACKS.



   (A)   (1)   Outside of shoreland areas, in the (R-1)
Single-Family Residential, (R-2) Single, 2-Family and Townhouse Residential,
(R-3) Medium Density Residential, and (R-B) Residential-Business Transitional
Districts, where adjacent structures within the same block have front yard
setbacks different from those required, the front yard minimum setback shall
be the average of the adjacent structures.



      (2)   If there is only 1 adjacent structure, the front yard
minimum setback shall be the average of the required setback and the setback
of the adjacent structure.



      (3)   The front setback required by this section shall not be
less than 20 feet.



      (4)   All setback distances shall be measured from the
appropriate lot line.



   (B)   In shoreland areas, the structure setback from the ordinary
high water level may be modified to equal the average of the principal
structure setback on lots immediately adjacent to the parcel in question
provided that no structure setback shall be established at less than 50 feet
from the ordinary high water level and no structure shall be allowed within a
shore or bluff impact zone.



(Prior Code, § 66-50)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007) 
Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.056  DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS.



   (A)   No more than 1 principal building may be located on 1 lot in a
residential district.



   (B)   In other districts, each principal building shall be a minimum
of 12 feet from any other principal building on the lot.



(Prior Code, § 66-51)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.057  (C-1) CONSERVATION DISTRICT.



   (A)   Statement of intent.  This Conservation District is intended
to maintain the open space area in the center of Park Rapids and to prevent
property losses resulting from inappropriate development of the river
floodplain.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Pasture and cropland consistent with § 151.085;



      (2)   Forestry consistent with § 151.086;



      (3)   Public parks, open space, playgrounds, campgrounds; and



      (4)   Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted
uses. See § 151.115.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be permitted with
the approval of a conditional use permit by the City Council following the
procedures outlined in § 151.240 of this chapter:



      (1)   Single-family residences;



      (2)   State licensed residential facility or a housing with
services establishment registered under M.S. Chapter 144D serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (3)   Licensed daycare facility serving 12 or fewer persons;



      (4)   Group family daycare facility licensed under Minn.
Rules, Parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445, as it may be amended from time to time,
to serve 14 or fewer children;



      (5)   Commercial recreational uses utilizing and dependent
upon the natural amenities of the zoning district and immediate, surrounding
area; and



      (6)   Accessory uses and structures to the above uses.  See
§ 151.115.



 


Yard requirements for C-1 District






 

1-Family

 

Other Uses





Lot area minimum square feet
 
1 acre
 
5 acres


Lot width minimum feet
 
200 feet
 
500 feet


Maximum lot coverage
 
10%
 
5%


Front yard minimum
 
50 feet
 
50 feet


Side yard minimum
 
30 feet
 
30 feet


Rear yard minimum/alley
 
30 feet, 0 feet
 
30 feet, 0 feet


Maximum height
 
25 feet
 
25 feet




 



      (7)   Renewable energy systems (roof mounted active solar
system or wind energy facilities) provided they will not cast shadows and
obstruct solar access or cause wind deflection to a contiguous property.
These apparatuses must also meet all other required zoning and Universal
Building Code regulations including setback and height requirements, be in
compliance with all state and federal regulations, and meet the requirements
of the Park Rapids Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 66-52)  (Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007; Am. Ord. 522,
passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord. 537, passed 4-24-2012)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.058  (AG-1) AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Statement of intent. This district is intended to preserve
areas for low intensity use such as forestry, pasture and cropland, low
density residential development and outdoor recreation, and to serve as a
holding zone for future higher intensity uses when infrastructure is made
available.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Pasture and cropland consistent with § 151.085;



      (2)   Forestry consistent with § 151.086;



      (3)   Nurseries;



      (4)   Single-family housing and duplexes;



      (5)   State licensed residential facility or a housing with
services establishment registered under M.S. Chapter 144D serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (6)   Licensed daycare facility serving 12 or fewer persons;



      (7)   Group family daycare facility licensed under Minn.
Rules, Parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445, as it may be amended from time to time,
to serve 14 or fewer children; and



      (8)   Accessory structures and uses.  See § 151.115.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be permitted with
the approval of a conditional use permit by the City Council following the
procedures outlined in §§ 151.240et seq. of this chapter:



      (1)   Offices of veterinary and animal clinics, kennels, and
public animal shelters;



      (2)   Essential service utility structure and facilities;



      (3)   Home occupations consistent with § 151.146;



      (4)    Parks, campgrounds, golf courses, golf driving ranges,
race tracks, historical sites, museums, and related commercial facilities;



      (5)   Cemeteries, including animal cemeteries; and



      (6)   Treatment plants: water and sewage.



 


Yard Requirements for AG-1 District






 

Unsewered

 

Unsewered

 

Sewered

 

Sewered






 

1-Family

 

Other Uses

 

1-Family

 

Other Uses





Lot area minimum
 

10 acres

 

10 acres

 

2 acres

 

5 acres



Lot width minimum feet
 

600 feet

 

600 feet

 

150 feet

 

500 feet



Maximum lot coverage
 

10%

 

5%

 

10%

 

5%



Front yard minimum
 

50 feet

 

50 feet

 

50 feet

 

50 feet



Side yard minimum
 

30 feet

 

30 feet

 

30 feet

 

30 feet



Rear yard minimum/alley
 

30 feet/0 feet

 

30 feet/0 feet

 

30 feet/0 feet

 

30 feet/0 feet



Maximum height
 

30 feet

 

30 feet

 

30 feet

 

30 feet





 



      (7)   Renewable energy systems (roof mounted active solar
system or wind energy facilities) provided they will not cast shadows and
obstruct solar access or cause wind deflection to a contiguous property.
These apparatuses must also meet all other required zoning and Universal
Building Code regulations including setback and height requirements, be in
compliance with all state and federal regulations, and meet the requirements
of the Park Rapids Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 66-53)  (Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007; Am. Ord. 522,
passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord. 537, passed 4-24-2012)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.059  (P) PUBLIC AND QUASI-PUBLIC ZONE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Statement of intent.  To provide areas for actual or planned
facilities intended to serve the public; to permit orderly and economic
development of public service utilities.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  Cemeteries.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  Uses authorized upon issuance of a
conditional use permit include, but are not limited to, the following:



      (1)    Airport:  Public and/or private;



      (2)   Campground:  Public or private;



      (3)   Public penal and correctional institutions;



      (4)   Public sanitary landfills, transfer stations, and
recycling centers;



      (5)   Essential service utility structures and facilities; and



      (6)   Accessory uses to the above principal uses.  See §
151.115.



 


Yard Requirements for P District




 

Other Uses





Lot area minimum square feet
 

5 acres



Lot width minimum feet
 

300 feet



Maximum lot coverage
 

50%



Front yard minimum
 

100 feet



Side yard minimum
 

30 feet



Rear yard minimum/alley
 

30 feet/0 feet



Maximum height
 

35 feet





 



      (7)   Renewable energy systems (roof mounted active solar
system or wind energy facilities) provided they will not cast shadows and
obstruct solar access or cause wind deflection to a contiguous property.
These apparatuses must also meet all other required zoning and Universal
Building Code regulations including setback and height requirements, be in
compliance with all state and federal regulations, and meet the requirements
of the Park Rapids Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 66-54)  (Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007; Am. Ord. 522,
passed 2-23-2010)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.060  (R-1) SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Statement of intent.  The purpose of the R-1 Single-Family
Residential District is to provide low-density single-family detached
residential dwelling units and directly related complementary uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   State licensed residential facility or a housing with
services establishment registered under M.S. Chapter 144D serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (3)   Licensed daycare facilities serving 12 or fewer persons;



      (4)   Group family daycare facility licensed under Minn.
Rules, Parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445, as it may be amended from time to time,
to serve 14 or fewer children;



      (5)   Public parks and playgrounds; and



      (6)   Accessory uses to permitted principal uses.  See §
151.115.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following are conditional uses in the
R-1 District:  (A conditional use permit is required based upon the
procedures, factors, findings and conditions set forth in and regulated by §
151.243 of this chapter.)



      (1)   Bed and breakfast facilities;



      (2)   Public or semi-public recreational buildings and
educational institutions limited to elementary, middle and senior high
schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and
synagogues;



      (3)   Governmental and public utility buildings and structures
necessary for the health, safety, and general welfare of the community;



      (4)   Boarding or renting rooms to not more than 1 person;



      (5)   Communication transmission and reception systems
including but not limited to free-standing satellite dishes, towers and/or
antennae, provided that any ground cased device is located in the rear yard;
if located on corner lots, no closer than 5 feet from all adjoining lot
lines, and its location is reviewed by local utility companies.  The City
Council may require appropriate conditions as necessary to maintain the
character of the surrounding area;



      (6)   Home occupations consistent with § 151.146.



      (7)   Hospitals and clinics:  exclusive of public or private
institutions for confinement of civil and criminal commitments;



      (8)   Fire stations;



      (9)   Essential service utility structures and facilities;



      (10)   Public golf courses;



      (11)   Residential Planned Unit Developments in the Shoreland
Overlay District; and



      (12)   Accessory uses to the above principal uses.



 


Yard Requirements for R-1 District - Sewered Parcels






 

1-Family

 

Accessory Buildings

 

Other Buildings





Lot area minimum square feet
 
10,500
 
 
 
10,500


Lot width minimum feet
 
100 feet
 
 
 
100 feet


Maximum lot coverage
 
30%
 
30%
 
35%


Front yard minimum
 
35 feet
 
35 feet
 
35 feet


Side yard minimum
 
10 feet
 
10 feet
 
10 feet


Street side yard minimum
 
17.5 feet
 
17.5 feet
 
17.5 feet


Rear yard min./alley
 
30/20 feet
 
10/20 feet
 
30/20 feet


Maximum height
 
30 feet
 
17 feet
 
30 feet




 



 


Yard Requirements for R-1 District - Unsewered Parcels






 

1-Family

 

Accessory Buildings

 

Other Buildings





Lot area minimum square feet
 
10 acres
 
 
 
5 acres


Lot width minimum feet
 
600 feet
 
 
 
600 feet


Maximum lot coverage
 
5%
 
5%
 
5%


Front yard minimum
 
35 feet
 
35 feet
 
35 feet


Side yard minimum
 
10 feet
 
10 feet
 
10 feet


Street side yard minimum
 
17.5 feet
 
17.5 feet
 
17.5 feet


Rear yard min./alley
 
30/20 feet
 
10/20
 
30/20 feet


Maximum height
 
30 feet
 
17 feet
 
30 feet




 



      (13)   Renewable energy systems (roof mounted active solar
system or wind energy facilities) provided they will not cast shadows and
obstruct solar access or cause wind deflection to a contiguous property.
These apparatuses must also meet all other required zoning and Universal
Building Code regulations including setback and height requirements, be in
compliance with all state and federal regulations, and meet the requirements
of the Park Rapids Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 66-55)  (Am. Ord. 376, passed 1-14-2003; Am. Ord. 491,
passed 5-22-2007; Am. Ord. 522, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord. 537, passed
4-24-2012)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.061  (R-1A) SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL IN ANNEXATION AREA DISTRICT.



   (A)   Statement of intent.  The purpose of the R-1A Single-Family
Residential in Annexation Area District is to provide low density
single-family detached residential dwelling units and directly related
complementary uses primarily in previously platted area within the Henrietta
Township Orderly Annexation Area.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   State licensed residential facility or a housing with
services establishment registered under M.S. Chapter 144D serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (3)   Licensed daycare facilities serving 12 or fewer persons;



      (4)   Group family daycare facility licensed under Minn.
Rules, Parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445, as it may be amended from time to time,
to serve 14 or fewer children;



      (5)   Public parks and playgrounds; and



      (6)   Accessory uses to permitted principal uses.  See §
151.115.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following are conditional uses in the
R-1A District:  (A conditional use permit is required based upon the
procedures, factors, findings and conditions set forth in and regulated by §
151.243 of this chapter.)



      (1)   Bed and breakfast facilities;



      (2)   Public or semi-public recreational buildings and
educational institutions limited to elementary, middle and senior high
schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and
synagogues;



      (3)   Governmental and public utility buildings and structures
necessary for the health, safety, and general welfare of the community;



      (4)   Boarding or renting rooms to not more than 1 person;



      (5)   Communication transmission and reception systems
including but not limited to free- standing satellite dishes, towers and/or
antennae, provided that any ground cased device is located in the rear yard;
if located on corner lots, no closer than 5 feet from all adjoining lot
lines, and its location is reviewed by local utility companies.  The City
Council may require appropriate conditions as necessary to maintain the
character of the surrounding area;



      (6)   Home occupations consistent with § 151.146;



      (7)   Hospitals and clinics:  exclusive of public or private
institutions for confinement of civil and criminal commitments;



      (8)   Fire stations;



      (9)   Essential service utility structures and facilities;



      (10)   Public golf courses;



      (11)   Residential planned unit developments in the Shoreland
Overlay District; and



      (12)   Accessory uses to the above principal uses.



 


Yard Requirements for R-1A District - Sewered Parcels






 

1-Family

 

Accessory Buildings

 

Other Buildings





Lot area minimum square feet
 
10,500
 
 
 
10,500


Lot width minimum feet
 
100 feet
 
 
 
100 feet


Maximum lot coverage
 
30%
 
30%
 
35%


Front yard minimum
 
35 feet
 
35 feet
 
35 feet


Side yard minimum
 
10 feet
 
10 feet
 
10 feet


Street side yard minimum
 
17.5 feet
 
17.5 feet
 
17.5 feet


Rear yard min./alley
 
30/20 feet
 
10/20
 
30/20 feet


Maximum height
 
30 feet
 
17 feet
 
30 feet




 



 


Yard Requirements for R-1A District - Unsewered Parcels






 

1-Family

 

Accessory buildings

 

Other buildings





Lot area minimum square feet
 
2.5 acres
 
 
 
52. acres


Lot width minimum feet
 
200 feet
 
 
 
200 feet


Maximum lot coverage
 
5%
 
5%
 
5%


Front yard minimum
 
35 feet
 
35 feet
 
35 feet


Side yard minimum
 
10 feet
 
10 feet
 
10 feet


Street side yard minimum
 
17.5 feet
 
17.5 feet
 
17.5 feet


Rear yard min./alley
 
30/20 feet
 
10/20
 
30/20 feet


Maximum height
 
30 feet
 
17 feet
 
30 feet




 



      (13)   Renewable energy systems (roof mounted active solar
system or wind energy facilities) provided they will not cast shadows and
obstruct solar access or cause wind deflection to a contiguous property.
These apparatuses must also meet all other required zoning and Universal
Building Code regulations including setback and height requirements, be in
compliance with all state and federal regulations, and meet the requirements
of the Park Rapids Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007; Am. Ord. 522, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord. 537,
passed 4-24-2012)



2013 S-10



§ 151.062  (R-2) SINGLE, 2-FAMILY AND TOWNHOUSE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Statement of intent.  This district is intended to provide
low to moderate density single and 2-family dwellings, twinhomes and
townhouses and directly related complimentary uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Twinhomes, with municipal services only;



      (3)   Two-family dwelling units (duplex);



      (4)   State licensed residential facility or a housing with
services establishment registered under M.S. Chapter 144D serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (5)   Licensed daycare serving 12 or fewer persons;



      (6)   Group family daycare facilities licensed under Minn.
Rules, Parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445, as it may be amended from time to time,
to serve 14 or fewer children;



      (7)   Public parks and playgrounds; and



      (8)   Accessory uses to permitted principal uses.  See §
151.115.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following are conditional uses in the
R-2 District, requiring a conditional use permit based upon the procedures,
findings, factors and conditions set forth in and regulated by § 151.243:



      (1)   Bed and breakfast facilities;



      (2)   Public or semi-public recreational buildings and
educational institutions limited to elementary, middle and senior high
schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and
synagogues;



      (3)   Governmental and public utility buildings and structures
necessary for the health, safety, and general welfare of the community;



      (4)   Town homes containing 4 units or less;



      (5)   Mobile and manufactured home parks in accordance with §
151.158;



      (6)   State licensed residential facility serving 7 to 16
persons;



      (7)   Licensed daycare facility serving 13 to 16 persons;



      (8)   Nursing homes, hospitals and clinics:  exclusive of
public or private institutions for confinement of civil and criminal
commitments;



      (9)   Fire stations;



      (10)   Essential service utility structures and facilities;



      (11)   Public golf courses;



      (12)   Boarding or renting rooms to not more than 1 person;



      (13)   Communication transmission and reception systems
including but not limited to free-standing satellite dishes, towers and/or
antennas, provided that any ground cased device is located  in the rear
yard; if located on corner lots no closer than 5 feet from all adjoining lot
lines, and its location is reviewed by local utility companies.  The City
Council may require appropriate conditions as necessary to maintain the
character of the surrounding area;



      (14)   Home occupations consistent with § 151.146;



      (15)   Residential Planned Unit Developments in the Shoreland
Overlay District;



      (16)   Other residential, institutional, or government service
uses determined by the Planning Agency to be of the same general character as
the permitted and conditional uses above and found not to be detrimental to
existing uses and the general public health, safety and welfare; and



      (17)   Accessory uses to the above principal uses (see §
151.115).



 


Yard Requirements for R-2 District - Sewered Parcels




 

1-Family

 

Accessory Building

 

Twin-
home

 

Duplex

 

Town-
houses

 

Other Buildings





Lot area minimum square feet
 
9,000
 
 
 
5,500
 
10,500
 
11,000 first 2 units; 3,500 for each add’l. unit
 
10,500


Lot width minimum feet
 
80 feet
 
 
 
50 feet
 
100 feet
 
50 feet
(end lots)

25 feet (interior lots)
 
100 feet


Maximum lot coverage
 
30%
 
 
 
35%
 
35%
 
40%
 
35%


Front yard minimum
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet


Side yard minimum
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet


Street side yard minimum
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet


Rear yard minimum/alley
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
5 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet


Maximum height
 
30 feet
 
17 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
35 feet
 
30 feet




 



 


Yard Requirements for R-2 District - Unsewered Parcels




 

1-Family

 

Accessory Building

 

Duplex

 

Other Buildings





Lot area minimum square feet
 
10 acres
 
 
 
10 acres
 
10 acres


Lot width minimum feet
 
600 feet
 
 
 
600 feet
 
600 feet


Maximum lot coverage
 
5%
 
 
 
5%
 
5%


Front yard minimum
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet


Side yard minimum
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
10 feet


Street side yard minimum
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet


Rear yard minimum/alley
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
5 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet


Maximum height
 
30 feet
 
17 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet




 



      (18)   Renewable energy systems (roof mounted active solar
system or wind energy facilities) provided they will not cast shadows and
obstruct solar access or cause wind deflection to a contiguous property.
These apparatuses must also meet all other required zoning and Universal
Building Code regulations including setback and height requirements, be in
compliance with all state and federal regulations, and meet the requirements
of the Park Rapids Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance.



      (19)   Recreational camping area which:



         (a)   Meet all Minnesota Department of Health general
requirements for a recreational camping area;



         (b)   Is a minimum of 10 acres;



         (c)   Does not exceed 25% impervious lot coverage.



      (20)   Professional office under 10,000 square feet.



(Prior Code, § 66-56)  (Am. Ord. 376, passed 1-14-2003; Am. Ord. 425,
passed 1-25-2005; Am. Ord. 469, passed 10-24-2006; Am. Ord. 491, passed
5-22-2007; Am. Ord. 522, passed 2-23-2010; Am. Ord. 537, passed 4-24-2012;
Am. Ord. 540, passed 10-9-2012; Am. Ord. 554, passed 4-14-2015)  Penalty,
see § 151.999



§ 151.063  (R-3) MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Statement of intent.  The purpose of the R-3 Medium Density
Residential District is to provide for medium density housing in multiple
family structures and directly related complementary uses. 



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Two-family dwelling units (duplex);



      (3)   Twinhomes, with municipal services only;



      (4)   State licensed residential facility or a housing with
services establishment registered under M.S. Chapter 144D serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (5)   Licensed daycare serving 12 or fewer persons;



      (6)   Group family daycare facilities licensed under Minn.
Rules, Parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445, as it may be amended from time to time,
to serve 14 or fewer children;



      (7)   Multi-family dwellings containing 12 or less units;



      (8)   Townhouses containing 8 units or less;



      (9)   Boarding houses limited to not more than 10 persons;



      (10)   Public parks and playgrounds; and



      (11)   Accessory uses to permitted principal uses; ( See §
151.115).



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following are conditional uses in the
R-3 District, requiring a conditional use permit based upon the procedures,
findings, factors and conditions set forth in and regulated by § 151.243.



      (1)   Bed and breakfast facilities;



      (2)   Public or semi-public recreational buildings and
educational institutions limited to elementary, middle and senior high
schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and
synagogues;



      (3)   Governmental and public utility buildings and structures
necessary for the health, safety, and general welfare of the community;



      (4)   Townhouses containing more than 8 units;



      (5)   Mobile and manufactured home parks in accordance with §
151.158,  manufactured home park standards.



      (6)   State licensed residential facility serving 7 to 16
persons;



      (7)   Nursing homes, hospitals and clinics:  exclusive of
public or private institutions for confinement of civil and criminal
commitments;



      (8)   Fire stations;



      (9)   Essential service utility structures and facilities;



      (10)   Public golf courses;



      (11)   Communication transmission and reception systems
including but not limited to free-standing satellite dishes, towers and/or
antennae, provided that any ground cased device is located in the rear yard;
if located on corner lots no closer than 5 feet from all adjoining lot lines,
and its location is reviewed by local utility companies.  The City Council
may require appropriate conditions as necessary to maintain the character of
the surrounding area;



      (12)   Home occupations consistent with § 151.146;



      (13)   Residential Planned Unit Developments in the Shoreland
Overlay District;



      (14)   Small resort containing 12 or less units;



      (15)   Licensed daycare facility serving over 12 persons;



      (16)   Group family daycare licensed under Minn. Rules, Parts
9502.0315 to 9502.0445, as it may be amended from time to time, to serve over
14 children;



      (17)   Professional services located in existing homes
consistent with § 151.160;



      (18)   Multiple-family greater than 12 units;



      (19)   Other residential, institutional, or government service
uses determined by the planning agency to be of the same general character as
the permitted and conditional uses above and found not to be detrimental to
existing uses and the general public health, safety, and welfare; and



      (20)   Accessory uses to the above principal uses.  See §
151.115.



 


Yard Requirements for R-3 District - Sewered Parcels






 

1-Family

 

Accessory Building   

 

Twinhome

 

Duplex

 

Townhouses

 

Other Buildings   

 

Multi- Family





Lot area minimum square feet
 
8,500
 
 
 
5,500
 
10,500
 
11,000 first 2 units; 3,500 for each add’l. unit
 
10,500
 
10,500 plus 1,500 per unit


Lot width minimum feet
 
75 feet
 
 
 
50 feet
 
100 feet
 
50 feet (end lots) 25 feet (interior lots)
 
100 feet
 
100 feet


Maximum lot coverage
 
30%
 
 
 
35%
 
35%
 
40%
 
35%
 
40%


Front yard minimum
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet


Side yard minimum
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
10 feet


Street side yard minimum
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet


Rear yard minimum/alley
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet


Maximum height
 
30 feet
 
17 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
35 feet
 
45 feet
 
35 feet




Maximum density is 1,500 sq. ft. per unit





 


Yard Requirements for R-3 District - Unsewered Parcels






 

1-Family

 

Accessory Building   

 

Duplex

 

Townhouses   

 

Other Buildings   

 

Multi- Family





Lot area minimum square feet
 
10 acres
 
 
 
10 acres
 
10 acres
 
10 acres
 
10 acres


Lot width minimum feet
 
600 feet
 
 
 
600 feet
 
600 feet
 
600 feet
 
600 feet


Maximum lot coverage
 
5%
 
 
 
5%
 
5%
 
5%
 
5%


Front yard minimum
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet


Side yard minimum
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
10 feet


Street side yard minimum
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet


Rear yard minimum/alley
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet


Maximum height
 
30 feet
 
17 feet
 
30 feet
 
35 feet
 
45 feet
 
35 feet




 



      (21)   Renewable energy systems (roof mounted active solar
system or wind energy facilities) provided they will not cast shadows and
obstruct solar access or cause wind deflection to a contiguous property.
These apparatuses must also meet all other required zoning and Universal
Building Code regulations including setback and height requirements, be in
compliance with all state and federal regulations, and meet the requirements
of the Park Rapids Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 66-57)  (Am. Ord. 376, passed 1-14-2003; Am. Ord. 418,
passed 11-29-2004; Am. Ord. 421, passed 1-25-2005; Am. Ord. 469, passed
10-24-2006; Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007; Am. Ord. 522, passed 2-23-2010;
Am. Ord. 537, passed 4-24-2012)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.064  (R-B) RESIDENTIAL-BUSINESS TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent.  The purpose of the R-B District is to provide for
the transition in land use from residential to low intensity business
allowing for the intermixing for these uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings;



      (2)   Two-family dwelling units (duplex);



      (3)   Twinhomes, with municipal services only;



      (4)   State licensed residential facility or a housing with
services establishment registered under M.S. Chapter 144D serving 6 or fewer
persons;



      (5)   Licensed daycare serving 12 or fewer persons;



      (6)   Group family daycare facilities licensed under Minn.
Rules, Parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445, as it may be amended from time to time,
to serve 14 or fewer children;



      (7)   Public parks and playgrounds;



      (8)   Multi-family dwellings containing 12 or less units;



      (9)   Townhouses containing 8 units or less;



      (10)   Boarding houses limited to not more than 10 persons;



      (11)   Public libraries and museums;



      (12)   Public office buildings (such as city hall, courthouse,
state of Minnesota, and the like.)



      (13)   Professional service offices; and



      (14)   Accessory uses to the above permitted uses; (See §
151.115).



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following are conditional uses in the
R-B District, requiring a conditional use permit based upon the procedures,
findings, factors and conditions set forth in and regulated by § 151.243:



      (1)   Bed and breakfast facilities;



      (2)   Public or semi-public recreational buildings and
educational institutions limited to elementary, middle and senior high
schools; and religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples and
synagogues;



      (3)   Governmental and public utility buildings and structures
necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of the community;



      (4)   Town homes containing more than 8 units;



      (5)   Small resort containing 12 or less units;



      (6)   Licensed daycare facility serving over 12 persons;



      (7)   Group family daycare licensed under Minn. Rules, Parts
9502.0315 to 9502.0445, as it may be amended from time to time, to serve over
14 children;



      (8)   Mobile and manufactured home parks in accordance with §
151.158, manufactured home park standards;



      (9)   State licensed residential facility serving 7 to 16
persons;



      (10)   Communication transmission and reception systems
including but not limited to free-standing satellite dishes, towers and/or
antennae, provided that any ground cased device is located in the rear yard;
if located on corner lots no closer than 5 feet from all adjoining lot lines,
and its location is reviewed by local utility companies.  The City Council
may require appropriate conditions as necessary to maintain the character of
the surrounding area;



      (11)   Home occupations consistent with § 151.146;



      (12)   Residential Planned Unit Developments in the Shoreland
Overlay District;



      (13)   Hospitals, nursing homes, medical offices and clinics,
(exclusive of public or private institutions for confinement of civil and
criminal commitments);



      (14)   Fire stations;



      (15)   Essential service utility structures and facilities;



      (16)   Public golf courses;



      (17)   Public mental health clinic;



      (18)   Seasonal retail establishments located in existing
homes as regulated by § 151.160;



      (19)   Parking facilities for adjacent commercial or multiple
dwelling establishments;



      (20)   Buildings combining residential and non-residential
uses;



      (21)   Other residential, institutional, or government service
uses determined by the planning agency to be of the same general character as
the permitted and conditional uses above and found not to be detrimental to
existing uses and the general public health, safety, and welfare; and



      (22)   Accessory uses to the above principal uses.  See §
151.115.

 


Yard Requirements for R-B District  - Sewered Parcels






 

1-Family

 

Accessory Building

 

Twinhome

 

Duplex

 

Townhouses

 

Other Buildings

 

Multi-family





Lot area minimum square feet
 
10,500
 
 
 
5,500
 
10,500
 
11,000 first 2 units; 3,500 for each add’l. unit
 
10,500
 
10,500 plus 1,500/unit


Lot width minimum feet
 
100 feet
 
 
 
50 feet
 
100 feet
 
50 feet (end lots) 25 feet (interior lots)
 
100 feet
 
100 feet


Maximum lot coverage
 
30%
 
 
 
35%
 
35%
 
40%
 
40%
 
40%


Front yard minimum
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet


Side yard minimum
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
5 feet


Street side yard minimum
 
20 feet
 
20 feet
 
20 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
20 feet
 
15 feet


Rear yard minimum/alley
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
5 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet
 
30 feet/20 feet


Maximum height
 
30 feet
 
17 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
35 feet
 
45 feet
 
45 feet




 



      (23)   Renewable energy systems (roof mounted active solar
system or wind energy facilities) provided they will not cast shadows and
obstruct solar access or cause wind deflection to a contiguous property.
These apparatuses must also meet all other required zoning and Universal
Building Code regulations including setback and height requirements, be in
compliance with all state and federal regulations, and meet the requirements
of the Park Rapids Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 66-60)  (Am. Ord. 421, passed 1-25-2005; Am. Ord. 469,
passed 10-24-2006; Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007; Am. Ord. 522, passed
2-23-2010; Am. Ord. 537, passed 4-24-2012)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.065  (B-1) HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Statement of intent.  This district is established to
accommodate commercial activities convenient to motorists and to accommodate
those businesses which require large areas for off-street parking or
commercial storage, and which generate substantial traffic originating from
outside the community.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are allowed with a duly
authorized permit from the Zoning Administrator:



      (1)   Professional services including banks, medical clinics,
public mental health buildings, postal stations, and offices under 20,000
square feet;



      (2)   Personal services including dry cleaning and laundry
establishments, laundromats, barber and beauty shops, funeral homes, and shoe
repair shops;



      (3)   Equipment services including radio and television shops,
electrical appliance shops;



      (4)   Food services including grocery stores, fruit and
vegetable markets, meat markets, supermarkets, restaurants, delicatessens,
candy shops and bakeries whose products are sold at retail on the premises;



      (5)   Retail businesses (under 20,000 square feet) including
drug stores, hardware stores, stationery and book stores, floral shops,
apparel shops, showrooms for articles to be sold at retail;



      (6)   Hotels and motels;



      (7)   Churches, temples, chapels, synagogues, cathedrals and
shrines;



      (8)   Trade or business schools;



      (9)   Printing shops and newspaper office and sales;



      (10)   Public buildings and utilities, including public works
buildings;



      (11)   Public libraries and museums;



      (12)   Public office buildings (such as city hall, courthouse,
State of Minnesota, and the like);



      (13)   Hospitals and clinics:  exclusive of public or private
institutions for confinement of civil or criminal commitments;



      (14)   Fire stations;



      (15)   Treatment plants:  sewage or water;



      (16)   Group daycares:



      (17)   Gas stations without service, including convenience
stores.  See conditional uses § 151.243; and



      (18)   Accessory uses and structures to the above permitted
uses.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be permitted with
the approval of a conditional use permit by the City Council following the
procedures outlined in §§ 151.240et seq. of this chapter.



      (1)   Any professional service or retail establishment not
specifically allowed as a permitted use in this district;



      (2)   Single and multi-family housing provided that the
dwelling units are located above or behind commercial or office
establishments, subject to the following conditions that any apartment shall
be provided with private access, other than through a business;



      (3)   Entertainment businesses, such as bowling alleys, bars
and theaters;



      (4)   Storage facilities and warehouses;



      (5)   Large retail business and offices over 20,000 square
feet;



      (6)   On and off-sale liquor establishments;



      (7)   Recreational facilities such as bowling alleys,
community centers, private fitness clubs, and the like;



      (8)   Hospitals, nursing homes, care facilities;



      (9)   Private clubs (i.e. VFW, Eagles, and the like);



      (10)   Veterinary and animal clinics, kennels, and public
animal shelters;



      (11)   Manufactured housing sales and rental;



      (12)   Lumberyards, landscape equipment and sales;



      (13)   Contractors such as electrical, plumbing and building
service and sales;



      (14)   Auto, boat, farm machinery and recreational vehicles
repair, service and sales;



      (15)   Shopping centers (mini-malls, and the like);



      (16)   Public fairgrounds;



      (17)   Public golf courses;



      (18)   Other essential service utility structures and
facilities;



      (19)   Light assembly/manufacturing incidental to the primary
use and compatible with existing, permitted uses in this district; and



      (20)   Other uses determined by the planning agency to be of
the same general character as the permitted and conditional uses above and
found not to be detrimental to existing uses and the general public health,
safety, and welfare.



      (21)   Accessory uses and structures to the above
conditionally permitted uses.



 


Yard Requirements for B-1 District






 

All Uses - Unsewered

 

All Uses - Sewered





Lot area minimum
 
1 acre
 
No minimum


Lot width minimum feet
 
200 feet
 
100 feet


Maximum lot coverage
 
50%
 
85%


Front yard minimum
 
15 feet
 
15 feet


Side yard minimum
 
15 feet
 
8 feet


Rear yard minimum/alley
 
10 feet/10 feet
 
10 feet/10 feet


See § 151.156 for off-street parking requirements




 



      (22)   Renewable energy systems (roof mounted active solar
system or wind energy facilities) provided they will not cast shadows and
obstruct solar access or cause wind deflection to a contiguous property.
These apparatuses must also meet all other required zoning and Universal
Building Code regulations including setback and height requirements, be in
compliance with all state and federal regulations, and meet the requirements
of the Park Rapids Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 66-61)  (Am. Ord. 383, passed 5-13-2003; Am. Ord. 421,
passed 1-25-2005; Am. Ord. 437, passed 6-28-2005; Am. Ord. 491, passed
5-22-2007; Am. Ord. 522, passed 2-23-2010)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.066  (B-2) GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Statement of intent.  This district is intended to preserve a
central business district convenient and attractive for a wide range of
retail uses and businesses, government and professional offices, in a setting
conducive to and safe for a high level of pedestrian traffic.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are allowed with a duly
authorized permit from the Zoning Administrator:



      (1)   Professional services including banks, medical clinics,
postal stations, and offices;



      (2)   Personal services including dry cleaning and laundry
establishments, laundromats, barber and beauty shops, funeral homes, and shoe
repair shops;



      (3)   Equipment services including radio and television shops,
electrical appliances shops;



      (4)   Food services including grocery stores, fruit and
vegetable markets, meat markets, supermarkets, restaurants, delicatessens,
candy shops and bakeries whose products are sold at retail on the premises;



      (5)   Retail businesses including drug stores, hardware
stores, stationery and book stores, floral shops, apparel shops, showrooms
for articles to be sold at retail;



      (6)   Public libraries and museums;



      (7)   Public office buildings (such as city hall, courthouse,
State of Minnesota, and the like);



      (8)   Utilities:  public and private utilities in compliance
with all local, state and federal regulations; and



      (9)   Accessory uses and structures.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be permitted with
the approval of a conditional use permit by the City Council following the
procedures outlined in §§ 151.240et seq. of this chapter.



      (1)   Any professional service or retail establishment not
specifically allowed as a permitted use in this district, e.g., plumbing and
heating shops;



      (2)   Churches;



      (3)   Public mental health clinic;



      (4)   Other essential service utility structures and
facilities;



      (5)   Single and multi-family housing provided that the
dwelling units are located above or behind commercial or office
establishments, subject to the following conditions that any apartment shall
be provided with private access, other than through a business; and



      (6)   Entertainment businesses, such as bowling alleys, bars,
theater, and health clubs.



      (7)   Renewable energy systems (roof mounted active solar
system or wind energy facilities) provided they will not cast shadows and
obstruct solar access or cause wind deflection to a contiguous property.
These apparatuses must also meet all other required zoning and Universal
Building Code regulations including setback and height requirements, be in
compliance with all state and federal regulations, and meet the requirements
of the Park Rapids Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance.



   (D)   Accessory structures and uses.



      (1)   These specific requirements, in accordance with the
Minnesota State Building Codes and the State of Minnesota’s Fire Codes,
will be mandatory in the consideration given to individual building permits
for the construction of awnings, marquees, canopies, roof extension, decks
and balconies in the General Business District (B-2 Zone) as per the City of
Park Rapids Building Inspector and the Planning Administrator.



      (2)   Requirements for awnings, marquees, canopies, roof
extensions over the public right-of-way shall be considered a part of the
principal structure and shall, therefore, meet all structure requirements,
unless otherwise noted:



         (a)   Support poles must be a minimum of 8 feet from the
front line and a minimum of 2.5 feet from the curb line.



         (b)   Height shall be a minimum of 8 feet from the
sidewalk (grade) to lowest point, including support beams, and must be
maintained with the exception of non-rigid awnings, which may extend to 7
feet from grade.



         (c)   Lighting must be a minimum of 1 foot candle to be
maintained on the sidewalk area under the structure.  Lighting must remain
on after dark and all night long.



         (d)   Liability becomes the assumption of the property
owner, who will assume all liability for the maintenance of the structures
and must maintain them in a manner that will not jeopardize the health,
safety and welfare of the public.  This includes the removal of snow and ice
build up that may occur during winter months.  Refer to § 92.04 of the city
code.



      (2)   Requirements for decks and balconies shall be considered
a part of the principal structure and shall, therefore, meet all structure
requirements, unless otherwise noted.



         (a)   Support poles must meet standards of awnings,
marquees, canopies, and roof extensions.



         (b)   A deck must not extend beyond the support poles.



         (c)   Decks and balconies shall be for decorative
purposes only.  They are to be non-occupiable except for performing
maintenance on the structure.



 


Yard Requirements for B-2 District




 
All Uses




Lot area minimum
 
2,500 square feet


Lot width minimum feet
 
25 feet


Maximum lot coverage
 
None


Front yard minimum
 
0 feet


Side yard minimum
 
0 feet


Rear yard minimum/alley
 
30 feet/10 feet*


*In the B-2 District, awnings, marquees, canopies, balconies, decks, and roof
extensions shall be allowed to extend beyond the 0 feet front setback, over
the sidewalk (public right-of-way) upon meeting the requirements of this
section




 



(Prior Code, § 66-62)  (Am. Ord. 360, passed 2-12-2002; Am. Ord. 491,
passed 5-22-2007; Am. Ord. 522, passed 2-23-2010)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.067  (I-1) LIGHT INDUSTRY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Statement of intent.  The provisions of the I-1 District are
intended to provide areas for commercial establishments that are relatively
independent from adjacent commercial uses for spin-off business use,
extensive outdoor storage or warehousing, require close access to major
thoroughfares, generate truck traffic, or have similar characteristics which
make them incompatible uses in the B Districts and more appropriate as
neighbors of industrial uses; and, to establish and preserve, in a location
and manner which benefits the city, industrial and related uses which are
relatively free from objectionable influences and therefore are of a nature
that they will not adversely affect surrounding areas.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are allowed with a duly
authorized land use permit from the Zoning Administrator:



      (1)   Light manufacturing and similar-type industrial
operations that are consistent with the purposes of this district.  See §
151.159;



      (2)   Wholesale building material storage yards, and
lumberyards;



      (3)   Contractors and construction service shops, equipment
rental, or storage yards;



      (4)   Wholesale establishments including warehousing and
storage buildings;



      (5)   Commercial laundries and dry-cleaning plants;



      (6)   Veterinary clinics with overnight boarding facilities;



      (7)   Research and testing laboratories, storage buildings,
and distributing stations other than those storing combustible or explosive
fuels, used automobile parts, or other waste or junk;



      (8)   Bulk fuel distributorships, but only if located in the
I-1 District adjacent to South Highway 71;



      (9)   Auto, boat, farm machinery and recreational vehicle
repair, service and sales;



      (10)   Training facilities for high technology and
manufacturing;



      (11)   Vocational schools;



      (12)   Conference centers;



      (13)   Other essential service utility structures and
facilities; and



      (14)   Accessory uses to the above permitted uses.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be permitted with
the approval of a conditional use permit by the City Council following the
procedures outlined in §§ 151.240 of this chapter.



      (1)   Day care facilities as an accessory use to a primary
permitted use; and



      (2)   Adult uses are subject to the following restrictions:



         (a)   Adult use/principal activities must be located at
least 700 radial feet as measured in a straight line from the building upon
which the adult use/principal is located to the property line if the
following:



            1.   Residential zoned property;



            2.   Agricultural lands located in the neighboring
township or in the city that is designated in the comprehensive plan for
residential use;



            3.   A licensed daycare center including those
used as an accessory use;



            4.   A public or private educational facility
classified as elementary, middle, junior high, or senior high;



            5.   A public library;



            6.   A public park;



            7.   A church; and



            8.   Amusement places such as roller rinks, dance
halls, or bowling alleys.



         (b)   Adult use/principal activities is a separate use
and no 2 adult use/principal activities shall be located in the same building
or upon the same property and each use shall be subject to the above.



         (c)   Adult use/principal activities are prohibited in
establishments where liquor is served.



         (d)   Adult use/principal activities are prohibited at
any place or event where minors are permitted.



      (3)   Other uses determined by the planning agency to be of
the same general character as the permitted and conditional uses above and
found not to be detrimental to existing uses and the general public health,
safety, and welfare.



 


Yard Requirements for I-1 District




 
All Uses




Lot area minimum
 
20,000 square feet


Lot width minimum feet
 
100 feet


Maximum lot coverage
 
85%


Front yard minimum
 
35 feet


Side yard minimum
 
15 feet


Rear yard minimum/alley
 
30 feet/10 feet




 



      (4)   Renewable energy systems (roof mounted active solar
system or wind energy facilities) provided they will not cast shadows and
obstruct solar access or cause wind deflection to a contiguous property.
These apparatuses must also meet all other required zoning and Universal
Building Code regulations including setback and height requirements, be in
compliance with all state and federal regulations, and meet the requirements
of the Park Rapids Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 66-63)  (Am. Ord. 352, passed 8-28-2001; Am. Ord. 383,
passed 5-13-2003; Am. Ord. 421, passed 1-25-2005; Am. Ord. 437, passed
6-28-2005; Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007; Am. Ord. 522, passed 2-23-2010) 
Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.068  (I-2) HEAVY INDUSTRY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Statement of intent.  This district is intended to preserve
areas for industrial uses, such as manufacturing, which by their nature are
most appropriately located as neighbors of other industrial uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are allowed with a duly
authorized permit from the Zoning Administrator:



      (1)   Any uses listed in an I-1 District;



      (2)   Heavy equipment contractors that require outside storage
of equipment and construction materials;



      (3)   Manufacturing and similar type of industrial operations
consistent with the purposes of this district that has no adverse
environmental impacts, e.g. noise, odor, and the like;



      (4)   Grain elevators, feed mixing plants, and other
agricultural manufacturing plants; and



      (5)   Accessory uses clearly incidental to the principle use.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be permitted with
the approval of a conditional use permit by the City Council following the
procedures outlined in §§ 151.240 of this chapter.



      (1)   Wrecking and salvage yards when completely enclosed
within a solid fence;



      (2)   Manufacturing of cement, cement products, and concrete;



      (3)   Stockpiling of sand, gravel, or fill dirt;



      (4)   Manufacture or distillation of grain, wood, or vegetable
matter;



      (5)   Any industrial use not specifically listed as a
permitted use in this district, and which by its nature has a minimum impact
of noise, dirt, soot, offensive odors or unsanitary conditions which could be
observed from beyond the specific industrial districts; and



      (6)   Day care facilities.



 


Yard Requirements for I-2 District




 
All Uses




Lot area minimum
 
1 acre


Lot width minimum feet
 
150 feet


Maximum lot coverage
 
85%


Front yard minimum
 
35 feet


Side yard minimum
 
15 feet


Rear yard minimum/alley
 
30 feet/0 feet




 



      (7)   Renewable energy systems (roof mounted active solar
system or wind energy facilities) provided they will not cast shadows and
obstruct solar access or cause wind deflection to a contiguous property.
These apparatuses must also meet all other required zoning and Universal
Building Code regulations including setback and height requirements, be in
compliance with all state and federal regulations, and meet the requirements
of the Park Rapids Municipal Airport Zoning Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 66-64)  (Am. Ord. 437, passed 6-28-2005; Am. Ord. 491,
passed 5-22-2007; Am. Ord. 522, passed 2-23-2010)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.069  (S-O) SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Generally.  The regulations contained in this Overlay
District are intended to guide and govern the wise development of shoreland
of public waters, thus preserving and enhancing the quality of surface
waters, preserving the economic and natural environmental values of
shorelands, and providing for the wise utilization of water and related land
resources in the city. 



   (B)   Lot area requirements.



 


Lot Area Requirements






Unsewered Natural Environment Lakes



 
 

Riparian Lots

 

Nonriparian Lots



Single
 
80,000 square feet
 
80,000 square feet


Duplex
 
120,000 square feet
 
160,000 square feet


Triplex
 
160,000 square feet
 
240,000 square feet


Quad
 
200,000 square feet
 
320,000 square feet



Sewered Natural Environment Lakes



 
 

Riparian Lots

 

Nonriparian Lots



Single
 
  40,000 square feet
 
20,000 square feet


Duplex
 
  70,000 square feet
 
35,000 square feet


Triplex
 
100,000 square feet
 
52,000 square feet


Quad
 
130,000 square feet
 
65,000 square feet



Unsewered Recreational Development Lakes



 
 

Riparian Lots

 

Nonriparian Lots



Single
 
  40,000 square feet
 
40,000 square feet


Duplex
 
  80,000 square feet
 
80,000 square feet


Triplex
 
120,000 square feet
 
120,000 square feet


Quad
 
160,000 square feet
 
160,000 square feet



Sewered Recreational Development Lakes



 
 

Riparian Lots

 

Nonriparian Lots



Single
 
20,000 square feet
 
15,000 square feet


Duplex
 
35,000 square feet
 
26,000 square feet


Triplex
 
50,000 square feet
 
38,000 square feet


Quad
 
65,000 square feet
 
49,000 square feet




 



   (C)   Lot width requirements.



 


Lot Width Requirements






 

Unsewered Natural Environment Lakes

 

Sewered Natural Environment Lakes




Residential Use

 

Riparian Lots

 

Nonriparian Lots

 

Riparian Lots

 

Nonriparian Lots



Single
 
200 feet
 
200 feet
 
125 feet
 
125 feet


Duplex
 
300 feet
 
400 feet
 
225 feet
 
220 feet


Triplex
 
400 feet
 
600 feet
 
325 feet
 
315 feet


Quad
 
500 feet
 
800 feet
 
425 feet
 
410 feet









 


Special Lot Width Requirements for Shoreland Areas of Tributaries




Residential Use

 

Unsewered Lots

 

Sewered Lots



Single
 
100 feet
 
75 feet*


Duplex
 
150 feet
 
115 feet


Triplex
 
200 feet
 
150 feet


Quad
 
250 feet
 
190 feet


*Lot widths may be more restrictive in the underlying zoning district.  The
strictest standard shall apply.



 



 


 

Unsewered Recreational Development Lakes

 

Sewered Recreational Development Lakes




Residential Use

 

Riparian Lot

 

Nonriparian Lots

 

Riparian Lots

 

Nonriparian Lots



Single
 
150 feet
 
150 feet
 
75 feet*
 
75 feet*


Duplex
 
225 feet
 
265 feet
 
135 feet
 
135 feet


Triplex
 
300 feet
 
375 feet
 
195 feet
 
190 feet


Quad
 
375 feet
 
490 feet
 
255 feet
 
245 feet


*Lot widths may be more restrictive in the underlying zoning district.  The
strictest standard shall apply.



 



   (D)   Setback provisions.



 


Structure and other setbacks:*




Structures from




Class of Treatment Public Water

 

Ordinary High Water Level

 

Top of Bluff

 

Unplatted Cemetery

 

Side Lot Line

 

Federal, State or County Road

 

Other Road

 

Sewage System



(from OHWY)
 

Unsewered

 

Sewered

 



 



 

Unsewered

 

Sewered

 

R.O.W.

 

R.O.W.

 





Lakes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Natural Environment
 
150 feet
 
150 feet
 
30 feet
 
50 feet
 
12 feet
 
10 feet
 
50 feet
 
30 feet
 
150 feet


Recreational Development
 
100 feet
 
75 feet
 
30 feet
 
50 feet
 
10 feet
 
10 feet
 
50 feet
 
30 feet
 
75 feet


Rivers:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Tributaries
 
100 feet
 
50 feet
 
30 feet
 
50 feet
 
20 feet
 
10 feet
 
50 feet
 
30 feet
 
75 feet


*Structure setbacks from lot lines for non-riparian lots shall be equal to
the existing setback requirement in the corresponding zoning district that
the lot is located in.




 



      (1)   Averaging setbacks.  In shoreland areas, the structure
setback from the ordinary high water level may be modified to equal the
average of the principal structure setback on lots immediately adjacent to
the parcel in question provided that no structure setback shall be
established at less than 50 feet from the ordinary high water level and no
structure shall be allowed within a shore or bluff impact zone. 



      (2)   Height of structures.  No buildings shall exceed 25
feet in height in shoreland areas.



      (3)   Ground coverage percentage.  The maximum ground
coverage percentage shall be 25% of a lot in all shoreland areas and includes
paving, cement, and all other impermeable surfaces.



      (4)   Distance between buildings.



         (a)   No more than 1 principal building may be located
on 1 lot in a residential district.



         (b)   In other districts, each principal building shall
be a minimum of 12 feet from any other principal building on the lot.



      (5)   Uses without water-oriented needs.  Non-residential
uses without water-oriented needs shall locate on lots without public water
frontage or, if located on lots with public water frontage, shall be either
set back double the ordinary high water level setback or be substantially
screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography assuming summer
leaf-on conditions.



      (6)   Guest cottages in shoreland areas.  In shoreland areas,
1 guest cottage is allowed on lots meeting or exceeding the duplex lot area
and width standards prescribed in divisions (B) and (C) of this section,
provided the following minimum standards are met:



         (a)   A guest cottage may only be allowed as an
accessory structure to a conforming single-family dwelling;



         (b)   For lots exceeding the minimum lot dimensions of
duplex lots, the guest cottage shall be located within the smallest
duplex-sized lot that could be created including the principal unit;



         (c)   A guest cottage must not cover more than 500
square feet of land surface and must not exceed 15 feet in height; and



         (d)   A guest cottage must be located and designed to
reduce its visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by
vegetation, topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming summer leaf-on
conditions.



   (E)   Design criteria for structures in shoreland areas.  In
shoreland areas, all structures must be placed, and all lots developed, in
accordance with the following design criteria:



      (1)   Structures.  Structures must be placed in accordance
with any floodplain regulations applicable to the site.  Where these
controls do not exist, the elevation to which the lowest floor, including
basement, is placed or flood-proofed must be determined as follows.



         (a)   For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at least 3
feet above the highest known water level, or 3 feet above the ordinary high
water level, whichever is higher;



         (b)   For rivers and tributaries, by placing the lowest
floor at least 3 feet above the flood of record, if data are available.  If
data are not available, by placing the lowest floor at east 3 feet above the
ordinary high water level, or by conducting a technical evaluation to
determine the effects of proposed construction upon flood stages and flood
flows and to establish a flood protection elevation.  Under all 3
approaches, technical evaluations must be done by a qualified engineer or
hydrologist consistent with Statewide Floodplain Management Rules parts
6120.5000 to 6120.6200.  If more than 1 approach is used, the highest flood
protection elevation determined shall be used for placing structures and
other facilities.



      (2)   Stairways, lifts and landings.  Stairways and lifts are
the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving
access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas.  Stairways,
lifts, and landings must meet the following design requirements:



         (a)   Stairways and lifts must not exceed 4 feet in
width on residential lots.  Wider stairways may be used for commercial
properties, public open-space recreational properties, and Planned Unit
Developments if specifically authorized in a conditional use permit;



         (b)   Landings for stairways and lifts on residential
lots must not exceed 32 square feet in area.  Landings larger than 32 square
feet may be allowed for commercial properties, public open-space recreational
properties, and Planned Unit Developments if specifically authorized in a
conditional use permit;



         (c)   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways,
lifts, or landings;



         (d)   Stairways, lifts, or landings may be either
constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground
provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil
erosion;



         (e)   Stairways, lifts, or landings must be located in
the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface
of the public waters assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical;
and



         (f)   Facilities such as ramps, lifts or mobility paths
for physically handicapped persons are also allowed as a conditional use
(variance) for achieving access to shore areas, provided that the dimensional
and performance standards of ADAG, Americans with Disabilities Act
Guidelines, are complied with.



      (3)   Accessory structures and facilities.  All accessory
structures and facilities must meet or exceed structure setback standards.



      (4)   Bluff impact zones.  Structures or facilities, except
stairways and landings, must not be placed within bluff impact zones.



      (5)   Significant historic sites in shoreland areas.  No
structure may be placed on a significant historic site in a shoreland area in
a manner that affects the value of the site unless adequate information about
the site has been removed and deposited in a public repository.



      (6)   Steep slopes in shoreland areas.



         (a)   The Zoning Administrator shall evaluate possible
soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before
issuing a permit for the construction of sewage treatment systems, roads,
driveways, structures or other improvements on steep slopes.



         (b)   When determined necessary, conditions must be
attached to issue permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing
vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed
from the surface of public waters, assuming summer leaf-on conditions.



      (7)   Subdivisions of duplexes, triplexes, and quads on
natural environment lakes.  Subdivisions of duplexes, triplexes, and quads
on natural environment lakes must also meet the following standards:



         (a)   Each building must be set back at least 200 feet
from the ordinary high water level;



         (b)   Each building must have common sewage treatment
and water systems in 1 location and serve all dwelling units in the building;



         (c)   Watercraft docking facilities for each lot must be
centralized in 1 location and serve all dwelling units in the building; and



         (d)   No more than 25% of a lake’s shoreline may be in
duplex, triplex, or quad developments.



      (8)   See §§ 151.100et seq. for non-conformities and
substandard lots of record in a shoreland district.



(Prior Code, § 66-66)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 375, passed 11-26-2002;
Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007)  Penalty, see § 151.999



GENERAL SHORELAND REQUIREMENTS



§ 151.080  VEGETATIVE ALTERATIONS.



   Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for agricultural and forest
management uses as regulated by §§ 151.085 and 151.086 of this chapter, is
allowed subject to the following standards.



   (A)   Intensive vegetative clearing within the shore and bluff
impact zones and on steep slopes is not allowed.  Intensive vegetative
clearing for forest land conversion to another use outside of these areas is
allowed as a conditional use provided an erosion control and sedimentation
plan is developed and approved by the Hubbard Soil and Water Conservation
District;



   (B)   In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited
clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting and pruning, and trimming of trees
is allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal dwelling site
and to accommodate the placement of stairways, lifts and landings, picnic
areas, access paths, livestock watering areas, and beach and watercraft
access areas, provided that:



      (1)   The screening of structures, vehicles, or other
facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is
not substantially reduced;



      (2)   Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is
preserved; and



      (3)   The above provisions are not applicable to the removal
of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards.



   (C)   Vegetative alterations necessary for the construction of
structures and sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and
parking areas regulated by § 151.082 of the chapter are exempt from the
vegetative alteration standards prescribed in the section.



(Prior Code, § 66-71)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.081  TOPOGRAPHIC ALTERATIONS/GRADING AND FILLING.



   Topographic alterations, including grading or filling, shall not be
allowed without a use permit from the Zoning Administrator, with the
following exceptions.



   (A)   The cumulative movement of less than 10 cubic yards of
material on steep slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones may be
undertaken without a permit.



   (B)   The cumulative movement of less than 50 cubic yards of
material outside of steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones may be
undertaken without a permit.



   (C)   Grading and filling and excavations necessary for the
construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways under
validly issued construction permits for these facilities do not require the
issuance of a separate grading and filling permit.  However, the grading and
filling standards prescribed in this section must be incorporated into the
issuance of permits for the construction of structures, sewage treatment
systems, and driveways.



   (D)   Public roads and parking areas must meet the requirements
prescribed in § 151.082 of this chapter.



   (E)   The following considerations and conditions must be adhered to
for the issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits,
conditional use permits, variances, and subdivision approvals:



      (1)   Grading and filling in any type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8
wetland must be evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity
would affect the functional qualities of the wetland, including: sediment and
pollutant trapping and retention; storage of surface runoff to prevent or
reduce flood damage; fish and wildlife habitat; recreational use; shoreline
or bank stabilization; and note worthiness, including special qualities such
as historic significance, and critical habitat for endangered plants and
animals.  This evaluation must also include a determination of whether the
wetland alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews, or approvals by
other local, state or federal agencies such as a watershed district, the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, or the United States Army Corps of
Engineers.  The applicant will be so advised by the Zoning Administrator;



      (2)   Alterations must be conducted in a manner that ensures
that only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time
possible;



      (3)   Mulches or similar materials must be used, where
necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetative cover
must be established as soon as possible;



      (4)   Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments
before they reach any surface water feature must be used;



      (5)   Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion
control standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the
Hubbard Soil and Water Conservation District and the United States Soil
Conservation Service;



      (6)   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a
manner that creates an unstable slope;



      (7)   Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep
slopes must be reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope
stability and must not create finished slopes of 30% or greater;



      (8)   Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff
impact zones;



      (9)   Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of
public waters must first be authorized by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources under M.S. Chapter 103 G, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (10)   Alterations of topography must only be allowed if they
are accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect
adjacent or nearby properties; and



      (11)   Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated
grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if
the finished slope does not exceed 3 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical, the
landward extent of the riprap is within 10 feet of the ordinary high water
level does not exceed 3 feet.



   (F)   Excavating where the intended purpose is connection to public
water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors, requires a
conditional use permit from the Park Rapids City Council.  The conditional
use permit shall only be granted after the Commissioner of Natural Resources
has approved the proposed connection to public waters.



(Prior Code, § 66-72)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.082  PLACEMENT AND DESIGN OF ROADS, DRIVEWAYS, RECREATIONAL TRAILS
AND PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   Public and private roads, recreational trails and parking
areas must be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography
to achieve maximum screening from view from public waters.  Documentation
must be provided by a qualified individual that all roads and parking areas
are designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters
consistent with the technical guides of the Hubbard Soil and Water
Conservation District, or other technical materials.



   (B)   Roads, driveways, recreational trails and parking areas must
meet structure setbacks and must not be placed within bluff and shore impact
zones when other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist.  If
no alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas, but must be
designed to minimize adverse impacts.



   (C)   Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads,
and access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones
provided that the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this
section are met.  For private facilities, the grading and filling provisions
prescribed in § 151.081 (D) of this chapter must be met.



(Prior Code, § 66-73)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.083  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands, and
vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and retain
stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters.



   (B)   (1)   Development must be planned and conducted in a manner
that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion
potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes.



      (2)   Disturbed areas must be stabilized and protected as soon
as possible and facilities or methods used to retain sediment on the site.



   (C)   (1)   When development density, topographic features, and
soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle
stormwater runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of
constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices,
dikes, waterways and ponds may be used.



      (2)   Preference must be given to designs using surface
drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and manmade
materials and facilities.



   (D)   When constructed facilities are used for stormwater
management, documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that
they are designed and installed consistent with the field office technical
guide of the Hubbard Soil and Water Conservation District.



   (E)   Newly constructed stormwater outfalls to public water must
provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface
debris before discharge.



   (F)   Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed 25% of the
lot area.



(Prior Code, § 66-74)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.084  SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, PUBLIC AND
SEMI-PUBLIC USES.



   (A)   Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public,
or semipublic uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public
waters may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters. 
Those uses with water-oriented needs must meet the following standards:



      (1)   In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits,
setbacks, and other dimensional provisions of this chapter, the uses must be
designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas
and structures;



      (2)   Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for
patrons must centralize these facilities and design them to avoid
obstructions of navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the
need; and



      (3)   Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may
use signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to
the following general standards:



         (a)   No advertising signs or supporting facilities for
signs may be placed in or upon public waters.  Signs conveying information
or safety messages may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority
or under a permit issued by the Hubbard County Sheriff;



         (b)   Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the
shore impact zone.  The signs must not be located higher than 10 feet above
the ground, and must not exceed 32 square feet in size.  If illuminated by
artificial lighting, the lights shall be shielded or directed to prevent
illumination out across public waters; and



         (c)   Other outside lighting may be located within the
shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate
potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent
direct illumination out across public waters.  This section does not
preclude the use of navigational lighting.



   (B)   Uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or
parcels without public water frontage, or, if located on lots with public
water frontage, must either be set back double the normal setback from the
ordinary high water level or be substantially screened from view from the
water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.



(Prior Code, § 66-75)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007) 
Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.085  SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR AGRICULTURAL USES.



   (A)   General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture,
truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if
steep slopes and bluff impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or
operated under an approved conservation plan consistent with the field office
technical guides of the Hubbard Soil and Water Conservation District or the
United States Soil Conservation Service.  The shore impact zone for parcels
with permitted agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and 50
feet from the ordinary high water level, or half of the structure setback
from the ordinary high water level within the particular management district,
whichever is greater.



   (B)   Animal feedlots must meet the following standards:



      (1)   New feedlots must not be located in the shoreland of
watercourses or in bluff impact zones and must meet a minimum setback of 300
feet from the ordinary high water level of all public water basins;



      (2)   Modifications or expansions to existing feedlots that
are located within 300 feet from the ordinary high water level or within a
bluff impact zone are allowed if they do not further encroach into the
existing ordinary high water level setback or encroach on bluff impact zones;
and



      (3)   Feedlots must comply with Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency Rules Chapter 7020, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   Agricultural practices and associated uses must be conducted
consistent with the provisions of Agricultural and Water Quality, Best
Management Practices for Minnesota, a copy of which is on file at city hall,
Park Rapids, Minnesota.



(Prior Code, § 66-76)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.086  SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR FOREST MANAGEMENT.



   The harvesting of timber and associated reforestation must be conducted
consistent with the provisions of the Minnesota Nonpoint Source Pollution
Assessment-Forestry and the provisions of Water Quality in Forest Management
Best Management Practices in Minnesota, a copy of which is on file at city
hall, Park Rapids, Minnesota.



(Prior Code, § 66-77)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.087  SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR EXTRACTIVE USES.



   (A)   An extractive use site development and restoration plan must
be developed, approved, and followed over the course of operation of the
site.  The plan must address dust, noise, possible pollutant discharges,
hours and duration of operation, and anticipated vegetation and topographic
alterations.  The plan must also identify actions to be taken during
operation to mitigate adverse environmental impacts, particularly erosion,
and must clearly explain how the site will be rehabilitated after extractive
activities end.



   (B)   Processing machinery must be located consistent with setback
standards for structures from the ordinary high water level of public water
and from bluffs.



   (C)   Mining of metallic minerals and peat, as defined in M.S. §§
93.44 to 93.51, as it may be amended from time to time, shall be a permitted
use provided the provisions of the specified sections of state statutes are
satisfied.



(Prior Code, § 66-78)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



NON-CONFORMITIES AND SUBSTANDARD LOTS OF RECORD



§ 151.100  STATEMENT OF INTENT.



   (A)   All legally established non-conformities existing as of the
date of enactment of this chapter may continue provided that they are managed
in accordance with applicable state statutes and the following standards.



   (B)   It is the intent of this subchapter to regulate non-conforming
uses of structures and lots and to provide for their gradual elimination.



(Prior Code, § 66-101)  (Ord. passed 2001)



§ 151.101  NON-CONFORMING USES.



   (A)   Any use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this
subchapter may be continued at the size and in a manner of operation existing
upon such date except as hereinafter specified.



   (B)   If such nonconforming use ceases for a continuous period of 1
year, any subsequent use of the building shall be in conformity to the use
regulations specified by this subchapter for the district in which such
building is located.



   (C)   Any structure which represents a nonconforming use shall not
be rebuilt or reconstructed to its former use and physical dimensions if
damaged 50% or more of the current market value by fire, wind, earthquake,
explosion, or any other casualty, according to the estimate of the Building
Inspector and approved by the Planning Commission (estimates shall be based
on current market value and replacement costs); and no building permit has
been applied for within 180 days of when the property is damaged.



   (D)   Non-conforming uses shall not be expanded, changed, enlarged,
or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity.



   (E)   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing
or related to a lawful nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary
non-structural repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or
intensify the nonconforming use.



   (F)   Nonconforming use shall not be moved to any other part of the
parcel of land upon which the same was conducted on the effective date of
this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 66-102)  (Ord. passed 2001; Am. Ord. 376, passed 1-14-2003;
Am. Ord. 454, passed 2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.102  NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Any structure lawfully existing upon the effective date of
Ord. 454 may be continued at the size and in a manner of operation upon such
date except as hereinafter specified.



   (B)   An addition or alteration to the outside dimensions of a
non-conforming principal structure shall be allowed by building permit
provided that:



      (1)   The principal structure is connected to city sewer
pursuant to § 151.130;



      (2)   All other provisions (dimensional requirements, etc.) of
this section are complied with; and



      (3)   Any addition or alteration to the outside dimensions of
a non-conforming structure that cannon meet these provisions must be
authorized by a variance pursuant to § 151.245.



   (C)   Expansion of a principal building found to be non-conforming
only by reason of height and yard setback may be allowed provided the
expansion does not increase the non-conformance or create a new
non-conformance.



   (D)   No additions shall be allowed to non-conforming accessory
structures.



(Prior Code, § 66-105)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 454, passed
2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.103  SUBSTANDARD LOTS OF RECORD.



   (A)   All lots of record existing as of the effective date of this
chapter, with the exception of lots located in shoreland areas, may be used
for the erection of a structure without meeting the minimum lot area and lot
width requirements provided that all other requirements of this chapter are
complied with.



   (B)   (1)   All lots of record in shoreland areas existing as of
the effective date of this chapter, that do not meet the minimum lot area and
lot width requirements, may be allowed as building sites without a variance
from lot size requirements provided that:



         (a)   The use is permitted in the zoning district;



         (b)   The lot has been in separate ownership from
abutting lands at all times since it became substandard;



         (c)   The lot was created compliant with official
controls in effect at that time; and



         (d)   The sewage treatment and setback requirements of
this chapter are met.



      (2)   However, a variance from setback requirements must be
obtained before any use, sewage treatment system, or building permit is
issued for a shoreland lot that does not meet setback requirements.  In
evaluating the variance request, the Board of Adjustment shall consider
sewage treatment and water supply capabilities or constraints of the lot, and
shall deny the variance if adequate facilities cannot be provided.



      (3)   If, in a group of 2 or more contiguous shoreland lots
under the same ownership, any individual lot does not meet the minimum lot
width or lot area requirements specified in this chapter, the lot shall not
be considered as a separate parcel of land for the purposes of sale or
development.  The substandard lots of record in shoreland areas must be
combined with 1 or more contiguous shoreland lots so that they equal 1 or
more parcels of land, each meeting the requirements of lot area or lot width
to the extent possible.



(Prior Code, § 66-106)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.104  (RESERVED).



ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES



§ 151.115  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   In residential districts, the maximum size of an accessory
building shall be based on a lot-building area density ratio.  For every 10
square feet of lot area, 1 square foot of building area is allowed.



   (B)   Private garages on residential properties are intended for the
storage of private passenger vehicles of the family resident upon the
premises; in which no business, service or industry is carried on.  An
exception is made for home occupations that meet the requirements of §
151.146.



   (C)   No accessory building for a multi-family dwelling shall exceed
3,000 square feet, without a conditional use permit.



   (D)   All accessory buildings attached to the principal building on
a lot, shall be made structurally a part thereof and shall comply in all
respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the principal
building.



   (E)   All detached accessory buildings shall be located in the side
or rear yards, and shall comply with all of the requirements applicable to
the accessory structure in a residential district.



   (F)   (1)   In business and industrial districts, accessory
buildings and uses may occupy any of the ground area which the principal
building is permitted to occupy.



      (2)   Accessory buildings such as buildings for parking
attendants, gate houses and transformer buildings, may be located in the
front or side yard in District I-1 and B-1.



      (3)   Parking of automobiles and other motor vehicles is
permitted in the front and side yards in District I-1 and B-1 provided a
greenbelt 8 feet in width is provided.



   (G)   No additions shall be allowed to nonconforming accessory
structures



(Prior Code, § 66-121)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 454, passed 2-28-2006;
Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007)  Penalty, see § 151.999




SANITATION STANDARDS




§ 151.130  (RESERVED).



§ 151.131  (RESERVED).



§ 151.132  (RESERVED).



§ 151.133  (RESERVED).



§ 151.134  WATER SUPPLY STANDARDS.



   (A)   The City of Park Rapids municipal water system must be used
where available and within 200 feet of a structure.



   (B)   All public or private supplies of water for domestic purposes
must meet or exceed the standards for water quality of the Minnesota
Department of Health.



   (C)   Private wells must be located, constructed, maintained, and
sealed in accordance with the Water Well Construction Code of the Minnesota
Department of Health.



(Prior Code, § 66-135)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



§ 151.145  DETERMINATION OF CONFORMITY.



   (A)   (1)   The performance standards established in this
subchapter are designed to encourage a high standard of development by
providing assurance that neighboring land uses will be compatible.



      (2)   These standards are also designed to prevent and
eliminate those conditions that cause blight.



   (B)   (1)   Before any building permit is issued, the Zoning
Administrator shall determine whether the proposed use will conform to the
performance standards prescribed in this subchapter.



      (2)   The applicant shall supply information necessary to
demonstrate conformance.



      (3)   This information may include description of equipment to
be used, hours of operation, method of refuse disposal, type and location of
exterior storage, or other reasonable information as requested by the Zoning
Administrator.



(Prior Code, § 66-146)  (Ord. passed 1994)



§ 151.146  HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   In any zoning district where home occupations are allowed, the uses
must comply with the following provisions.



   (A)   The home occupation shall not occupy an area in excess of 25%
of the total ground floor area of the principal or accessory structures. 



   (B)   Substantial interior or exterior alteration of a dwelling unit
to accommodate a home occupation shall not be permitted.



   (C)   Home occupations which will create odor, noise, electrical
glare, dust, or vibrations noticeable from outside of the dwelling shall not
be permitted.



   (D)   No sign shall be allowed with the exception of 1
non-illuminated name plate measuring not more than 4 square feet in size.



   (E)   Home occupations shall be conducted by the permanent occupants
of the dwelling in which the use is located and not more than 1 additional
person.



   (F)   Home occupations shall be carried on wholly within the
principal or accessory structure, there shall be no exterior storage of
materials, and no exterior indication of the home occupation or variation
from the residential character of the structure.



   (G)   A conditional use permit issued by the City Council for a home
occupation shall not transfer with the change of ownership of the dwelling.



(Prior Code, § 66-147)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.147  STANDARDS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS.



   The following standards apply to all single-family dwelling units,
unless specifically exempted.



   (A)   All single-family dwellings shall have a minimum floor area of
800 square feet.



   (B)   All single-family dwelling units, except mobile homes in
mobile home parks, shall be attached to a permanent foundation with frost
protection as per state building code.



   (C)   All single-family dwelling units, except mobile homes in
mobile home parks, shall have a minimum width of 20 feet and meet current
codes.



(Prior Code, § 66-148)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.148  TEMPORARY DWELLINGS.



   No temporary dwelling may be erected or occupied on any parcel of land
with the following exceptions.



   (A)   Travel and motor home coaches may be occupied for a period of
not more than 2 weeks in 6 month period.



   (B)   Temporary residence in a basement or foundation structure
while awaiting the completion of the total structure may be allowed for a
period not to exceed 12 months.



(Prior Code, § 66-149)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.149  EXTERIOR STORAGE.



   (A)   In all Residential Districts, all materials and equipment
shall be stored within a building or be fully screened so as not to be
visible from adjoining properties, except for the following:



      (1)   Laundry and recreational equipment;



      (2)   Construction and landscaping materials currently being
used on the premises;



      (3)   Agricultural equipment and materials if these are used
or are intended for use on the premises;



      (4)   Off-street parking of passenger automobiles and pick-up
trucks if current license is on the vehicle and is operative; and



      (5)   Boats and trailers, less than 20 feet in length, are
permissible if stored in rear yard more than 10 feet distance from property
line.



   (B)   In other districts, no materials or equipment may be stored
outside except those directly related to the principal use or those being
used for construction on the premises.



(Prior Code, § 66-150)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.150  MOVED IN STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Before any dwelling unit or other principal structure not
constructed entirely of new material is moved onto a parcel of land, every
structure shall be brought into compliance with the standards set forth for
new construction in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code
Standards and other Zoning Code requirements as applicable.



   (B)   This requirement shall apply to the moving of pre-existing
buildings and is not meant to apply to new buildings manufactured off-site
and moved to a permanent site in sections or as complete structures.



(Prior Code, § 66-151)  (Ord. 437, passed 6-28-2005)  Penalty, see §
151.999



§ 151.151  SCREENING AND/OR FENCING.



   (A)   Screening shall be required in a residential zone where:



      (1)   Any off-street parking area containing more than 6
parking spaces and is within 30 feet of an adjoining residential zone; and



      (2)   Where the driveway to a parking area of more than 6
parking spaces is within 15 feet of an adjoining residential zone.



   (B)   No perimeter fence or screening shall exceed 6 feet in height
in residential areas, 8 feet in height in industrial or commercial areas, or
4 feet in height in the front yard.  All fences must maintain a 30 foot
sight triangle along the right-of-way when placed on corner lots.



   (C)   Fencing or screening required by this section or the City
Council shall be either a solid fence or dense vegetative cover at least 6
feet but not greater than 8 feet in height.



   (D)   All fences must be located entirely upon the private property
of the person constructing the fence and the property owner must leave enough
setback to allow maintenance of both sides of the fence.



   (E)   All posts or supports shall face inward toward the property
being fenced.  The good or finished side shall face the neighboring property
or the public right-of-way.



   (F)   All fences shall be made of durable, weather treated or
resistant material, and kept in a condition so as not to become a private or
public nuisance. Fence material used shall be of common residential fence
material and shall not consist of salvaged materials not traditionally used
for fencing i.e. pallets, tires, doors, plywood, tarps or similar materials.



   (G)   Above ground perimeter electrified and barbed wire fences are
prohibited in residential districts except those associated with a permitted
agricultural use.



   (H)   Fences abutting an alley must leave enough setback as to not
impede with snow removal.



   (I)   Any fence erected on a tract of land subject to an easement
for the construction, maintenance, operations, or replacement of any water,
sanitary or storm sewer, gas line, electric power, telephone, or other
utility poles, or other cables or lines shall be designed and constructed to
be readily removable to permit the use of the easement. Such fences shall be
subject to removal by request whenever necessary to permit access. The cost
of removal or replacement shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
fence.



   (J)   Fences shall be erected and maintained so as to avoid limiting
or obstructing the flow of water in natural drainage courses, or drainage
ways created within easements.



(Prior Code, § 66-152) (Am. Ord. 536, passed 3-27-2012; Am. Ord. 565, passed
8-23-2016)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.152  MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   All structures shall be properly maintained in a clean and
acceptable manner so as not to constitute a menace to the public health,
safety, convenience, general welfare, property values, and aesthetics.



   (B)   All landscaping shall be properly maintained so as to preserve
planting in a live state and free of noxious weeds.



(Prior Code, § 66-153)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.153  TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   (A)   The traffic generated by any use shall be channelized and
controlled in a manner that will avoid congestion on the public streets,
traffic hazards and excessive traffic through residential areas, particularly
truck traffic.



   (B)   Internal traffic shall be so regulated as to insure its safe
and orderly flow.



   (C)   Traffic into and out of business and industrial areas shall in
all cases be forward moving with no backing onto streets.



(Prior Code, § 66-154)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.154  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that
results in additional water run-off, causing flooding, or erosion on adjacent
properties.



   (B)   Site plans for new development of any kind, including any
redevelopment that results in additional impervious surface, shall provide
on-site measures for storm water quantity control and storm water quality
management sufficient to reduce the impacts of the development by, at a
minimum, maintaining pre-development conditions. When applicable, a permit
from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency shall be obtained and all
appropriate runoff and treatment requirements shall also apply.



(Prior Code, § 66-155)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 548, passed
4-22-2014)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.155  DRIVEWAYS.



   (A)   Residential lots shall be required to maintain at least a 3
foot side yard at driveways.



   (B)   Driveways in other districts must be located as to allow for
orderly traffic flow and at least 30 feet from any intersection.



(Prior Code, § 66-156)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 548, passed
4-22-2014)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.156  PARKING STANDARDS, TRAFFIC CONTROL, AND STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   Minimum off-street parking stall requirements. In all zoning
districts, with the exception of the B-2 District, off-street parking
facilities for employees and patrons of the buildings or structures erected
after the effective date of this chapter shall be provided as herein provided.



      (1)   Residential uses including single family, multiple
family, and other similar residential uses. One and one-half (1.5) parking
stall for each dwelling unit and 1 parking stall for each efficiency unit.



      (2)   Hospitals, assisted care facilities, senior housing,
state licensed residential facilities and similar uses. One stall per
employee on largest shift plus .5 stalls per dwelling unit or patient bed.



      (3)   Hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, resorts,
campgrounds, and similar uses. One stall per room or site for rent plus 1
stall per employee on largest shift. Additional auxiliary uses (bars,
restaurants, event facilities, retail, and the like) will be evaluated for
additional parking requirements and based on the parking requirements for
those uses.



      (4)   Office, retail, clinics, minor repair shops, and similar
uses. One parking stall per 250 square feet of floor area.



      (5)   Restaurant, bars, and entertainment uses. One parking
stall per 150 square feet of floor area.



      (6)   Schools, churches, theatres, funeral homes, and other
similar institutional and governmental uses. Parking stalls shall be provided
in sufficient quantities to accommodate the needs of each specific use
without causing inconvenience to nearby properties, interfering with the flow
of traffic, or negatively impacting public safety.



      (7)   Outdoor recreational facilities. Parking stalls shall be
provided in sufficient quantities to accommodate the needs of each specific
use without causing inconvenience to nearby properties, interfering with the
flow of traffic, or negatively impacting public safety.



      (8)   Open sales lots, outdoor storage, and warehouses. One
parking stall per 2,000 square feet of floor or display area.



      (9)   Industrial uses, contractors yards, indoor storage
facilities, wholesale and manufacturing (non-retail). One parking stall per
500 square feet of floor area. Parking for additional auxiliary uses (office
space, open sales lots, warehousing, retail, and the like) shall be provided
in sufficient quantities to accommodate the needs of each specific use
without causing inconvenience to nearby properties, interfering with the flow
of traffic, or negatively impacting public safety.



   (B)   Exemptions and exceptions.



      (1)   Any existing non-conforming residential use that is
converted into a conforming permitted or conditional commercial use may
exempt up to the first 5 required parking stalls of this section, provided
there is sufficient on-street parking adjacent to the property to meet the
needs of the specific use without causing inconvenience to nearby properties,
interfering with the flow of traffic, or negatively impacting public safety.



      (2)   Any commercial use in non-residential districts that are
adjacent to streets that allow on-street parking may factor the on-street
parking spaces into their required stalls at a rate of 1 space per 30' of
street frontage.



   (C)   Parking lot dimensions for full sized cars.



 


Parking Lot Dimensions for Full Sized Cars




Angle (in degrees)

 

Minimum Width of Space at Curb

 

Minimum Length of Space from Curb

 

Minimum Drive Aisle Width (One- Way)

 

Minimum Drive Aisle Width (Two Way)



45
 
12.6 feet
 
19.0 feet
 
13.6 feet
 
12.0 feet


60
 
11.0 feet
 
20.0 feet
 
18.6 feet
 
17.0 feet


75
 
9.0 feet
 
19.0 feet
 
23.0 feet
 
23.0 feet


90
 
9.0 feet
 
19.0 feet
 
26.0 feet
 
25.0 feet


Parallel
 
23.0 feet
 
9.0 feet
 
22.0 feet
 
21.0 feet



 



   (D)   Design standards.



      (1)   In all residential districts, required parking spaces
shall be located on the same premises as the use that they serve. In other
districts, they shall be located on the premises or within 100 feet distance.



      (2)   Parking areas for 1 or 2-family dwellings shall be in
the garage, in the rear or side yards, or on the driveway leading to the
garage only.



      (3)   Parking of automobiles and other motor vehicles is
permitted in the front and side yards in District I-1 and B-1 provided a
greenbelt 8 foot in width is provided.



      (4)   Parking areas shall be used for automobile parking only,
with no sales, dead storage, repair work, dismantling, or servicing of any
kind permitted.



      (5)   (a)   All uses, excluding 1 and 2-family residences,
where parking or access facilities are located within 30 feet of a 1 or
2-family property line shall be required to effectively screen their parking
facility from the residential use pursuant to § 151.151, Screening and/or
Fencing.



         (b)   Before a building permit shall be issued, the
Zoning Administrator shall approve the screening proposal.



      (6)   Off-street parking areas on properties that are
currently adjacent to Municipal Storm Water Facilities (curb and gutter) or
within an area outlined in the current Five-Year Capital Improvement Plan to
have Municipal Storm Water Facilities within the next 5 years shall be
improved with a paved impervious surface and afford adequate drainage and
property on-site storm water management.  Gravel, crushed asphalt, or
similar materials is not considered a paved impervious surface.



      (7)   Off-street parking areas on properties that are not
currently adjacent to Municipal Storm Water Facilities (curb and gutter) or
within an area outlined in the current Five Year Capital Improvement Plan to
have Municipal Storm Water Facilities within the next five years may be
improved with paved impervious, gravel, crushed asphalt, or similar materials
and afford adequate drainage and proper on-site storm water management. These
parking areas must also remain free of noxious weeds and dust.



      (8)   All sources of parking area lighting shall be fixed,
directed, and designed so as to not create a nuisance to any abutting
residential properties.



      (9)   For bicycle parking, the total parking requirement is 1
space for each 25 off-street parking spaces required.  The bicycle parking
spaces shall be equipped with bicycle racks.



      (10)   All newly constructed parking facilities must meet all
ADA design requirements.



(Prior Code, § 66-157)  (Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007; Am. Ord. 548,
passed 4-22-2014)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.157  SITE VIEW CLEARANCE.



   No structure, vehicle, sign, fence, building or foliage shall obstruct
the vision clearance of street corners, curb cuts or railroad crossings or
constitute a traffic hazard in any zone. 



(Prior Code, § 66-158)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.158  MOBILE HOME PARK STANDARDS.



   In order that a mobile home park may be harmonious within itself and
with the surrounding area, the following performance standards are required.



   (A)   Inspection of mobile home parks.  The Zoning Administrator,
the Chief of Police, or their duly authorized representative, shall have the
power to inspect the register containing a record of all residents of the
mobile home park. 



   (B)   Open space and area requirements.



      (1)   Area.  The minimum total mobile home park shall be 10
acres.



      (2)   Open space.



         (a)   A minimum of 500 square feet per mobile home shall
be provided in a definable play area and/or open space.



         (b)   1.   Lot setbacks shall not be included in this
space nor shall any areas of less than 20 feet in length or width.



            2.   All areas not used for access, parking,
circulation, buildings, and service shall be completely landscaped and the
entire area maintained in good condition, consistent with the provisions of
§ 151.152.



      (3)   Setbacks.



 

Setback from property boundary lines
 

30 feet



Setback from public road/highway right-of-way
 

35 feet



Setback from front/park street right-of-way
 

20 feet



Side setback
 

10 feet



Rear setback
 

15 feet




 



      (4)   Lot size.



 

Minimum lot area
 

7,200 square feet



Minimum lot width
 

60 feet



Maximum ground coverage
 

30%




   



   (C)   Streets.  Streets must follow subdivision requirements
concerning grading and must be a minimum of 24 feet in width and be paved or
have Class IV gravel.  When a mobile home park reaches 75% occupancy,
streets will be required to be paved with a bituminous or cement surface. 
The right-of-way width will be a minimum of 40 feet.  On-street parking will
not be allowed.



   (D)   Parking.  A minimum and maximum of 2 off-street parking
spaces will be provided on each lot.  These spaces will be clearly defined
with a border and gravel or cement surface.  A parking compound must be
provided by the developer to accommodate 1 parking space for every 2 mobile
homes.  All boats, campers, and trailers must be parked in this designated
parking compound.   



   (E)   Screening.  All mobile home parks located adjacent to
residential, recreational, commercial, or industrial land uses shall provide
screening such as fences, shrubs, or trees along the property boundary line
separating the park and other uses and shall be maintained in a neat and
orderly manner.  Screening shall be a minimum of 5 feet in height. 
Landscaping shall be provided between the screen and the property boundary. 
A landscape plan is required as part of the platting process for a mobile
home park.



   (F)   Accessory buildings.  One storage building of not more than
10 feet by 12 feet is allowed per lot.  A carport may also be allowed on
mobile home lots.  All accessory buildings must meet setbacks.  Storage and
accessory buildings must be maintained and designed to enhance the general
appearance of the lot.



   (G)   Mobile home requirements.  All mobile homes shall be skirted
and shall be in accordance with the decor of the mobile home and in good
repair.  Each home shall be parked upon a jack or block approved by the
city.  Each mobile home shall be anchored to resist damaging movement by
wind or storm.  Each mobile home base shall have a suitable hardstand of
durable material capable of supporting the vehicle wheels, stands or jacks. 
A minimum of 800 square feet shall be required for all single-family
residential dwelling, including mobile homes.



   (H)   Miscellaneous requirements.



      (1)   Responsibilities of the park management.



         (a)   Park management shall notify park occupants of all
applicable provisions of this section and inform them of their duties and
responsibilities under this section.



         (b)   1.   The park operator shall maintain a record
of all mobile home owners and occupants located within the park.



            2.   The register shall contain the following
information:



                  a.   The name and address of each
mobile home occupant;



                  b.   The name and address of the owner
of each mobile home and motor vehicle by which it is towed;



                  c.   The make model, year and license
number of each mobile home and motor vehicle, the state, territory or country
issuing the license; and



                  d.   The date of arrival and departure
of each mobile home.



            3.   The operator shall make this available to law
enforcement officers, public health officers, and other officials whose duty
necessitates acquisition of the information in the register.  The register
record for each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of 3
years of the registrant moving from the park.



      (2)   Use requirements.  No part of any park shall be used
for non-residential purposes, except the uses that are required for the
direct serving and well being of park residents and for the management and
maintenance of the park. 



      (3)   Compliance.  All mobile home parks shall comply with
the State of Minnesota Board of Health requirements for mobile home
licensing.  The platting requirements of mobile home parks shall meet the
subdivision standards as listed in §§ 151.205et seq. unless otherwise
stated in this section.



(Prior Code, § 66-159)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.159  SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL USES.



   The following provisions apply to all wholesale businesses, commercial
laundries, dry cleaning plants, manufacturing facilities, and public utility
buildings and yards, electrical transformer stations, substations, and gas
regulator yards:



   (A)   All uses not located in an industrial park shall be conducted
wholly within a building with a landscaped front yard and with all loading,
unloading, and employee parking provided in the side or rear yards; and



   (B)   Visitor parking may be provided in the front yard.



(Prior Code, § 66-160)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.160  PROFESSIONAL/PERSONAL SERVICE OFFICES.



   Professional and personal service offices will be allowed in the R-3
District in existing dwellings, provided the following provisions are met.



   (A)   Substantial exterior alteration of a dwelling unit to
accommodate the office/service shall not be permitted.



   (B)   Office and service activities which will create odor, noise,
dust, electrical glare, or vibrations noticeable from outside of the
structure shall not be permitted.



   (C)   Office activities shall be carried on wholly within the
principal structure, there shall be no exterior storage of materials, and no
variation from the residential character of the structure.



   (D)   Signs shall conform to all requirements prescribed in §
151.186



   (E)   One parking space per employee and 1 parking space for each
office/service located in the home shall be provided off-street.  Parking
area and building ground coverage shall not exceed 50%. 



   (F)   A conditional use permit issued by the City Council for a
professional/personal service office shall not transfer with the change of
ownership of the dwelling.



(Prior Code, § 66-161)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 491, passed
5-22-2007)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.161  GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND SITE PLAN.



   (A)   All proposed developments shall conform with the provisions of
this section with respect to site plan, parking, and landscaping.



   (B)   General development plan shall be reviewed and approved by the
Planning Commission.



   (C)   The development plan shall include as follows:



      (1)   Complete details of the proposed site development
including, but not limited to, identification signs, location of buildings,
streets, driveways, parking spaces, dimensions of the lot, lot area, and yard
dimensions;



      (2)   Complete landscaping plans reflecting all information
showing planting size and type;



      (3)   Complete plans for proposed sidewalks or walkways and
access driveways to parking showing distance from street intersection and
service areas;



      (4)   Complete plans for stormwater drainage systems
sufficient to drain and dispose of all surface water accumulations within the
area of the site;



      (5)   Complete plans and specifications for exterior wall
finishes proposed for all principal and accessory buildings.  Elevation
drawings shall show proposed rooftop equipment and any proposed screening; and



      (6)   Complete plans for screening of storage areas for waste
and garbage.



(Prior Code, § 66-162)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.162  EXCEPTIONS TO YARD REQUIREMENTS.



   Every part of a yard shall be open and unobstructed by any building or
structure, from its lowest point upward, except as follows: 



   (A)   Awnings, balconies, overhangs, fire escapes and eaves may
project not more than 5 feet over or half the distance of the required side
yard, whichever is less;



   (B)   Walks, steps for negotiating ground slopes, retaining walls,
hedges and natural growth, fences, paved areas;



   (C)   Uncovered porches, and steps to building entrances may not
extend more than 5 feet into any required front yard or required rear yard
and not more than 3 feet into any required side yard; and



   (D)   Chimneys and fireplaces may extend not more than 4 feet into a
required yard or court.



(Prior Code, § 66-163)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.163  SPECIAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO SPECIFIC PERMITTED AND



CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Water retention areas.  Water retention areas or devises
shall be required for any new development projects creating new impervious
surface of 1 acre or greater.



   (B)   Exemptions.  The following activities are exempt from this
section:



      (1)   Where the development project is a linear project, such
as sidewalks, paths, or trails, or is reconstruction, repair, reconditioning,
or resurfacing of existing roads or impervious surfaces; or



      (2)   Where the plans for a project development site were
approved by a local unit of government by a permit or in a preliminary or
final plat approval process prior to 11-1-2004.



(Prior Code, § 66-164)  (Ord. 417, passed 11-29-2004)  Penalty, see §
151.999



§ 151.164  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Statement of intent.  The intent of this section is to
improve the appearance of vehicular use areas and property abutting public
rights of way; to require buffering between non-compatible land uses; to
protect and preserve existing plant materials and promote aesthetic appeal
through green space, character and value of the surrounding neighborhoods;
and to promote public health and safety through the reduction of noise
pollution, air pollution, visual pollution, and glare.



   (B)   Compliance.  No new site development, permanent building or
structure construction, remodeling involving change of the outside perimeter
or vehicular use area modifications are allowed, unless the provisions of
this section are met for the property in its entirety.



   (C)   Reduction of visual impacts.



      (1)   The landscaping standards shall require reduction of
visual impacts associated with given uses, including, but not limited to:



         (a)   Truck loading areas;



         (b)   Refuse containers;



         (c)   Parking lots, interior lot areas, and perimeters;



         (d)   Large unadorned building massing;



         (e)   Garage doors associated with auto oriented uses; 



         (f)   Vehicular stacking areas for drive-through uses;
and



         (g)   Antennae and support structures.



      (2)   All undeveloped lots and parcels shall be mowed and kept
free of accumulation of garbage, trash, refuse, debris, and other unsightly
or nuisance creating materials.  All landscaping shall be continually
maintained by the owner or other person responsible for maintenance of the
premises, and all planting areas shall be kept free of weeds and debris.



   (D)   General landscaping and maintenance requirements.



      (1)   All planting material shall be of good quality, of
species normally grown in Minnesota and capable of withstanding the extremes
of individual site microclimates.  All specifications for measurement,
quality, and installation of trees and shrubs shall be in accordance with the
Urban Forestry Technical Manual.



      (2)   Landscaping and screening required by this section shall
be interrupted only by required access drives and sidewalks.  All
landscaping and screening required by this section shall be so designed and
maintained as to preserve unobstructed vision of the street and sidewalk at
points of access and as not to interfere with, or be damaged by, work within
any public or utility easement unless the City Planner shall determine that
no other location is reasonably feasible.



   (E)   Applicability.  A landscaping plan, and the implementation
and maintenance of the plan, shall be required for all uses, except for R-1
(Single-Family Residential), and B-2 (General Business) districts and
municipal airport property.



   (F)   Landscape plans.



      (1)   Issuance of building permit.  No building permit shall
be issued until the required landscaping plan has been submitted and
approved, and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the
landscaping is completed as certified by an on-site inspection by a
designated city official.



      (2)   Part of certificate of occupancy.  Wherever the
submission and approval of a landscape plan is required by this chapter, the
landscape plan and its maintenance shall be part of the certificate of
occupancy.



      (3)   Extension for completion.  The city may allow an
extended period of time for completion of all landscaping if the delay is due
to conditions which are reasonably beyond the control of the developer. 
Extensions may not exceed 9 months, and extensions may be granted due to
seasonal or weather conditions.  When an extension is granted, the city
shall require a performance bond, certified check or cash escrow.  This
amount shall cover 100% of the remaining site work to be completed.



         (a)   Content of landscape plan.  All landscape plans
submitted for approval shall contain or have attached thereto the following
information:



            1.   The location and dimensions of all existing
and proposed structures, lot lines, easements, parking lots and drives,
roadways and right-of-ways, sidewalks, bicycle paths, ground signs, refuse
disposal areas, bicycle parking areas, fences, freestanding electrical
equipment, tot lots and other recreational facilities, and other features as
determined necessary by the City Planner;



            2.   The location, quantity, size and name, both
botanical and common names, of all proposed planting materials;



            3.   Existing and proposed grading of the site,
including proposed berming, indicating contours, at 1 foot intervals;



            4.   Specification of the type and boundaries of
all proposed ground cover;



            5.   Elevations of all fences proposed for
location on the site; and



            6.   Elevations, cross-sections and other details
as determined necessary by the City Planner.



         (b)   Design criteria.



            1.   Landscaping plans described above shall be
prepared based on the following design criteria.



            2.   The evaluation and approval of landscape
plans shall also be based on these design criteria:



               a.   Scale and nature of landscaping
material.



                  i.   The scale and nature of
landscaping materials shall be appropriate to the size of the structures.
Large scaled buildings, for example, shall be complemented by larger scaled
plants.



                  ii.   Landscaping of larger areas,
such as required yards, shall be accomplished by both horizontal landscaping
elements, such as planting beds, and vertical landscaping elements, such as
trees, berms, and fences.



               b.   Selection of plant material.  Refer to
Urban Forestry Technical Manual.



               c.   Conifers.  Conifers should be
incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site, particularly in those
areas screening parking lots from dedicated public right-of-ways or property
zoned for residential use.  All conifers shall have a minimum height of 3
feet.



               d.   Deciduous shade trees.  All shade
trees shall have a minimum trunk size of 1-1/4 inches in diameter upon
installation, as measured 6 inches above the established ground level.



               e.   Ornamentals.  Ornamental trees shall
have a minimum trunk size of 1-1/4 inches in diameter upon installation, as
measured 6 inches above the established ground level.



               f.   Softening of walls and fences.  Plant
material shall be placed intermittently against long expanses of building
walls, fences, and other barriers to create a softening effect.



               g.   Planting bed.  Planting beds shall be
mulched with bark chips, rock mulch, feather rocks, or similar materials.



               h.   Detention, retention, basins, and
ponds.  Detention/retention basins and ponds shall be landscaped.  The
landscaping shall include shade and ornamental trees, conifers, shrubbery,
hedges, and/or other planting materials.



               i.   Preservation of existing plant
material.  Existing plant material shall, wherever practical as determined
by the City Planner, be incorporated into the landscape plan. Credit for
retention of existing trees which are of acceptable minimum size, species,
and location, may be given to satisfy the minimum number of requirements.



               j.   Berming.  Earthen berms, and existing
topography should be, whenever determined practical by the City Planner,
incorporated into the landscape plan, particularly when combined with plant
material to facilitate screening from adjacent residential uses.  Berms
should be designed to allow for maintenance, mowing, and adequate drainage.
Final slope grade steeper than the ratio of 3:1 will not be permitted without
special approval or treatment, such as terracing or retaining walls.



   (G)   Transitional yards.  Transitional yards shall extend along
the entire length of the lot line and shall be designed and maintained to
function as a buffer area.  Transitional yards shall consist of a
combination of ground cover, shade trees, conifers and shrubs, and
appropriate screening devices such as decorative walls, fences, or berms. 
Areas not planted with shrubs, trees, or other appropriate screening devices
shall be maintained with living ground cover. 



   (H)   Perimeter landscaping.



      (1)   (a)   Every off-street parking lot containing 6 or
more parking stalls shall be buffered and screened by perimeter landscaping
consisting of an area at least 8 feet or greater in width as required in the
yard and setback standards of each zoning district.



         (b)   The required perimeter landscaping area shall be
measured from the property line of the site.



         (c)   The perimeter landscaping shall consist of a
combination of ground cover, shade trees or conifers, shrubs, and/or
appropriate screening devices such as decorative walls, fences, or berms. 



         (d)   Deciduous shade trees shall be provided at a
minimum of 1 tree for every 2,000 square feet of total building floor area or
1 tree for every 100 feet of site perimeter, whichever is greater.  All
shade trees shall have a minimum trunk size of 1-1/4 inches in diameter upon
installation, as measured 6 inches above the established ground level.



         (e)   Conifers shall be provided at a minimum of 1 tree
for every 2,000 square feet of total building floor area or 1 conifer for
every 200 feet of site perimeter, whichever is greater.  All conifers shall
have a minimum height of 3 feet.



         (f)   Ornamental trees shall be provided at a minimum of
1 tree for every 2,000 square feet of total building floor area or 1
ornamental tree for every 200 feet of site perimeter, whichever is greater. 
Ornamental trees shall have a minimum trunk size of 1-1/4 inches in diameter
upon installation, as measured 6 inches above the established ground level.



         (g)   The number of planting material required in
(H)(1)(d) through (f) may be reduced by 15% in the (I-1) Light Industrial
District and (I-2) Heavy Industrial District.



         (h)   Areas not planted with shrubs, trees, or other
appropriate screening devices shall be maintained with living ground cover,
or planting beds with bark or rock mulch.



      (2)   Off-street parking areas for more than 6 vehicles shall
be effectively screened by a fence or densely planted hedge on each side of a
parking area that adjoins or faces any property located in a Residential
District, unless the property is developed with a non-residential use.  The
fence or hedge shall not be less than 4 feet nor more than 6 feet in height.



   (I)   Interior landscaping - off-street parking lots.



      (1)   Every off-street parking lot providing 100 spaces or
more shall provide interior landscaping.



      (2)   Interior landscaping shall consist of planting islands
with a minimum area of 60 square feet and a minimum width of 6 feet, measured
from the back of curb to back of curb.



      (3)   The interior landscaping shall constitute at least 5% of
the area of the parking lot.



      (4)   Area devoted to perimeter landscaping shall not be
considered as any part of interior landscaping.



      (5)   Where more than 1 planting island is provided, the
islands shall be appropriately spaced throughout the parking lot.



   (J)   Refuse containers.



      (1)   All refuse and recyclable material containers, except
those containers used on a temporary basis for a construction or disposal
activity, shall be fully enclosed by a gated opaque fence or wall of a
sufficient height to completely screen the containers from view by all
adjoining properties and all streets.



      (2)   The fence or wall shall have an exterior finish that is
similar to the material found on the exterior walls of the main building on
the property or other approved material as determined by the City Planner.



      (3)   The outside base of the wall or fence shall be
landscaped if the wall or fence fronts on a public street.



   (K)   Antennae and support structures.  Ground-mounted antennae and
antenna support structures shall be buffered and screened by a fence and a
densely planted conifer hedge of not less than 6 feet in height.



   (L)   Maintenance policy.  It is the responsibility of the property
owner to insure that the landscaping is maintained in an attractive
condition.  The owner shall replace any damaged or dead trees, shrubs,
ground cover, and sodding.



   (M)   Appeals.  Appeals on the quantity, size, and location of
planting materials, or any variation to the provisions outlined in this
chapter may be directed to the city’s Urban Forestry Committee for
consideration.  The Urban Forestry Committee will then make a recommendation
for action by the Board of Adjustments.



(Prior Code, § 66-165)  (Ord. 442, passed 7-12-2005; Am. Ord. 491, passed
5-22-2007; Am. Ord. 518, passed 8-25-2009)  Penalty, see § 151.999



SIGN REGULATIONS



§ 151.175  FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND EFFECT.



   (A)   Findings. The City Council hereby finds as follows:



      (1)   Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the
character and quality of the environment.



      (2)   Signs provide an important medium through which
individuals may convey a variety of messages.



      (3)   Signs can create traffic hazards, aesthetic concerns and
detriments to property values, thereby threatening the public health, safety
and welfare.



      (4)   The city’s zoning regulations have included the
regulation of signs in an effort to provide adequate means of expression and
to promote the economic viability of the business community, while protecting
the city and its citizens from a proliferation of signs of a type, size,
location and character that would adversely impact upon the aesthetics of the
community and threaten the health, safety and welfare of the community. The
regulation of the physical characteristics of signs within the city has had a
positive impact on traffic safety and the appearance of the community.



   (B)   Purpose and intent. It is not the purpose or intent of this
subchapter to regulate the message displayed on any sign; nor is it the
purpose or intent of this subchapter to regulate any building design or any
display not defined as a sign, or any sign which cannot be viewed from
outside a building. The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to:



      (1)   Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination
and other physical characteristics of signs within the city in order to
promote the public health, safety and welfare.



      (2)   Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment
of the city by preventing visual clutter that is harmful to the appearance of
the community.



      (3)   Improve the visual appearance of the city while
providing for effective means of communication, consistent with
constitutional guarantees and the city’s goals of public safety and
aesthetics.



      (4)   Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign
regulations set forth herein under the zoning authority of the city.



      (5)   To preserve and protect the integrity of the Lake
Country Scenic Byway designation by preventing visual clutter that is harmful
to the appearance of the scenic byway.



   (C)   Effect. A sign may be erected, mounted, displayed or
maintained in the city if it is in conformance with the provisions of this
subchapter. The effect of this subchapter, as more specifically set forth
herein, is to:



      (1)   Allow a wide variety of sign types in commercial zones,
and a more limited variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards
set forth in this subchapter.



      (2)   Allow certain small, unobtrusive signs incidental to the
principal use of a site in all zones when in compliance with the requirements
of this subchapter.



      (3)   Prohibit signs whose location, size, type, illumination
or other physical characteristic negatively affect the environment and where
the communication can be accomplished by means having a lesser impact on the
environment and the public health, safety and welfare.



      (4)   Provide for the enforcement of this subchapter.



   (D)   Scope. This subchapter shall not regulate official traffic or
government signs; signs not intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way;
window displays; product dispensers and point of purchase displays;
scoreboards on athletic fields; flags bearing any noncommercial message;
gravestones; barber poles; religious symbols; commemorative plaques; the
display of street numbers; or any display or construction not defined herein
as a sign.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007)



§ 151.176  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED SIGN. Any sign and/or its supporting sign structure which
remains without a message or whose display surface remains blank for a period
of 1 year or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event, or purpose
which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Signs
applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change in
ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless
the property remains vacant for a period of 1 year or more. Any sign
remaining after demolition of a principal structure shall be deemed to be
abandoned. Signs which are present because of being legally established
nonconforming signs or signs which have required a conditional use permit or
a variance shall also be subject to the definition of ABANDONED SIGN.



   ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator or designated representative.



   ANIMATION. The movement of any object or light used in conjunction with
a sign such as blinking, flashing, traveling, scrolling or changing degree of
intensity of any light movement other than burning continuously.



   AREA. See SIGN, AREA OF.



   AWNING. A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass
designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative
embellishment, and which projects from a wall or roof of a structure
primarily over a window, walk, or the like. Any part of an awning which also
projects over a door shall be counted as an AWNING.



   AWNING SIGN. A building sign or graphic painted on, printed on, or
attached flat against the surface of an awning.



   BALLOON SIGN. A sign consisting of a bag made of lightweight material
supported by helium, hot or pressurized air which is greater than 24 inches
in diameter.



   BANNER SIGN. A sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material with no
enclosing framework.



   BILLBOARD. See OFF-PREMISES SIGN.



   BUILDING. As defined in § 151.003 of this chapter.



   BUILDING FACE. The exposed face of a building, including windows and
doors, from ground level to the roof line. Where a building has a facade,
mansard, or awning, the Zoning Administrator shall work with the applicant to
determine what constitutes the aggregate building face for purposes of
signage.



   CANOPY. A rigid multi-sided structure covered with fabric, metal or
other material and supported by a building at one or more points or
extremities and by columns or posts embedded in the ground at other points or
extremities which provides shelter over a doorway.



   CANOPY SIGN. Any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy, made of
fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door or entrance. A
CANOPY SIGN is not a marquee and is different from service area canopy signs.



   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign or portion thereof with characters, letter
or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face
or the surface of the sign. CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS do not include signs upon
which characters, letters, or illustrations change or rearrange only once in
a 24-hour period.



   CLEARANCE (OF A SIGN). The smallest vertical distance between the grade
of the adjacent street, highway, or street curb and the lowest point of any
sign, includes framework and embellishments, extending over that grade.



   COMMERCIAL SPEECH. Speech or graphics advertising a business,
profession, commodity, service or entertainment.



   COMMUNITY/SPECIAL EVENT SIGN. A sign which solicits for a special short
term or one-time civic event. Such events may include, but shall not be
limited to: seasonal celebrations, community programs and activities, or the
location of places or events of interest to the community or tourists. Such
events must appeal to a broad audience, are open to the public, and are
accessible to all residents or visitors.



   COPY. The graphic content of a sign surface in either permanent or
removable letter, pictographic, symbolic, or alphabetic form.



   DIRECTIONAL SIGN - OFF-PREMISE. An off-premise sign which provides
directional assistance to access an establishment conveniently and safely.



   DIRECTIONAL SIGN - ON-PREMISE. An on-premise sign giving directions,
instructions, or facility information and which may contain the name or logo
of an establishment but no advertising copy, e.g., parking or exit and
entrance signs. May contain logo provided that the logo may not comprise more
than 20% of the total sign area.



   DOUBLE-FACED SIGN. A sign with 2 faces, essentially back-to-back or
v-construction.



   DYNAMIC DISPLAY.  Any characteristics of a sign that appear to have
movement or that appear to change, caused by any method other than physically
removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent
movement of change is in the display, the sign structure itself, or any other
component of the sign. This includes a display that incorporates a technology
or method allowing the sign face to change the image without having to
physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its components. This also
includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, shimmering, blinking or
animated display and any display that incorporates rotating panels, LED
lights manipulated through digital input, “digital ink” or any other
method or technology that allows the sign face to present a series of images
or displays.



   ELECTRICAL SIGN. A sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring,
connections, or fixtures are used.



   ELECTRONIC VARIABLE MESSAGE SIGN. A sign whose message may be changed
at intervals by electronic process or remote control and having a constant
light level.



   ERECT. Activity of constructing, building, raising, assembling,
placing, affixing, attaching, creating, painting, drawing or any other ways
of bringing into being or establishing.



   FACADE. The entire building front including the parapet.



   FACE OF SIGN. The area of a sign on which the copy is placed.



   FEATHER FLAG SIGN. A lightweight, portable advertising medium, mounted
on a pole, which resembles a sail.



   FLAG. Any fabric or similar lightweight material attached at 1 end of
the material, usually to a staff or pole, so as to allow movement of the
material by atmospheric changes and which contains distinctive colors,
patterns, symbols, emblems, insignia, or other symbolic devices.



   FRONTAGE. The length of the property line of any 1 premise along a
public right-of-way on which it borders.



   GOVERNMENT SIGN. Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained
by the city, county, state, or federal government for traffic direction or
for designation of or direction to any school, hospital, historical site, or
public service, property, or facility.



   HEIGHT (OF A SIGN). The vertical distance measured from the highest
point of the sign, excluding decorative embellishments, to the grade of the
adjacent street or the surface grade beneath the sign, whichever is less.



   IDENTIFICATION SIGN. An on-premise identification sign giving the name,
address, and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants.
IDENTIFICATION SIGNS may be illuminated.



   ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign which contains an element designed to
emanate artificial light internally or externally.



   INCIDENTAL SIGN. A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of
goods, facilities, or services available on the premises, e.g., a credit card
sign or a sign indicating hours of business. Maximum size is 4 square feet.



   INTERIOR SIGN. A sign which is located within the interior of any
building, or within an enclosed lobby or court of any building, and a sign
for and located within the inner or outer body, court, entrance of any
theater.



   LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any sign and its support
structure lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this subchapter
which fails to conform to the requirements of this subchapter. A sign which
was erected in accordance with a variance granted prior to the adoption of
this subchapter and which does not comply with this subchapter shall be
deemed to be a legal nonconforming sign. A sign which was unlawfully erected
shall be deemed to be an illegal sign.



   MAINTENANCE. The cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of
defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy,
design, or structure of the sign.



   MANSARD. A roof having 2 slopes on all sides with the lower slope
steeper than the upper one.



   MARQUEE. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building
facade or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of that building,
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.



   MARQUEE SIGN. Any building sign painted, mounted, constructed or
attached in any manner, on a marquee.



   MONUMENT SIGN. A sign where the extent of the sign surface is attached
to the ground or a foundation in the ground; and where there are no poles,
braces, or other visible means of support other than attachment to the ground.



   MULTI-TENANT BUILDING. A building that houses more than 1 tenant or use.



   NAMEPLATE. A non-electric on-premise identification sign giving only
the name, address, and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants.



   NON-COMMERCIAL SPEECH. Dissemination of messages not classified as
commercial speech which include, but are not limited to, messages concerning
political, religious, social, ideological, public service and information
topics.



   OFF-PREMISE SIGN. A commercial speech sign which directs the attention
of the public to a business, activity conducted, or product sold or offered
at a location not on the same lot where the sign is located.  For purposes
of this subchapter, easements and other appurtenances shall be considered to
be outside such lot and any sign located or proposed to be located in an
easement or other appurtenance shall be considered an OFF-PREMISE SIGN.



   ON-PREMISE SIGN. A sign which identifies or advertises an
establishment, person, activity, goods, products or services located on the
premises where the sign is installed.



   OWNER. In the case of a lot, the legal owner of the lot as officially
recorded by Hubbard County, and including fee owners, contract for deed
purchasers and ground lessees.  For the purposes of this subchapter, the
owner of property on which a sign is located is presumed to be the owner of
the sign unless facts to the contrary are officially recorded or otherwise
brought to the attention of the Administrator, e.g., a sign leased from a
sign company.



   PAINTED WALL SIGN. Any sign which is applied with paint or similar
substance on the surface of a wall.



   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, or
similarly defined interest.



   POINT OF PURCHASE DISPLAY. Advertising of a retail item accompanying
its display, e.g., an advertisement on a product dispenser, tire display, and
the like.



   POLE SIGN. See PYLON SIGN.



   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported,
including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such
sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support is converted to
another sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground since this
characteristic is based on the design of such sign.



   PREMISE. A parcel of land with its appurtenances and buildings which,
because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit
of real estate.



   PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign which is affixed to a building or wall in
such a manner that its leading edge extends more than 2 feet beyond the
surface of such building or wall face.



   PUBLIC STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire right-of-way of any public
street.



   PYLON SIGN. Any freestanding sign which has its supportive structure(s)
anchored in the ground and which has a sign face elevated above ground level
by pole(s) or beam(s) and with the area below the sign face open.



   ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and above the
roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically
above the highest portion of the roof.



   SANDWICH SIGN. Two sign faces that are back to back and are connected
together at the top and apart from each other at the bottom.



   SCENIC BYWAY. Any portion of Highway 34 East and West and Highway 71
North throughout the city.



   SCROLL OR TRAVEL. A message transition where the message that is
leaving or appearing appears to move vertically or horizontally across the
display surface.



   SIGHT TRIANGLE. A triangular area formed at the intersection of any
street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between the right-of-way
lines at a distance along each line of 30 feet from their point of
intersection.



   SIGN. Any letter, word or symbol, poster, picture, statuary, reading
matter or representation in the nature of advertisement, announcement,
message or visual communication, whether painted, posted, printed, affixed or
constructed, including all associated brackets, braces, supports, wires and
structures, which is displayed for information or communicative purposes.



   SIGN, AREA OF. Includes the space inside a continuous line drawn around
and enclosing all letters, designs, and background materials exclusive of
border, trim and structural supports. For the purpose of calculating the sign
area of multiple-faced or back-to-back signs the stipulated maximum sign area
shall refer to a single face.



   SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign identifying a recognized
subdivision, condominium complex, or residential development.



   SUSPENDED SIGN. Any building sign that is suspended from the underside
of a horizontal plane surface and is connected to this surface.



   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign, balloon, banner, blimp, flag, pylon, pennant,
poster, reader board or advertising display which is intended to be displayed
for a period of time not to exceed 3 weeks per permit period. Signs other
than temporary signs shall be considered permanent signs.



   TOTAL SITE SIGNAGE. The maximum permitted combined area of all free
standing and wall identification signs allowed on a specific property.



   WALL SIGN. A sign attached essentially parallel to and extending not
more than 24 inches from the wall of a building with no copy on the sides or
edges. This definition includes painted, individual letter, and cabinet
signs, and signs on a mansard.



   WINDOW SIGN. Any building sign, pictures, symbol, or combination
thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon
the window pane or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.



   ZONING LOT. One or more lots which are used for a single principal use
or planned unit development.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007; Am. Ord. 542, passed 4-23-2013)



§ 151.177  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No sign shall be erected, reconstructed, or moved in the city without
first securing a permit from the city and payment of fees as described in
this chapter, unless no permit is required pursuant to § 151.178. The
content of the message or speech displayed on the sign shall not be reviewed
or considered in determining whether to approve or deny a sign permit.
Application for a sign permit shall be on forms furnished by the
Administrator.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.178  EXEMPTED SIGNS - NO PERMIT.



   The following signs need no permit. These exemptions, however, shall
not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility
of its erection and maintenance, and is in compliance with the provisions of
this subchapter or any other law or ordinance regulating the same.  Unless
restricted by this section, these signs may be placed in all zoning districts.



   (A)   Signs with a commercial message placed upon construction
sites. Such signs may be erected 60 days prior to construction and shall be
removed within 10 days after completion of construction. Total site signage
shall not exceed the following size limitations:



 

Project Area
 
Residential
 
Commercial/Industrial


Under 1 acre
 
8 sq. ft.
 
32 sq. ft.


1.01 to 10 acres
 
64 sq. ft.
 
64 sq. ft.


10.1 to 25 acres
 
150 sq. ft.
 
150 sq. ft.


25.1 plus acres
 
300 sq. ft.
 
500 sq. ft.



 



   (B)   On-premise directional/information signs of 9 square feet or
less.



   (C)   Building address signs of 2 square feet or less.



   (D)   Non-commercial speech signs. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this subchapter, all signs of any size containing
non-commercial speech may be posted from 46 days before the state primary in
any general election year until 10 days following the general election and 13
weeks prior to any special election until 10 days following the special
election. One non-commercial speech sign is allowed on each lot outside the
above specified time period on all properties. All signs must be at least 5
feet from all property lines and shall not be located in the sight triangle.



   (E)   Emergency signs as required by any governmental agency.



   (F)   Residential and commercial real estate signs, not placed in
the right of way. These signs must be removed within 7 days after the closing
date of the sale or lease of the property.



   (G)   Signs or posters attached or painted on the inside of a
display window including illuminated signs, but not flashing signs. These
signs shall be placed as not to obstruct or interfere with any window,
doorway or fire escape. Such signs shall not exceed 50% of the window area or
32 square feet, which ever is more restrictive. Such signs shall be
prohibited in residential districts.



   (H)   Public signs, street signs, warning signs, or signs of public
service companies for the purpose of promoting safety.



   (I)   Noncommercial flags.



   (J)   Pedestrian, vehicular-traffic and parking directional signs in
parking lots, provided the face of such signs meet Minnesota Department of
Transportation standards and which do not contain commercial speech.



   (K)   Replacement or repair of signs damaged by storm or accident,
as long as the size or setback is not increased.



   (L)   Noncommercial directional signs not illuminated and not
exceeding 2 square feet. Signs are limited to 1 per avenue or street directly
leading to the establishment.



   (M)   Temporary or permanent signs by public utilities erected to
warn the public.



   (N)   Easel and/or sandwich signs, as long as such signs do not
exceed 24 inches by 48 inches. Signs are limited to 1 per lot. Signs must be
taken down daily and must not block sidewalks or right of ways.



   (O)   Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of
erection when cut into are attached to any masonry surface or noncombustible
material.



   (P)   Banners affixed to buildings for point of purchase displays or
special events.



   (Q)   Portable sign for community events displayed for 7 calendar
days or less at a time.



   (R)   General sign maintenance such as painting, replacing light
bulbs, cracked panels, and the like, including changing nameplates/sign copy
for an existing business that does not increase the size, height, or setback.



   (S)   Temporary off-premise community/special event signs which meet
the definition of a community/special event and all of the provision of §
151.184(F).



   (T)   Feather flag signs (commercial) not exceeding 10 feet in
height.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007; Am. Ord. 526, passed 5-25-2010; Am. Ord. 542,
passed 4-23-2013)



§ 151.179  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   The following signs are prohibited in all districts, unless otherwise
noted below:



   (A)   Any sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is
an imitation of or resembles any official traffic control device or signal,
or emergency vehicle signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic control device or signal.



   (B)   Signs within a public right-of-way or easement, except for
signs installed by governmental entities.



   (C)   Signs painted, attached or in any manner affixed to trees,
rocks, or similar natural surfaces, or attached to public utility poles,
bridges, towers, or similar public structures.



   (D)   Electronic variable message signs dynamic displays are
prohibited except in the B-1, I-1 and I-2 Districts and which conform to
provisions in § 151.181.



   (E)   All off-premise commercial signs including billboards.



   (F)   Signs advertising by letters, words or figures painted upon
any sidewalk with the city.



   (G)   Signs that emit sound.



   (H)   Signs painted or attached to vehicles where the vehicle is
parked on a property and not intended to be moved for a period of 48 hours or
more. At all times, vehicles containing advertising and/or signage shall not
be parked along the property frontage.



   (I)   Vacant or abandoned building signs. Owner has 30 days to
remove such signs after notification by Administrator.



   (J)   Signs anchored by guy wires, chains, cables or similar devices
that project down to the ground in any way.



   (K)   Any signs that would conflict with restrictions set forth in
the Airport Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007; Am. Ord. 542, passed 4-23-2013)  Penalty, see
§ 151.999



§ 151.180  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   The following provisions apply to signs in all districts:



   (A)   All signs shall be constructed and maintained in a manner
where they will be safe to the general public. A sign shall be repainted
whenever its paint begins to fade, chip or discolor and defective parts shall
be replaced promptly.



   (B)   A sign shall be considered abandoned if the property or use
remains vacant for a period of more than 1 year. The property owner has 30
days to remove such signs after notification by Administrator.



   (C)   If the Administrator shall find that any sign is unsafe, a
detriment to the public, not maintained, or constructed, erected or
maintained in violation of the provisions of this section, the Administrator
shall give written notice to the property owner thereof.  If the property
owner fails to comply with the standards of this section within 30 days after
such notice, and if no appeal is taken pursuant to § 151.245, or if no
owner, occupant, or agent can be found, such sign shall be removed or altered
by the city. The cost of such city action shall be specifically assessed
against the subject property.



   (D)   All permanent signs shall be constructed to meet the Uniform
Building Code standards for wind resistance, dead loads, wind loads and other
applicable sections of the Uniform Building Code. Signs shall be rigidly
suspended by means of fastening or support so as not to be free swinging nor
a menace to persons or property.



   (E)   All electrical wiring of signs shall comply with the
provisions of the National Electrical Code and other applicable sections of
the State Building Code.



   (F)   No sign shall be erected as to obstruct access/egress to or
from fire escapes, windows, doors or exits and fire lanes.



   (G)   No pylon sign shall be erected in such a manner that projects
or will project over any building or public right-of-way.



   (H)   Projecting signs, awnings and canopies that overhang a
sidewalk or other pedestrian way shall provide a minimum clearance above the
said pedestrian way of 8 feet.



   (I)   Monument signs shall be constructed with the entire bottom of
the sign structure in contact with the ground.



   (J)   Computation of the area of multifaceted signs. The sign area
for a sign with more than 1 face shall be computed by adding together the
area of all sign faces visible from any 1 point. When 2 identical sign faces
are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point
at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign
structure and are not more than 42 inches apart, the sign area shall be
computed by the measurement of 1 of the faces.



   (K)   All signs may be illuminated as provided for in § 151.182.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007; Am. Ord. 542, passed 4-23-2013)  Penalty, see
§ 151.999



§ 151.181  DYNAMIC DISPLAYS AND CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS.



   Dynamic displays and changeable copy on signs are allowed subject to
the following conditions:



   (A)   Dynamic displays and changeable copy signs are allowed only on
monument and pylon signs for all uses in the B-1, I-1 and I-2 Districts only.
Dynamic displays and changeable copy signs may occupy no more than 50% of the
actual copy and graphic area. The remainder of the sign must not have the
capability to have dynamic displays even if not used. Only 1, contiguous
dynamic display or  changeable copy is allowed on a sign face.



   (B)   A dynamic display may not change or move more often than once
every 3 seconds.



   (C)   Messages on dynamic displays may not be animated. Transitions
between messages are permitted, but such transitions may only fade, scroll,
travel or reveal, and the transition shall not exceed duration of 1 second.



   (D)   The images and messages displayed must be complete in
themselves, without continuation in content to the next image or message or
to any other sign.



   (E)   (1)   Every line of copy and graphics in a dynamic display
must be as outlined below:



 

Road Speed Limit
 
Height of Copy and Graphics


25 to 34 MPH
 
7 inches


35 to 44 MPH
 
9 inches


45 to 54 MPH
 
12 inches


55 MPH or more
 
15 inches



 



      (2)   If there is insufficient room for copy and graphics of
this size in the area allowed under division (E)(1) above, then no dynamic
display is allowed.



   (F)   Dynamic displays must be designed and equipped to freeze the
device in 1 position if a malfunction occurs. The displays must also be
equipped with a means to immediately discontinue the display if it
malfunctions, and the sign owner must immediately stop the dynamic display
when notified by the city that it is not complying with the standards of this
subchapter.



   (G)   Dynamic displays must comply with the brightness standards
contained in § 151.182 below.



   (H)   Dynamic displays existing on October 3, 2007 must comply with
the operational standards listed above. An existing dynamic display that does
not meet the structural requirements in division (A) above may continue as a
legally established non-conforming sign subject to § 151.192. An existing
dynamic display that cannot meet the minimum size requirement in division (E)
above must use the largest size possible for 1 line of copy to fit in the
available space.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007; Am. Ord. 542, passed 4-23-2013)  Penalty, see
§ 151.999



§ 151.182  ILLUMINATION AND BRIGHTNESS STANDARDS.



   (A)   Illuminated signs may not exhibit any of the following:



      (1)   External illumination that is determined to interfere
with safe traffic operations;



      (2)   The sign is directly oriented to any residential
district;



      (3)   Illumination of any sign in a residential district;



   (B)   All signs must meet the following brightness standards:



      (1)   No sign may be brighter than is necessary for clear and
adequate visibility.



      (2)   No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance as to
impair the vision of a motor vehicle driver with average eyesight or to
otherwise interfere with the driver’s operation of a motor vehicle.



      (3)   No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance that it
interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device or
signal.



   (C)   All signs installed after October 3, 2007 that will have
illumination by a means other than natural light must be equipped with a
mechanism that automatically adjusts the brightness in response to ambient
conditions. These signs must also be equipped with a means to immediately
turn off the display or lighting if it malfunctions and the sign owner or
operator must immediately turn off the sign or lighting when notified by the
city that it is not complying with the standards in this section.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.183  SUBSTITUTION CLAUSE.



   The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this subchapter may
substitute non-commercial speech in lieu of any other commercial speech or
non-commercial speech. This substitution of copy may be made without any
additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to
prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial
speech, or favoring of any particular non-commercial speech over any other
non-commercial speech. This provision prevails over any more specific
provision to the contrary.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007)



§ 151.184  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   Temporary signs are only permitted in the B-1, B-2, R-B, R-3, I-1, and
I-2 zoning districts and are subject to the following requirements.



   (A)   Portable signs.



      (1)   There shall be no more than 1 portable sign on any
zoning lot at a time, excluding banners.



      (2)   Maximum size not to exceed 32 square feet in area.



      (3)   Portable sign shall be set back 5 feet from all property
lines and shall not be located in the sight triangle.



      (4)   A temporary sign permit is required for portable signs
which are allowed for 4 times per year, each for a 3-week time period.



      (5)   Portable signs shall not be placed in the public
right-of-way, be flashing, having moving parts or be fastened to any pylon
sign or light pole.



      (6)   The square footage of portable signs does not count
towards the total site signage maximum allowed.



      (7)   Multi-tenant businesses will be allowed temporary
signage time per business, not per building, subject to the other
requirements of this section.



      (8)   The temporary sign permit fee shall be waived for new
businesses for a period of 3 weeks.



      (9)   Erecting a temporary sign without a permit shall result
in a double permit fee.



   (B)   Banners.



      (1)   No more than 3 such signs shall be allowed on a building
at any 1 time.



      (2)   Any 1 banner shall not exceed 10% of the wall area.



      (3)   Total square footage of all banners shall not exceed 200
square feet.



      (4)   Banners shall be affixed to the primary structure.



      (5)   The square footage of banners shall not count towards
the total site signage maximum.



   (C)   Sandwich signs.



      (1)   One sandwich sign is allowed per zoning lot. Sign must
be displayed only during business hours and removed when closed. The
placement of the sign must not interfere with pedestrian traffic and must be
able to maintain a 6-foot path on the sidewalk. Sandwich signs shall not
exceed 24 inches by 48 inches in size.



      (2)   The square footage of sandwich signs does not count
towards the total site signage maximum.



   (D)   Feather flag signs (commercial).



      (1)   Only 1 feather flag is allowed per parcel and must be
attached to the primary structure or the sign must be displayed only during
business hours and removed when closed.



      (2)   Signs must be set back a minimum of 5 feet from the
property line.



   (E)   Garage sale signs.



      (1)   Signs may not be placed in the right-of-way.



      (2)   Signs may be placed off site with permission of the
property owner.



      (3)   Signs must be removed by 6:00 p.m. on the last day of
the sale.



   (F)   Temporary off-site community/special event signs.



      (1)   No signs are allowed within any right-of-way or along
highway sections designated as a scenic byway (Highway 34 East and West and
Highway 71 North throughout the city).



      (2)   Need to have property owner permission to place signs.



      (3)   Individual signs not to exceed 32 square feet.



      (4)   Signs are allowed the week prior to the event and all
signs must be removed within 24 hours of the conclusion of the event.



      (5)   No permit or fee is required, but all signs must
identify the event location and include contact information for the event
sponsor.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007; Am. Ord. 542, passed 4-23-2013)  Penalty, see
§ 151.999



§ 151.185  SIGNS PERMITTED IN AGRICULTURAL (AG-1) DISTRICT, PUBLIC AND
QUASI-PUBLIC (P) DISTRICT, AND CONSERVATION (C-1) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Sign permit applications for signs located within these
districts shall be reviewed on a case by case basis depending on the proposed
use of the property and based on similar uses in the zoning districts listed
below.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007; Am. Ord. 542, passed 4-23-2013)  Penalty, see
§ 151.999



§ 151.186  SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL (R-1, R-1A, R-2, AND R-3)
DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The following regulations shall apply to non-residential
permitted, conditional or legal nonconforming uses:



      (1)   Nameplates may be wall or monument mounted or
combination thereof and shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.



      (2)   Monument signs shall have a maximum height of 6 feet and
shall have a setback of 15 feet from any property line and shall not be
placed in the sight triangle.



   (B)   The following regulations shall apply to residential
permitted, conditional or legal nonconforming uses:



      (1)   One subdivision identification sign per street frontage,
neighborhood, subdivision or development, not to exceed 48 square feet in
sign area in each location.



      (2)   One identification sign per entrance to apartment or
condominium complex, not to exceed 36 square feet in sign area.



      (3)   Home occupations - 1 sign with a maximum area of 4
square feet will be allowed and may not be illuminated. The sign must be
located in the front yard.



      (4)   All allowed signs shall have a maximum height of 6 feet
and shall have a setback of 15 feet from any property line and shall not be
placed in the sight triangle.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.187  SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL-BUSINESS TRANSITIONAL (R-B)
DISTRICT.



   (A)   The following regulations shall apply to non-residential
permitted, conditional, or legal nonconforming uses:



      (1)   One 20-square feet pylon or monument sign and one
12-square feet wall sign are allowed per building.



      (2)   Pylon signs shall have a maximum height of 10 feet and
shall have a setback of 15 feet from any property line and shall not be
placed in the sight triangle. The Zoning Administrator must verify setback
before the sign support is installed.



      (3)   Monument signs shall have a maximum height of 8 feet and
shall have a setback of 15 feet from any property line and shall not be
placed in the sight triangle. The Zoning Administrator must verify setback
before the sign support is installed.



   (B)   The following regulations shall apply to residential
permitted, conditional, or legal nonconforming uses:



      (1)   One subdivision identification sign per street frontage,
neighborhood, subdivision or development, not to exceed 48 square feet in
sign area in each location.



      (2)   One identification sign per entrance to apartment or
condominium complex, not to exceed 36 square feet in sign area.



      (3)   Home occupations - 1 sign with a maximum area of 4
square feet will be allowed and may not be illuminated. The sign must be
located in the front yard.



      (4)   All allowed signs shall have a maximum height of 6 feet
and shall have a setback of 15 feet from any property line and shall not be
placed in the sight triangle.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007; Am. Ord. 542, passed 4-23-2013)  Penalty, see
§ 151.999



§ 151.188  SIGNS PERMITTED IN HIGHWAY BUSINESS (B-1) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Total site signage.  Two square feet per front foot of
building abutting a public right-of-way.



   (B)   On-premise signs.



      (1)   A zoning lot which has a front lineal footage of greater
than 300 feet may have a pylon sign and a monument sign or 2 monument signs.
A zoning lot which has a front lineal footage less than 300 feet may have
either a pylon sign or monument sign.



      (2)   On corner lots, all signs must be located outside of the
sight triangle.



      (3)   Pylon sign.



         (a)   A zoning lot is allowed 1 pylon sign not to exceed
100 square feet in area.



         (b)   Pylon signs shall be set back 10 feet from
property lines to the support structure. The maximum height for pylon signs
is 30 feet. The sign may project from the support into the setback area 5
feet. The sign must be a minimum of 8 feet above grade. The Zoning
Administrator must verify setback before the sign support is installed.



         (c)   The square footage of pylon signs shall count
towards the total site signage maximum allowed.



      (4)   Monument signs.



         (a)   A zoning lot is allowed to have up to 2 monument
signs, provided the requirements for 2 signs have been met per this section.



         (b)   Monument signs greater than 8 feet in height shall
be constructed with the entire bottom of the sign structure in contact with
the ground. A solid continuous background area should be provided from the
ground to the top of the sign in a material which matches the principal
structure.



         (c)   Monument sign height may be a maximum of 15 feet.



         (d)   The sign face shall occupy at least 50% of the
monument sign. The sign face shall not exceed 100 square feet in area.



         (e)   Signs should exhibit a sense of continuity through
the use of a uniform color of the metal surround. Monument signs are required
to be constructed of materials of either the same as the principal structure
or appear the same.



         (f)   Monument signs shall be set back a minimum of 10
feet from the property lines. The Zoning Administrator must verify setback
before the sign support is installed.



         (g)   The square footage of the sign area on a monument
sign shall count towards the total site signage maximum allowed.



      (5)   Wall signs.



         (a)   Total wall signage on any building shall not
exceed 10% of the front wall area.



         (b)   Wall signs shall not project above the roof line.



         (c)   Wall signs shall not project in excess of 12
inches from building face, with the exception of canopies or awnings that do
not overhang the public right-of-way.



         (d)   Any 1 wall sign shall not exceed 200 square feet
in area.



         (e)   Multi-tenant business centers may have 1 wall sign
per business which has an exclusive exterior entrance. A second wall sign may
be allowed if a tenant has an additional exclusive exterior entrance on a
second wall. All wall signs shall not exceed more than 10% of the wall area.



         (f)   The square footage of wall signs shall count
towards the total site signage maximum allowed.



      (6)   Window signs are exempt from permit requirements, but
must conform to all other requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007; Am. Ord. 542, passed 4-23-2013)  Penalty, see
§ 151.999



§ 151.189  SIGNS PERMITTED IN GENERAL BUSINESS (B-2) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Size of signs. Total site signage - 150 square feet.
Multi-tenant buildings and properties located on a corner lot may increase
the total site signage to 200 square feet with an approved comprehensive sign
plan for the property.



   (B)   On-premise signs.



      (1)   Pylon sign.



         (a)   A zoning lot is allowed 1 pylon sign which shall
not exceed 60 square feet in area.



         (b)   Maximum height is 15 feet above grade. The sign
may not be located in or over right-of-way. The Zoning Administrator must
verify setback before the sign support is installed.



         (c)   The square footage of pylon signs shall count
towards the total site signage maximum allowed.



      (2)   Wall sign.



         (a)   Total wall signage on any building shall not
exceed 20% of the front wall area.



         (b)   All signs shall not project above the roof line.



         (c)   Wall signs shall not project in excess of 12
inches from building face, with exception of canopies or awnings.



         (d)   Any 1 wall sign shall not exceed 100 square feet.



         (e)   Multi-tenant buildings may have 1 wall sign per
business which has an exclusive exterior entrance. A second wall sign may be
allowed if a tenant has an additional exclusive exterior entrance on a second
wall. All signs shall not exceed 20% of the wall area.



         (f)   The square footage of wall signs shall count
towards the total site signage maximum allowed.



      (3)   Projecting signs.



         (a)   Projecting signs cannot project more than 8 feet
from the wall of the building and must be a minimum of 8 feet above grade and
shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.



         (b)   The square footage of any projecting signs shall
count towards the total site signage maximum.



      (4)   Suspended signs.



         (a)   Suspended signs shall not exceed 8 square feet and
must have a minimum clearance of 8 feet to grade.



         (b)   The square footage of suspended signs shall count
towards the total site signage maximum.



      (5)   Window signs are exempt from permit requirements, but
must conform to all other requirements of this subchapter.



      (6)   Signs in the General Business District may be
illuminated.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007; Am. Ord. 542, passed 4-23-2013)  Penalty, see
§ 151.999



§ 151.190  SIGNS PERMITTED IN LIGHT INDUSTRY (I-1) AND HEAVY INDUSTRY (I-2)
DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Total site signage. Three square feet per front foot of
building abutting a public right-of-way.



   (B)   On-premise signs.



      (1)   A zoning lot which has a front lineal footage of greater
than 300 feet may have a pylon sign and a monument sign or 2 monument signs.
A zoning lot which has a front lineal footage less than 300 feet may have
either a pylon sign or monument sign.



      (2)   On corner lots, all signs must be located outside of the
sight triangle.



      (3)   Pylon signs.



         (a)   A zoning lot is allowed 1 pylon sign not to exceed
100 square feet in area.



         (b)   Pylon signs shall be set back 10 feet from
property lines to the support structure. The maximum height for pylon signs
is 30 feet. The sign may project from the support into the setback area 5
feet. The sign must be a minimum of 8 feet above grade. The Zoning
Administrator must verify setback before the sign support is installed.



         (c)   The square footage of pylon signs shall count
towards the total site signage maximum allowed.



      (4)   Monument signs.



         (a)   No more than 1 monument sign shall be permitted
per zoning lot.



         (b)   Monument signs greater than 8 feet in height shall
be constructed with the entire bottom of the sign structure in contact with
the ground. A solid continuous background area should be provided from the
ground to the top of the sign in a material which matches the principal
structure.



         (c)   Monument sign height may be a maximum of 15 feet.



         (d)   The sign face shall occupy at least 50% of the
monument sign. The sign face shall not exceed 125 square feet in area.



         (e)   Signs should exhibit a sense of continuity through
the use of a uniform color of the metal surround. Monument signs are required
to be constructed of materials of either the same as the principal structure
or appear the same.



         (f)   Monument signs shall be set back a minimum of 10
feet from the property lines. The Zoning Administrator must verify setback
before the sign support is installed.



         (g)   Multi-tenant business centers will be allowed to
have 1 joint identification monument sign.



         (h)   The square footage of the sign area on a monument
sign shall count towards the total site signage maximum allowed.



      (5)   Wall signs.



         (a)   Total wall signage on any building shall not
exceed 10% of the front wall area.



         (b)   Wall signs shall not project above the roof line.



         (c)   Wall signs shall not project in excess of 12
inches from building face with the exception of canopies or awnings that do
not overhang the public right-of-way.



         (d)   Any 1 wall sign shall not exceed 200 square feet
per sign.



         (e)   Multi-tenant business centers may have 1 wall sign
per business which has an exclusive exterior entrance. A second wall sign may
be allowed if a tenant has an additional exclusive exterior entrance on a
second wall. All wall signs shall not exceed more than 10% of the wall area.



         (f)   The square footage of wall signs shall count
towards the total site signage maximum allowed.



      (6)   Window signs are exempt from permit requirements, but
must conform to all other requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007; Am. Ord. 542, passed 4-23-2013)  Penalty, see
§ 151.999



§ 151.191  STREET BANNERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place any sign or
banner or other obstruction across or over any street or alley except Main
Avenue, Highway 71 and Highway 34.



   (B)   For banners placed upon or over Main Avenue, Highway 71 or
Highway 34 a banner permit must first be obtained from the Administrator. 
Proof of insurance shall be submitted with all permit applications, as well
as a permit from the State of Minnesota for the state highways.



   (C)   Such permit shall be granted upon Council approval provided a
security deposit is paid by the applicant in a sum established by the Council.



   (D)   Any permit granted pursuant to this section shall not exceed
30 days.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.192  NON-CONFORMING SIGN; COMPLIANCE.



   It is recognized that signs exist within the zoning districts which
were lawful before this subchapter was enacted, but will be prohibited under
the terms of this subchapter.  It is the intent of this subchapter that
nonconforming signs shall not be enlarged upon or expanded, nor be used as
grounds for adding other signs or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district.  It is further the intent of this subchapter to permit legal
nonconforming signs existing on the effective date of this subchapter to
continue as legal nonconforming signs provided such signs are safe, are
maintained so as not to be unsightly, and have not been abandoned or removed
subject to the following provisions:



   (A)   No sign shall be enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its nonconformity.



   (B)   If the use of the nonconforming sign or sign structure is
discontinued for a period of 1 year, the sign or sign structure shall not be
reconstructed or used except in conformity with the provisions of this
subchapter.



   (C)   Should such nonconforming sign or sign structure be damaged or
structure be destroyed by any means to an extent greater than 50% of its
market value and all required permits for its reconstruction have not been
applied for within 180 days of when the sign or sign structure was damaged,
it shall not be reconstructed or used except in conformity with the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (D)   Should such a sign or sign structure be moved for any reason
for any distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations
for the zoning district in which it is located after it is moved.



   (E)   No existing sign devoted to a use not permitted by the Zoning
Code in the zoning district in which it is located shall be enlarged,
expanded or moved except in changing the sign to a sign permitted in the
zoning district in which it is located.



   (F)   When a building loses its nonconformity status all signs
devoted to the structure shall be removed and all signs painted directly on
the structure shall be repainted in a neutral color which will harmonize with
the structure.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.193  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)    If any portion of this subchapter is found to be in conflict
with any other provision of any zoning, building, fire safety, or health
ordinance, the provision that establishes the higher standard shall prevail.



   (B)   Failure to obtain a sign permit prior to erection of a sign
shall result in a double permit fee.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007)



§ 151.194  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this subchapter
is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this subchapter. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have adopted this subchapter in each section,
division, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections, divisions, sentences, clauses, or phrases be
declared invalid.



(Ord. 494, passed 9-25-2007)




SUBDIVISIONS AND PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS




§ 151.205  PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Each new subdivision becomes a permanent unit in the basic
physical structure of the community, a unit with which the future community
will, of necessity, be forced to comply.



   (B)   Haphazard and piecemeal planning of subdivisions, without
correlation to a plan, will result in a disconnected patchwork of plats with
poor traffic circulation and expensive provision of utilities.



   (C)   In order that new subdivisions will contribute toward an
attractive, orderly, stable and wholesome community environment, adequate
municipal services and efficient movement of traffic, all subdivisions
hereafter platted within the jurisdiction of the city shall comply with the
regulations set forth in this subchapter.



   (D)   In their interpretation and application the provisions of this
subchapter are minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the public
health, safety, and general welfare.



(Prior Code, § 66-211)



§ 151.206  LIMITS OF REGULATIONS AND SCOPE.



   (A)   General. The rules and regulations governing plats and
subdivisions of land contained in this subchapter apply within the city and
orderly annexation area in Henrietta Township.



   (B)   Prior subdivisions.  Except in the case of a resubdivision,
this subchapter shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of
subdivision plats recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Hubbard
County prior to the effective date of this chapter, nor is it intended by
this subchapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere
with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances except those in conflict
with these regulations, or with private restrictions placed upon property by
deed, covenant or other private agreements which are equal to or more
restrictive than covenants running with the land to which the city is a party.



(Prior Code, § 66-212)



§ 151.207  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY.  A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve
as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on a street. 



   BOULEVARD.  The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb
line and the property line.



   BUTT LOT.  A lot at the end of a block and located between 2 corner
lots.



   BLOCK.  An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded
by streets, or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the
subdivision, or a combination of the above with a stream or water body.



   COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  The comprehensive plan prepared by
the Planning Commission indicating the general locations recommended for the
various functional classes of land use, places and structures, and for the
general physical development of the city and includes any unit or part of the
plan separately adopted and any amendments to the plan or parts thereof.



   EASEMENT.  A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land
and for the purpose of constructing and maintaining drives, utilities,
including, but not limited to, wetlands, ponding areas, sanitary sewers,
watermains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewers, or storm drainage
ways and gas lines.



   FINAL PLAT.  The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdividers
plan of subdivision is presented for approval and which, if approved, will be
submitted to the county register of deeds.  The plat must conform to the
requirements of law.



   LOT.  A parcel or portion of land designated by metes and bounds, a
registered land survey, auditor’s plats or other means and separated from
other parcels or portions by the description for the purpose of sale, lease,
or separate use thereof.



   LOT IMPROVEMENT.  Any building, structure, place, work of art, or
other object, or improvement of the land on which they are situated
constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of the
betterment.  Certain LOT IMPROVEMENTS shall be properly bonded as provided
in these regulations.



   MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS.  The guides, principles and
specifications for the preparation of subdivision plans indicating, among
other things, the minimum and maximum dimensions of the various elements set
forth in the preliminary plan.



   MINOR SUBDIVISION.  Any subdivision containing not more than 3 lots
fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road, or the
extension of municipal facilities, or the creation of any public
improvements, and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or
adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the
comprehensive plan or these regulations.



   OFFICIAL MONUMENT.  A marker established by the original Federal Land
Survey for use as a reference point in surveying and subdividing land.



   OUTLOT.  A remnant from a subdivision that is not a developable piece
of property unless replatted in accordance with city ordinances.



   OWNER.  Any person having sufficient proprietary interest in the land
sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain preceding to subdivide the
same under these regulations.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY.  The right-of-way across or within a block, for use by
pedestrian traffic whether designated as a pedestrian way, crosswalk or
however otherwise designated.



   PERCENTAGE OF GRADE ON STREET CENTERLINE.  The distance vertically
from the horizontal in feet and tenths of a foot for each 100 feet of
horizontal distance.



   PLANNING COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission of the City of Park
Rapids.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT.  The preliminary plat map, drawing or chart
indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the
Planning Commission and City Council for their consideration as compliance
with the comprehensive development plan and these regulations along with
required supporting data.



   PROTECTIVE COVENANTS.  Contracts entered into between private parties
constituting a restriction on the use of all private property within a
subdivision for the benefit of property owners, and to provide mutual
protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to
impair stability of values.



   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT.  Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk,
pedestrian-way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or
other facility for which the city may ultimately assume the responsibility
for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which
local government responsibility is established.



   SETBACK LINE, BUILDING.  A line within a lot which establishes the
minimum distance between the property lines and the nearest portion of an
enclosed structure.



   STREETS AND ALLEYS.  Public ways and have the following meanings:



      (1)   ALLEY.  A minor way which is used primarily for
vehicular access to the back or the side of properties abutting on a street.



      (2)   COLLECTOR STREET.  A street which carries traffic from
minor streets to thoroughfares.  It includes the principal entrance streets
of a residential development and streets for circulation within a development.



      (3)   CUL-DE-SAC.  A minor street with only 1 outlet and
having a turnaround.



      (4)   HALF STREET.  A public right-of-way having only half
the required width as specified in § 151.213.



      (5)   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET.  A minor street which is
parallel and adjacent to a thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.



      (6)   MINOR STREET.  A street of limited continuity used
primarily for access to the abutting properties and the local needs of a
neighborhood.



      (7)   PRIVATE STREET.  A way for vehicular traffic which is
not owned and maintained by the city.



      (8)   STREET.  A way for vehicular traffic, whether
designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road,
avenue, lane, and place or however otherwise designated.



      (9)   STREET WIDTH.  The shortest distance between the lines
delineating the right-of-way of a street.



      (10)   THOROUGHFARE.  A street which heavy volumes of fast
moving vehicles are provided for, having considerable continuity, and used
primarily as traffic arteries for intercommunication between large areas.



   SUBDIVIDER.  Any person commencing proceedings under the terms of this
section to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself, herself, or
for another.



   SUBDIVISION.



      (1)   The division of a parcel of land into 2 or more lots or
parcels, any of which resultant parcel is less than 5 acres in area or 300
feet in width, for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building or
development or, if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land.



      (2)   The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to
the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.



   WATER RETENTION DEVICE OR AREA.  Any constructed control device,
ponding area or stormwater pond, or a natural depression or wetland installed
or planned for under a state approved surface water management plan which
provides for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff, with the purpose of
replicating, pre-development hydrologic conditions and retaining sediment
and/or nutrients.



(Prior Code, § 66-213)  (Am. Ord. 417, passed 11-29-2004; Am. Ord. 491,
passed 5-22-2007)



§ 151.208  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   Unless approved as a final plat as provided herein, no subdivision
shall be entitled to record in the County Recorder’s office or have any
validity, and the building official shall not issue building permits for any
structure on a lot in any proposed subdivision.  The Council shall not
permit any public improvements to be installed unless the preliminary plat is
approved and shall not permit any connection of services until approval of
the final plat and recording of same.



(Prior Code, § 66-214)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.209  PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Plat approval.  The procedure for plat approval is set forth
in this section.



   (B)   Sketch plan.



      (1)   Subdivider’s are invited to prepare, for review with
the Planning Commission, City Engineer and others as the Planning Commission
may direct, a proposed subdivision sketch plan which, in order to be most
useful, shall contain the following information:



         (a)   Site location map showing streets, school
locations, commercial centers and other significant developments;



         (b)   Tract boundaries;



         (c)   North arrow and scale;



         (d)   Streets within and adjacent to tract;



         (e)   Topography and physical features;



         (f)   Proposed general street design; and



         (g)   Proposed lot size and orientation.



      (2)   The sketch plan will be considered as the basis for
discussion between the subdivider and the Planning Commission.  Submission
of the sketch plan shall not constitute formal filing of a preliminary
plan.  If desired by either the Planning Commission or the subdivider, the
sketch plan may be submitted to the Planning Commission for their unofficial
review and comments, the intent of which shall be to point out any
deficiencies in the plan and to recommend any modifications necessary to
bring the plan into conformance with this section.



   (C)   Preliminary plats.



      (1)   Before dividing any tract of land into 2 or more lots or
parcels, an owner or subdivider shall, unless a variance is authorized, file
with the City Planner:



         (a)   Ten copies of the preliminary plat and one 11
inches by 17 inches copy.



         (b)   A subdivision fee per the city fee schedule, as
adopted and amended from time to time by the City Council.  This fee shall
be used for public expenses in connection with the approval or disapproval of
the plan and final plat that may thereafter be submitted.  Each final plat
submitted except the first as a part of the approved preliminary plan, may
require an additional fee of $50.



         (c)   Minor subdivisions shall be charged a fee per the
city fee schedule.



         (d)   If the subdivider requests or the Council requires
that any existing special assessments which have been levied against the
premises described in the subdivision be divided and allocated to the
respective lots in the subdivision plat, the City Clerk shall estimate the
clerical cost of preparing the revised assessment roll, filing the same with
the County Auditor, and making the division and allocation, and upon approval
by the Council of the estimated cost, the same shall be paid to the City
Clerk in addition to the fees mentioned in division (b) above to cover the
cost of preparing and filing of the revised assessment.



         (e)   The subdivider shall fill out a subdivision
application blank available at the office of the City Planner.



      (2)   The Planning Commission shall consider the preliminary
plat officially filed after the City Planner has examined it and advised the
Planning Commission that it is in proper form.



      (3)   On the same date that the City Planner places the
preliminary plat on file, the City Planner shall:



         (a)   Set a date for a public hearing on the preliminary
plat, subject to division (4) below.  The City Planner shall cause notice of
the hearing to be sent by mail to all property owners of record within 350
feet of the proposed subdivision boundaries at least 10 days prior to the
hearing.  In addition, notice of the hearing shall be published in the
official newspaper at least 10 days prior to the hearing.  The Planning
Commission shall hold the public hearing at 1 of its regular meeting dates.



         (b)    Refer 1 copy of the preliminary plat to the
Street and Water Department for examination and report and 1 copy to the City
Engineer for his or her examination and report, 1 copy to the Hubbard County
Wetlands Coordinator for his or her examination and report, and 1 copy to the
school district.  Copies of the report of the City Engineer shall be given
to the Planning Commission prior to the public hearing.



      (4)   The Planning Commission shall make its report to the
Council within 60 days except in cases where the applicant requests
additional time to adjust or count the plats.



      (5)   The Council shall act on the preliminary plat within 60
days of the date on which it was received from the Planning Commission.



      (6)   If the preliminary plat is not approved by the Council
the reasons for the action shall be recorded in the proceedings of the
Council and transmitted to the applicant.  If the preliminary plat is
approved, the approval shall not constitute final acceptance of the
subdivision.



      (7)   Should the subdivider desire to amend the preliminary
plat as approved, he or she may resubmit the amended plan which shall follow
the same procedure except for the hearing and fee, unless the amendment is,
in the opinion of the Planning Commission, of the scope as to constitute a
new plat, in which case it shall be refiled.



   (D)   Final plat.



      (1)   The owner or subdivider shall file 10 copies of the
final plat with the Planning Commission not later than 6 months after the
date of approval of the preliminary plat by the Council; otherwise, the
preliminary plat will be considered void unless an extension is requested in
writing by the subdivider and for good cause granted by the Council.  One 11
inches by 17 inches copy of the final plat shall also be submitted.



      (2)   The final plat will have incorporated all changes or
modifications approved in the preliminary plat; in all other respects, it
shall conform to the preliminary plat.  It may constitute only that portion
of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposed to record and
develop at the time, provided that the portion conforms with all the
requirements of this section.



      (3)   The Planning Commission shall consider the final plat
officially filed after the City Planner has examined it and advised the
Planning Commission that it is in proper form.



      (4)   On the same date that the final plat is placed on file,
the City Planner shall refer 2 copies of the final plat to the Planning
Commission, 3 copies to the City Engineer and 1 copy each to the telephone,
gas, and electric companies.  The procedure and timing for processing the
final plat shall be the same as for the preliminary plat except that no
public hearing is required in processing the final plat.



      (5)   If the final plat is approved by the Council, the
subdivider shall record it with the County Recorder within 6 months after the
date of approval; and if not so filed, the approval of the final plat shall
be void and of no effect.



      (6)   The subdivider shall furnish the following specified
types of copies of the final plat to the persons listed below:



 

Hubbard County Recorder
 
1 copy on mylar


Hubbard County Auditor
 
1 copy on paper


Hubbard County  Engineer
 
1 copy on paper


City Engineer
 
1 copy on transparent linen or mylar


 
 
1 copy on film positive at 1 inch equals 200 feet


 
 
A digital copy (when available) with information from the preliminary and
final plat included



 



   (E)   Land division.  In any case where the division of a parcel of
land into 2 or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership
or building development does not come within the definition of a subdivision,
a description of the land division shall be filed with the Planning
Commission which shall submit copies of the division to the Council and City
Engineer.  No building permit may be issued until the description has been
received by the City Planner.



   (F)   Absence of utilities.  In areas which cannot reasonably be
served by public water and sanitary sewer, and the service cannot be expected
within a 5 year period, no residential lot shall be developed for residential
purposes unless it contains at least 1 acre of land area regardless of the
lot area requirements of prevailing zoning regulations.  Where public water
and sanitary sewer is not available and individual wells and disposal systems
are to be utilized, the subdivider may be required to submit the results of
tests to ascertain subsurface soil, rock, and ground water conditions.



(Prior Code, § 66-215)  (Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007)  Penalty, see §
151.999



§ 151.210  NECESSARY DATA FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   Size.



      (1)   The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn.



      (2)   The size of the map shall not be less than 12 inches by
18 inches.



      (3)   All subdivision maps shall be drawn at a scale not
smaller than a scale of 1 inch equals 100 feet, unless otherwise required by
the Council.



   (B)   Information required.  The preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision shall contain or have attached thereto the following information:



      (1)   Identification and description.



         (a)    Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall
not duplicate or be alike in pronunciation of the name of any plat
theretofore recorded in the County of Hubbard;



         (b)   Legal description of property to be platted and a
survey prepared by a surveyor registered in the State of Minnesota;



         (c)   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider,
surveyor, and designer of the plan;



         (d)    North arrow and scale; and



         (e)   Date of preparation.



      (2)   Existing conditions.



         (a)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision clearly
indicated;



         (b)   Existing zoning classification;



         (c)   Total approximate acreage;



         (d)   Location, widths, and names of all existing or
previously platted streets or other public ways, showing the type, width and
condition of improvements, if any, and utility right-of-ways, parks and other
public open space, permanent buildings and structures, easements and section
and corporate lines within the proposed subdivision and to a distance of 100
feet beyond the proposed subdivision;



         (e)   Location and size of existing sewers, water mains,
culverts or other underground facilities within the proposed subdivision and
to a distance of 100 feet beyond the proposed subdivision.  This data as
grades, invert elevations and locations of catch basin, manholes, and
hydrants shall also be shown;



         (f)   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or
subdivided land within 100 feet of the proposed subdivision, the land to be
identified by name and ownership;



         (g)   Topographic data, including an area 300 feet
beyond the boundaries of the proposed subdivision, with a vertical contour
interval of not more than 2 feet.  Water courses, marshes, wooded areas,
rock outcrops, power transmission poles and lines and other significant
features shall also be shown.  United States Geographic Survey data shall be
used for all topographic mapping.  In the case of a subdivision where no new
street is involved, the required topographic map may be waived if it is
deemed unnecessary by the City Engineer and the Planning Commission;



         (h)   In shoreland areas, a line or contour representing
the ordinary high water level, the “toe” and the “top” of bluffs, and
the minimum building setback distances from the top of the bluff and the lake
or river; and



         (i)   A plan for soil erosion and sediment control both
during construction and after development has been completed.  The plan
shall include gradients of waterways, design of velocity and erosion control
measures, design of sediment control measures, and landscaping of the erosion
and sediment control system.



      (3)   Subdivision design features.



         (a)   Layout of proposed streets, showing right-of-way
widths and proposed names of streets;



         (b)   Location and widths of proposed pedestrian ways
and utility easements;



         (c)   Typical cross-sections of proposed improvements
upon streets, together with an indication as to the method of disposing of
the proposed stormwater runoff;



         (d)   Approximate centerline gradients of proposed
streets;



         (e)   Locations, size, and approximate gradient of
proposed sewer lines, water mains, and service connections;



         (f)   Layout, numbers, and preliminary dimensions of
lots and blocks;



         (g)   Minimum front and side street building setback
lines, indicating dimensions; and



         (h)   Areas, other than streets, pedestrian ways, and
utility easements intended to be dedicated or preserved for public use,
including the size of the area or areas in acres.



      (4)   Other information.



         (a)    Statement of the proposed use of lots, stating
the type of residential buildings, with the number of proposed dwelling
units; the type of business or industry so as to reveal the effect of the
development on traffic, fire hazards, or congestion of population;



         (b)   Proposed restrictive covenants and a copy of any
restrictive covenants pertaining to adjacent properties;



         (c)   Source of water supply;



         (d)    Provisions for sewage disposal, drainage, and
flood control;



         (e)   If any zoning changes are contemplated, indicate
the proposed zoning plan for the area, including dimensions;



         (f)   Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to
that which is being proposed for the subdivision, the Planning Commission may
require that the subdivider submit a preliminary plan for the remainder of
the property so as to show the possible relationships between the proposed
subdivision and any future subdivisions.  In any event, all subdivisions
must be shown to relate well with existing or potential adjacent
subdivisions; and



         (g)   Potential resubdivision and use of excessively
deep (over 200 feet) lots must be indicated in a satisfactory manner.



(Prior Code, § 66-216)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.211  QUALIFICATION GOVERNING APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN.



   (A)   Conditional report.



      (1)   If a proposed subdivision fails to meet the requirements
set forth in this section, the Planning Commission may submit a conditional
report to the Council, listing those items in which the proposed subdivision
is deficient.



      (2)   The Council may then, at its discretion, require that
the subdivider make any and all necessary changes in the preliminary plan in
order to bring it into compliance with the requirements of this section.



   (B)   Tentative approval.  The approval of a preliminary plan by
the Planning Commission and Council is tentative only, involving merely the
general acceptability of the layout as submitted, and is not to be construed
as approval of the final subdivision plan.



   (C)   Other approvals.  Subsequent approval of the engineering
proposals pertaining to water supply, storm drainage, sewerage and sewage
disposal, sidewalks, gas and electric service, grading, gradients and roadway
widths and the surfacing of streets will be required by the Council and by
other public officials having jurisdiction in the matters, prior to the
approval of the final plat by the city.



   (D)   Flood prone areas.  No plan will be approved for a
subdivision which covers an area subject to periodic flooding or which
contains extremely poor drainage facilities and which would make adequate
drainage of the streets and lots impossible, unless the subdivider agrees to
make improvements which will, in the opinion of the City Engineer, make the
area completely safe for occupancy and provide adequate street and lot
drainage.



   (E)   Sewers.  No plat will be accepted that cannot be adequately
served with sanitary sewers or other approved disposal systems.



(Prior Code, § 66-217)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.212  NECESSARY DATA FOR FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   General.  The final plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor
who is registered in the State of Minnesota and shall conform to all state
and county requirements and the requirements of this section.  For the final
plat to be considered it must be accompanied by a letter from a Minnesota
registered land surveyor, other than the surveyor drafting the plat, stating
that the proposed plat is in conformance with existing laws and that all
mathematical computations are correct.  In any event, the data shown on the
final plat shall comply with provisions of law.



   (B)   Forms of approval.



      (1)   Form for approval by Council is as follows:



         Approved by the City Council of the City of Park Rapids,
Minnesota, this ___ day of ____, 20__.



         Signed: ___________________________



                  Mayor



         Attest: ____________________________



                  City Clerk



      (2)   Form for approval by Planning Commission is as follows:



         Approved by the Planning Commission of the City of Park
Rapids, Minnesota, this ___ day of ___________, 20__.



         Signed: ____________________________



                  Chair



         Attest: ____________________________



                  Secretary



(Prior Code, § 66-218)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.213  MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Conformity with the comprehensive development plan.  The
proposed subdivision shall conform to the comprehensive development plan.



   (B)   Street plan.  The arrangement, character, extent, width,
grade and location of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive
development plan and to this section, and shall be considered in their
relation to existing and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of
traffic, to topographical conditions, to drainage patterns, to public
convenience and safety and in their appropriate relationship to the proposed
uses of the land and land to be served by these streets.  Names of new
streets shall not duplicate existing or platted streets. 



      (1)   Continuation of existing streets.  The arrangement of
streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions for the appropriate
continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas.  When new streets
are extensions of existing streets or in alignment with the existing or
platted street, the new streets shall be at the same or greater width than
the existing streets, but in no case may a new street be less than the
minimum width required by this section.  Streets which are an extension of
existing streets or in alignment with the existing or platted street, shall
have the same name as the existing street. 



      (2)   Future projection of streets.  Where adjoining areas
are not subdivided but may be subdivided, the arrangement of streets in a new
subdivision shall make provision for the proper projection of streets into
adjoining areas by carrying the new streets to the boundaries of the new
subdivision at the appropriate locations.



      (3)   Widths.  All right-of-way widths and pavement widths
(face to face of curb) shall be not less than the following dimensions:



 


Classification

 

Roadway Width

 

Right-of-Way



Arterial and collector
 

44 - 48 feet

 

80 feet



Local
 

36 feet

 

66 feet



Alleys (Commercial)
 

20 feet

 

24 feet



Alleys (Residential)
 

16 feet

 

20 feet



Pedestrian
 

6 feet

 

10 feet




 



      (4)   Deflection.  The angle of intersection between any 2
streets shall not vary by more than 10 degrees from a right angle.



      (5)   Grades.  All centerline gradients shall be at least .5%
wherever feasible and shall not exceed the following:



 


Classification

 

Grade (Percent)



Arterials
 

4%



Collector
 

7%



Local
 

8%



Minor streets, alleys
 

8%




 



      (6)   Vertical curves.  Different connecting street gradients
shall be connected with vertical curves.  Minimum lengths of these curves
shall conform to the standards specified in Table A, Sheet 5-291.231 of the
Minnesota Highway Road Design Manual as amended.



      (7)   Street jogs.  Street jogs shall have a centerline
offset of 150 feet or more when applied to minor streets or marginal access
streets; in all other cases, they shall be avoided. 



      (8)   Minor streets.  Minor streets shall be so aligned as to
discourage their use by through traffic.



      (9)   Cul-de-sacs.  The maximum length of cul-de-sac streets
shall be 500 feet measured along the centerline from the intersection of
origin to the end of the right-of-way and terminated with a diameter of 120
feet.



      (10)   Marginal access streets.



         (a)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing
or planned major thoroughfare, the Council may require a street approximately
parallel to and on either side of the right-of-way for adequate protection of
residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.



         (b)   The marginal access streets shall be located at a
distance from the major thoroughfare right-of-way as to allow for the
appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential
districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in the appropriate
districts.



         (c)   The distances shall also be determined with due
regard for the requirements for approach grades and future grade separations.



      (11)   Half streets.



         (a)   Half streets shall be prohibited, except where
essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with
the other requirements of this section; and except where the Council finds it
will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half of the street
when the adjoining property is subdivided.



         (b)   Wherever there is a half street adjacent to a
tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within
the tract.



      (12)   Reserve strips.  Reserve strips controlling access to
streets shall be prohibited.



      (13)   Private streets.  Private streets shall not be
approved nor shall public improvements be approved for any private street.



      (14)   Hardship to owners of adjoining property avoided.  The
street arrangements shall not be so as to cause hardship to owners of
adjoining property in platting their own land and providing convenient access
to it.



   (C)   Alleys.



      (1)   Location requirements.  Either a public or private
alley shall be provided in a block where commercially zoned property abuts a
major or local thoroughfare.



      (2)   Widths.  All alley right-of-ways and pavement widths
shall conform to the following minimum standards:



 


Classification

 

Right-of-Way

 

Pavement



Industrial/Commercial
 

24 feet

 

20 feet



Residential (2-way)
 

20 feet

 

16 feet




 



      (3)   Grades.  All centerline gradients shall be at least .5%
but not more than 8%.



   (D)   Intersections.



      (1)    Angle of intersection.  The angle formed by
intersecting streets shall not be less than 60 degrees when measured at the
acute angle formed by the intersecting centerlines.  An angle of 90 degrees
is preferred.



      (2)   Size of intersection.  Intersections of more than 4
corners are prohibited.



      (3)   Corner radii.  Roadways of street intersections at the
curb shall be rounded by a radius of not less than 20 feet.  Roadways of
alley-street intersections shall be rounded by a radius of not less than 10
feet.  Corners at the entrance to the turnaround portions of cul-de-sacs
shall be rounded by a radius of not less than 15 feet.



   (E)   Water supply.  Extensions of the public water supply system
shall be designed so as to provide public water service to each lot.  The
design of the extensions shall be in accordance with the standards of the
city.



   (F)   Sewage disposal.  Extension of the public sanitary sewer
system shall be designed so as to provide sewer service to each lot.  The
design of the extensions shall be in accordance with the applicable standards
of the city, county, and state.



   (G)   Drainage.  A complete and adequate drainage system for the
subdivision shall be designed and shall include a storm sewer system or a
system of open ditches, culverts, pipes, and catch basins.  The system or
systems shall be designed in conformity with all applicable standards of the
city.



   (H)   Easements.



      (1)   Utilities.  Easements at least 12 feet wide, centered
on rear and other lot lines, shall be provided for utilities where necessary
and shall be dedicated to the public by appropriate language in the plat. 
They shall have continuity of alignment from block to block and at deflection
points, easements for pole-line anchors shall be provided where necessary. 
Easements shall be provided along property lines from utility easements on
rear lots lines to right-of-way so as to provide for a street light interval
not to exceed 500 feet.



      (2)   Drainage.  Easements shall be provided along each side
of the centerline of any water course or drainage channel whether or not
shown in the comprehensive development plan, to a width sufficient to provide
proper maintenance and protection and to provide for stormwater runoff and
installation and maintenance of storm sewers, and they shall be dedicated to
the city by appropriate language in the plat.



   (I)   Blocks.



      (1)   Factors governing dimensions.  Block length and width
or acreage within bordering streets shall be so as to accommodate the size of
residential lot required in the area by the Zoning Chapter and to provide for
convenient access, circulation control, and safety of street traffic.



      (2)   Length.  Block lengths shall not exceed 1,300 feet.



      (3)   Arrangements.  A block shall be so designed as to
provide 2 tiers of lots, unless it adjoins the Heartland Trail, Fish Hook
River or a lake, or a major thoroughfare, where it may have a single tier of
lots.



   (J)   Lots.



      (1)   Location.  All lots shall abut by their full frontage
on a publicly dedicated street or a street that has received legal status as
such.



      (2)   Size.  The dimensions of lots in a subdivision shall
not be less than the minimum dimensions specified under the appropriate
district requirements in the City Zoning Chapter.



      (3)   Butt lots.  Butt lots shall be platted at least 5 feet
wider than the average width of interior lots in the block.



      (4)   Side lot lines.  Side lines of lots shall be
substantially at right angles to the street line.



      (5)   Water courses.  Lots abutting upon a water course,
drainage way, channel or stream shall be required to abide by the regulations
of the shoreland provision of the Zoning Chapter.



      (6)   Natural features.  In the subdivision of any land, due
regard shall be shown for all natural features such as tree growth, water
courses, historic spots or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.



      (7)   Lot remnants.  All remnants of lots below minimum size
left over after subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots,
rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels.



      (8)   Lots along thoroughfares.  Except in those cases where
there are extenuating circumstances, residential lots shall not front on
major thoroughfares.



(Prior Code, § 66-219)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.214  PARK DEDICATION, OPEN SPACES AND PUBLIC USES.



   (A)   Authority.



      (1)   Pursuant to M.S. 462.358, as it may be amended from time
to time, the City Council, upon recommendations by the Planning Commission,
shall require all subdividers requesting platting or replatting of land in
the City of Park Rapids to contribute 5% of final gross area of the
subdivision to be dedicated to the public for their use as either parks,
playgrounds, public open space, trail systems; or to contribute an equivalent
amount of cash, or any combination thereof.



      (2)   The form of contribution (cash, land, or any combination
thereof) shall be decided by the City Council upon recommendation of the
Planning Commission.



      (3)   Stormwater ponding areas may be incorporated into the
park land but shall not be consider a part of the park land dedication.



   (B)   Conditions for contribution for dedication.  It shall be
deemed in the public interest to require land dedication, cash contribution
or any combination thereof when the City Council, after review and
recommendation, makes 1 or more of the following findings of fact:



      (1)   The contribution is necessary in order to protect
adjacent land uses from potential conflicting land uses which could exist on
the land being subdivided.



      (2)   Increased number of residents to reside or be employed
within the subdivision will increase the recreational demands upon the city.



      (3)   The contribution is necessary to provide surface water
run off generated by the use proposed within the subdivision.



      (4)   The land proposed to be subdivided contains or borders
upon existing unique topographical features including but not limited to
ponds, lakes, streams, timber stands, water holding areas, hills, steep
slopes, drainage areas or bluffs which should be preserved to prevent
foreseeable safety, pollution, or erosion hazards or to provide unique
recreational and aesthetic qualities and enjoyment for the City of Park
Rapids.



      (5)   The contribution is necessary to comply with or fulfill
the goals, policies, and plans of the city.



   (C)   Type of contribution or dedication.



      (1)   The City Council shall require the subdivider to
dedicate 5% of the final plat gross area or contribute an equivalent amount
of cash, or any combination thereof to be used for either park, open space or
trail purposes.



      (2)   Land dedication will only be accepted if the property is
consistent with the city’s recreation or other related plans.  In the
absence of these plans or if the proposed dedicated land is inconsistent with
the appropriate city plans, cash contribution shall be mandatory.



   (D)   Procedure for cash contribution.



      (1)   Any cash contribution shall be based on 5% of the
estimated fair market value of the undeveloped land of the final plat area.



      (2)   For purposes of this division, FAIR MARKET VALUE OF
UNDEVELOPED LAND is defined as fair market value of the undeveloped portion
of the proposed gross platted area at the time of final plat submittal.  The
value shall exclude any value to be added to the land as a result of
improvements required as part of the final plat approval, including
utilities, streets, holding ponds and other public improvements serving the
land.  The fair market value as determined by the City Council shall be
based upon a current appraisal submitted to the city by a qualified real
estate appraiser at a fair market value or by reference to the estimated
market value as determined by the Hubbard County Assessor or by market
analysis or other qualified opinion from a non-certified appraiser.  The
cost of the appraisal shall be originally paid by the city and then paid to
the city from the cash contribution amount paid by the subdivider.  If the
subdivider disputes the accepted appraisal, the subdivider at his or her own
expense may obtain a second appraisal of the property, which may, at the
option of the City Council, be accepted by the City Council as being an
accurate appraisal of the property in question.  If the city rejects the
subdivider’s second appraisal, the amount of the cash contribution shall be
settled by arbitration between the subdivider and the City Administrator. 
All revenue obtained as park dedication fees shall be placed in the city’s
park land dedication account.



   (E)   Land dedication.  In cases where the subdivider is required
to dedicate land area, the City Council shall have the right to determine the
geographic location and configuration of the dedication.



   (F)   Delayed dedication or contribution.  At the time of
preliminary plat approval, the subdivider shall commit to the park dedication
policy.  The subdivider shall be required to pay the dedication prior to the
filing of the final plat.



   (G)   Exceptions for outlots.  In subdivisions which include
outlots, the subdivider may contribute land, cash, or any combination thereof
for the entire subdivision, including land within the outlots, or for only
that land exclusive of the outlots.  When the outlots are subdivided, the
contribution requirement shall be met in accordance with then existing
regulations as applicable, unless the contributions have been previously met.



   (H)   Resubdivision credit.  In a subdivision of any parcel of land
which previously has been subdivided and previously subjected to a cash
contribution of land dedication, the amount of the land dedication or cash
contribution previously received or dedicated shall be a credit against any
new contributions or dedication required for resubdivision.



   (I)   Commercial or industrial subdivisions.  The City Council may
waive the requirements of this section for commercial or industrial
subdivisions or resubdivisions when it is found the waiver is in the best
interest for the City of Park Rapids.



(Prior Code, § 66-220)  (Ord. 346, passed 6-12-2001; Am. Ord. 400, passed
11-25-2003; Am. Ord. 418, passed 11-29-2004)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.215  REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS ON THE SITE.



   Prior to the approval of a final plat by the Council, the subdivider
shall have agreed, in the manner set forth in this section, to install or pay
for the installation in conformity with all applicable standards and
provisions of this code, the following improvements on the site.



   (A)   Monuments.  Monuments of a permanent character shall be
placed in locations on the boundary of the subdivision and within it as
required. 



   (B)   Street and alley improvement.



      (1)   Grading.  The full width of the right-of-way of each
street and alley dedicated in the plat shall be graded.



      (2)   Pavement.  All streets and alleys shall have an
adequate subbase and shall be improved with an all-weather, permanent
surface.  If the streets and alleys are not paved, Class V gravel must be
applied as approved by the City Engineer.



   (C)   Water supply and sewage disposal.  Water service and sanitary
sewer mains and service connections stubbed into the property line shall be
provided to serve all the lots in residential subdivisions and shall be
connected to the existing city water and sewer system. 



   (D)   Drainage.  A system that will adequately take care of the
water runoff within the subdivision shall be provided.  If the City Council,
upon the recommendation of the City Engineer, determines that it is feasible
for the subdivider to install storm sewers connected to the existing storm
sewer system of the city within or adjacent to the subdivision, or an
extension of the city system which will be extended to the boundary of the
subdivision within 18 months of the filing of the final plat, the city shall
install a storm sewer system to provide drainage.  If a storm sewer system
is installed and connections to the city system are not immediately
available, the storm sewers shall be capped and temporary provisions made for
drainage by other means.  The cost of storm sewers shall be assessed against
the benefiting properties including those which may lie outside the
boundaries of the proposed subdivision. 



   (E)   Street signs.  Street signs shall be installed in all new
subdivisions by the city.



   (F)   Underground electric service and phone service.  The City
Council may require that all electric service and phone service installations
be put underground except where extreme conditions prohibit and a variance
from this requirement is recommended by the Planning Commission upon the
advice of the utility companies.



(Prior Code, § 66-221)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.216  DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT FOR IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Plans and specifications.  Prior to installation of any
required improvements and prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider
shall enter into a contract in writing with the city requiring the subdivider
to furnish and construct the improvements at his or her sole cost and in
accordance with plans and specifications and usual contract conditions all
approved by the Council, which shall include provisions for supervision of
details of construction by the City Engineer and grant to the City Engineer
authority to coordinate the work to be done under the contract by any
subcontractors authorized to proceed thereunder and with any other work being
done or contracted by the city in the vicinity.  The agreement shall require
the subdivider to make an escrow deposit or, in lieu thereof, to furnish a
performance bond as specified in division (B) below, the amount of the
deposit and the penal amount of the bond to be equal to the city engineer’s
estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be furnished under the
contract, including the cost of inspection by the city.  On request of the
subdivider, the contract may provide for completion of part or all of the
improvements covered thereby, prior to acceptance of the plat, and in the
event, the amount of the deposit or bond shall be reduced in an amount equal
to the estimated cost of the improvements to be furnished after the
acceptance of the plat only.  The time for completion of the work and the
several parts thereof shall be determined by the Council upon recommendation
of the City Engineer after consultation with the subdivider and shall be
reasonable in relation to the work to be done, the season of the year and
proper coordination with construction activities in the subdivision.  The
provisions of this section shall be waived or amended as deemed appropriate
by the City Council upon advice of the City Engineer on those improvements
which the city has agreed to install under the provisions of § 151.217. 



   (B)   Financial guarantee.  The contract required by this section
shall require the subdivider to make an escrow deposit or in lieu thereof,
furnish a performance bond as follows.



      (1)   Escrow deposit.  An escrow deposit shall be made with
the City Clerk in an amount equal to the total cost, as estimated by the City
Engineer including the cost of inspection by the city, of all the
improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider pursuant to the
contract and which have not been completed prior to approval of the final
plat.  The city shall be entitled to reimburse itself out of the deposit for
any cost and expense incurred by the city for completion of the work in case
of default of the subdivider under the contract, and for any damages
sustained by the city on account of any breach thereof.  Upon completion of
the work and termination of any liability to the city of the subdivider under
this contract, the balance remaining in the deposit shall be refunded to the
subdivider.



      (2)   Performance bond.  In lieu of making the escrow deposit
above described, the subdivider may furnish the city with a public
contractor’s performance bond in the form prescribed by statute, with
corporate surety, in a penal sum equal to the total cost, as estimated by the
City Engineer including the cost of inspection by the city, of all of the
improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider pursuant to the
contract and which have not been completed prior to approval of the final
plat.  The bond shall be approved by the City Attorney and filed with the
City Clerk.



      (3)   Construction plans.  Construction plans for the
required improvements, conforming to all respects with the standards of the
City Engineer and this code, shall be prepared at the subdivider’s expense
by a professional engineer who is registered in the State of Minnesota and
shall contain his or her seal.  The plans, together with the quantities of
construction items, shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his or her
estimate of the total cost of the required improvements.  Upon approval they
shall become a part of the contract required in division (A) above.  The
tracings of the plans approved by the City Engineer plus 2 prints shall be
furnished to the city to be filed by the City Engineer as a record in the
Engineering Department.



      (4)   Inspection.  All required improvements on the site that
are to be installed under the provisions of this section shall be inspected
during the course of construction by the City Engineer at the subdivider’s
expense, and acceptance shall be subject to the City Engineer’s certificate
of compliance with the contract.



   (C)   Improvements completed prior to approval of final plat. 
Improvements within the subdivision which have been completed prior to
application for approval of the final plat or execution of the contract for
installation of the required improvements shall be accepted and equivalent
improvements in compliance with the requirements of this section if the City
Engineer certifies that he or she has determined that the existing
improvements conform to applicable city standards.



(Prior Code, § 66-222)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.217  OPTIONAL CITY CONSTRUCTION PERMITTED.



   (A)   Petition.



      (1)   In lieu of doing the actual construction work on
improvements required to be made by the subdivider under this subchapter, the
subdivider may petition the city to do the construction work required.



      (2)   The petition shall include a request that the benefited
property be assessed for the cost of the improvements where appropriate.



      (3)   The petition shall be presented to the city by September
1 for construction during the next season.



      (4)   The option shall apply to streets, alleys, curb and
gutters, water and sanitary sewer facilities.



      (5)   In no event shall the construction result in a cost to
be borne by the taxpayers of the city generally, except in those cases where
part of the benefit of the construction is deemed by the City Council to
extend beyond the properties contained in the proposed subdivision.



   (B)   Payment for installation of improvements.



      (1)   Improvements required by this subchapter are to be
furnished and installed at the sole expense of the subdivider and at no
expense to the city, unless otherwise stated.



      (2)   In the case of an improvement the cost of which would,
by general policy of the Council, be assessed only in part to the improved
property and the remaining cost paid out of the general tax levy, the Council
may make provisions for payment of a portion of the cost by the subdivider
and the remaining portion of the cost by the city, and provided further, that
if any improvement installed within the subdivision, the Council may make
provision for causing a portion of the cost of the same and in the case the
subdivider will be required only to pay for the portion of the whole cost of
the improvement as will represent the benefit to the property within the
subdivision.



(Prior Code, § 66-223)



§ 151.218  MODIFICATION, EXCEPTIONS, AND VARIANCES.



   (A)   Minor subdivisions.  In the case of a subdivision of small
size and of minor importance, situated in a locality where conditions are
well defined, the city may exempt the subdivider from complying with some of
the requirements of this section.  In the case of a request to divide a lot
which is a part of a recorded plat where the division is to permit the adding
of a parcel of land to an abutting lot or to create 2 lots and the newly
created property line will not cause the other remaining portion of the lot
to be in violation with this section or the Zoning Chapter, the division may
be approved by the City Council after submission of a survey by a registered
land surveyor showing the original lot and the proposed subdivision.



   (B)   Variances.  The Council may grant a variance upon receiving a
report from the Planning Commission in any particular case where the
subdivider can show that, by reason of exceptional topography or other
physical conditions, the strict compliance with these regulations could cause
an exceptional and undue hardship on the enjoyment of a substantial property
right, provided the relief may be granted without detriment to the public
welfare and without impairing the intent and purpose of this section.



   (C)   Application process.  Application for a variance shall be
made in writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is
filed for  consideration by the Council, stating fully all facts relied upon
by the petitioner and supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data
which may aid the Planning Commission and Council in the analysis of the
proposed project.  The plans for the development shall include covenants,
restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full
achievement of the plan.  Any variance or modification thus granted shall be
recorded in resolution form and entered in the minutes of the Council setting
forth the reasons which justified the action taken.



(Prior Code, § 66-224)



§ 151.219  BUILDING PERMITS.



   No building permits shall be issued for construction on any lot until
the final plat has been recorded.



(Prior Code, § 66-225)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.220  COPIES OF PLAT.



   Copies of all plats or subdivisions, after the same have been submitted
and approved as provided in this subchapter, shall be filed with the City
Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 66-226)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.221  CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS.



   No conveyance of land shall be filed which fails to meet the
requirements set forth in state law.



(Prior Code, § 66-227)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.222  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REVIEW.



   (A)   Planned Unit Developments (PUD’s) area allowed as
conditional uses for new projects on undeveloped land, redevelopment of
previously built sites, or conversions of existing buildings and land in
those management districts where specifically identified in §§ 151.055et
seq.  Planned Unit Developments shall be processed as a conditional use,
except that an expansion to an existing Commercial PUD involving 6 or fewer
new dwelling units or sites since the date of enactment of this chapter is
allowed as a permitted use provided that the total project density does not
exceed the allowable densities as prescribed in this section.  Approval
shall not occur until the environmental review process (EAW/EIS) has been
completed, as required by Minnesota Environmental Quality Board rules.



   (B)   (1)   An applicant for a PUD shall submit the following
documents to the Zoning Administrator prior to final action being taken on
the application request.  A site plan and/or plat for the project showing:



         (a)   The boundary of the proposed development;



         (b)   Surface water features and other natural and
manmade features;



         (c)   Existing and proposed structures and other
facilities, proposed land alterations; the location of existing and proposed
sewage treatment and water supply systems; and



         (d)   Topographic contours at a minimum of 10 foot
intervals.



      (2)   A PUD that combines commercial and residential
structures shall indicate and distinguish which buildings and portions of a
project are commercial, residential, or a combination of the 2.



   (C)   For Residential Planned Unit Development a property owner’s
association agreement with mandatory membership, all in accordance with the
maintenance and administrative requirements prescribed in § 151.225 of the
code.



   (D)   Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements or other
instruments that:



      (1)   Properly address future vegetative and topographic
alterations; construction of additional buildings; beaching of watercraft;
and construction of commercial buildings in residential PUD’s; and



      (2)   Ensure the long-term preservation and maintenance of
open space in accordance with the criteria and analysis specified in the
maintenance and administrative requirements of this section.



   (E)   For Commercial Planned Unit Developments and for commercial
structures within a Residential Planned Unit Development, a master
plan/drawing describing the proposed project and the floor plan for all
commercial structures to be occupied.



   (F)   Any additional documents as requested by the Park Rapids
Planning Commission that are necessary to explain how the PUD will be
designed and will function.



(Prior Code, § 66-228)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 370, passed 9-11-2002)



§ 151.223  PUD SITE SUITABILITY EVALUATION.



   (A)   Proposed new, or expansions to existing, Planned Unit
Developments shall be evaluated using the following procedures and standards
to determine the suitable area for the dwelling unit/dwelling site evaluation.



   (B)   The project parcel must be divided into tiers by locating 1 or
more lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary high
water level at the following intervals, proceeding landward:



 


Public Water Classification

 

Tier Interval



Unsewered Natural Environment Lake Lots
 

400 feet



Sewered Natural Environment Lake Lots
 

320 feet



Unsewered Recreational Development Lake Lots
 

267 feet



Sewered Recreational Development Lake Lots
 

267 feet



Tributaries
 

300 feet




 



   (C)   (1)   The suitable area within each tier is next calculated
by excluding from the tier area all wetlands, bluffs, and land below the
ordinary high water level of public waters.



      (2)   This suitable area and the proposed development are then
subjected to either the Residential or Commercial Planned Unit Development
density evaluation steps to arrive at an allowable number of dwelling units
or sites within each tier.



(Prior Code, § 66-229)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 370, passed 9-11-2002)



§ 151.224  RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL PUD DENSITY EVALUATION.



   The procedures for determining the allowable density of Residential and
Commercial Planned Unit Development are as follows.  Allowable densities may
be transferred from a tier to any other tier farther from the public water,
but shall not be transferred to any tier closer to the public water.



   (A)   To determine the allowable density for Residential Planned
Unit Developments:



      (1)   For lakes or tributaries, the suitable area within each
tier is divided by the single residential lot size standard for the
applicable management district. 



      (2)   Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or
sites for the residential Planned Unit Developments are then compared with
the tier, density, and suitability analyses herein and the maintenance and
design criteria prescribed in § 151.225.  All Residential Planned Unit
Developments must contain at least 5 dwelling units or sites.



      (3)   (a)   Dwelling unit or site density increases above
the densities determined in the evaluation may be permitted if all
dimensional standards in § 151.069 are met or exceeded.  Maximum density
increases may only be allowed if all maintenance and design criteria in §
151.225 are also met or exceeded. Increases in dwelling unit or site
densities must not exceed the maximums in the following table. Allowable
densities may be transferred from any tier to any other tier further from the
shoreland water body or watercourse, but must not be transferred to any other
tier closer to the water body.



         (b)   Maximum allowable dwelling unit or site density
increases for Residential Planned Unit Developments.



 


Density Evaluation Tiers

 

Maximum Density Increase Within Each Tier (Percent)



First
 

50%



Second
 

100%



Third
 

200%



Fourth
 

200%



Fifth
 

200%




 



   (B)   To determine the allowable density for Commercial Planned Unit
Developments:



      (1)   The average inside living area size of dwelling units or
sites is computed. Computation of inside living area need not include decks,
patios, stoops, steps, garages, porches, or basements unless these areas are
habitable space.



      (2)   The appropriate floor area ratio is then selected from
the following table based upon the average unit floor area for the
appropriate public water classification.



 


Commercial Planned Unit Development*




Floor Area Ratio by Public Waters Classification




Average Unit Floor Area (square feet)

 

Non-Shoreland Areas and Tributaries

 

Recreational Development Lakes

 

Natural Environment Lakes





200 or less
 

.040

 

.020

 

.010



300
 

.048

 

.024

 

.012



400
 

.056

 

.028

 

.014



500
 

.065

 

.032

 

.016



600
 

.072

 

.038

 

.019



700
 

.082

 

.042

 

.021



800
 

.091

 

.046

 

.023



900
 

.099

 

.050

 

.025



1,000
 

.108

 

.054

 

.027



1,100
 

.116

 

.058

 

.029



1,200
 

.125

 

.064

 

.032



1,300
 

.133

 

.068

 

.034



1,400
 

.142

 

.072

 

.036



1,500 or more
 

.150

 

.075

 

.038



*For recreational camping areas, use the ratios listed for average floor area
of 400 square feet.  Manufactured home sites in recreational areas shall use
a ratio equal to the size of the manufactured home, or if known shall use the
ratio listed for the average floored area of 1,000 square feet.




 



      (3)   The suitable area within each tier is multiplied by the
floor area ratio to yield the total floor area in each tier allowed to be
used for dwelling units or sites;



      (4)   The total floor area for each tier is divided by the
average living area size to yield the number of dwelling units or sites
allowed for each tier;



      (5)   Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or
sites for the Commercial Planned Unit Developments are then compared with the
tier, density, and suitability analyses herein and the maintenance and design
criteria prescribed in § 151.221.



(Prior Code, § 66-230)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 370, passed 9-11-2002;
Am. Ord. 375, passed 11-26-2002; Am. Ord. 392, passed 8-12-2003)  Penalty,
see § 151.999



§ 151.225  PUD MAINTENANCE AND DESIGN CRITERIA.



   (A)   Before final approval of a Planned Unit Development may be
granted, adequate provisions must be developed for the preservation and
maintenance of open spaces in perpetuity, and for the continued existence and
functioning of the development.



   (B)   Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements, public
dedication and acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent means
shall be provided to ensure long-term preservation and maintenance of open
space.  The instruments must include all of the following protections:



      (1)   Commercial uses shall be prohibited in Residential
Planned Unit Developments;



      (2)   Vegetative and topographic alterations, except for
routine maintenance, shall be prohibited;



      (3)   Construction of additional buildings or the storage of
vehicles and/or other materials is prohibited; and



      (4)   Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft shall be prohibited.



   (C)   All Residential Planned Unit Development must have a property
owners association with the following features:



      (1)   Membership shall be mandatory for each dwelling unit or
site owner;



      (2)   Each member must pay a pro-rata share of the expenses of
the association, and unpaid assessments may become liens on units or sites;



      (3)   Assessments must be adjustable to accommodate changing
conditions; and



      (4)   The association shall be responsible for insurance,
taxes, and maintenance of all commonly owned property and facilities.



   (D)   All Planned Unit Developments must contain open space meeting
all of the following criteria:



      (1)   At least 50% of the total project area must be preserved
as open space;



      (2)   Dwelling units or sites, road rights-of-way, land
covered by road surfaces, parking areas, and structures are developed areas
and shall not be included in the computation of open space;



      (3)   Open space must include those areas with physical
characteristic unsuitable for development in their natural state, and areas
containing significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries;



      (4)   Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities
for use by owners of dwelling units or sites, by guests staying in commercial
dwelling units or sites, and by the general public;



      (5)   Open space may include subsurface sewage treatment
systems provided the use of the space is restricted to avoid adverse impacts
on these systems;



      (6)   Open space must not include commercial facilities or
uses;



      (7)   The appearance of open space areas, including
topography, vegetation, and allowable uses, must be preserved by use of
restrictive deed covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and
acceptance, or other equally effective and permanent means; and



      (8)   The shore impact zone, based upon normal structure
setbacks, must be included as open space.  For Residential Planned Unit
Developments, at least 50% of the shore impact zone of existing developments
and at least 50% of the shore impact zone of existing preserved in its
natural or existing state.  For Commercial Planned Unit Developments, at
least 50% of the shore impact zone must be preserved in its natural state.



   (E)   Erosion control and stormwater management plans must be
developed and the PUD must:



      (1)   Be designed, and the construction managed, to minimize
the likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after
construction.  This must be accomplished by limiting the amount and length
of time of bare ground exposure. Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment
facilities, vegetative buffer strips, or other appropriate techniques must be
used to minimize erosion impacts on surface water features.  Erosion control
plans approved by the Hubbard Soil and Water Conservation District may be
required if warranted by project size and/or the physical characteristics of
the site; and



      (2)   Be designed and constructed to effectively manage
reasonably expected quantities of stormwater runoff.  Impervious surface
coverage within any tier must not exceed 25% of the tier area.



   (F)   Centralization and design of facilities and structures must be
done according to the following standards:



      (1)   Planned unit developments must be connected to publicly
owned water supply and sewer systems, if available. On-site water supply and
sewage must be centralized and designed and installed to meet or exceed
applicable standards or rules of the Minnesota Department of Health and
suitable areas of the development, and sufficient lawn area free of limiting
factors must be provided for a replacement soil treatment system for each
sewage system;



      (2)   Dwelling units or sites must be clustered into 1 or more
groups and located on suitable areas of the development. They must be
designed and located to meet or exceed the following dimensional standards
for the applicable shoreland classification; setback from the ordinary high
water level; elevation above the surface water features; and maximum
height.  Setbacks from the ordinary high water level must be increased for
developments with density increases.  Maximum density increases may only be
allowed if structure setbacks from the ordinary high water level are
increased to at least 50% greater than the minimum setbacks, or the impact on
the waterbody is reduced an equivalent amount through vegetative management,
topography, or additional means acceptable to the local unit of government
and the setback is at least 25% greater than the minimum setback;



      (3)   Shore recreation facilities, including but not limited
to swimming areas, docks and watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps
must be centralized and located in suitable areas.  Evaluation of
suitability must include consideration of land slope, water depth,
vegetation, soils, depth to groundwater and bedrock, or other relevant
factors.  The number of spaces provided for continuous beaching, mooring, or
docking of watercraft must not exceed 1 for each allowable dwelling unit or
site



in the first tier (not withstanding existing mooring sites in an existing
commercially used harbor). Launching ramp facilities, including a small dock
for loading and unloading equipment, may be provided for use by occupants of
dwelling units or sites located in other tiers;



      (4)   Structures, parking areas, and other facilities must be
treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent
shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or other
means, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.  Vegetative and topographic
screening must be preserved, if existing, or may be required to be provided;
and



      (5)   Accessory structures and facilities must meet the
required principal structure setback, and must be centralized.



(Prior Code, § 66-231)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 370, passed 9-11-2002;
Am. Ord. 491, passed 5-22-2007)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.226  CONVERSIONS TO PUD’S.



   Resorts or other land uses and/or facilities may be converted to
Residential Planned Unit Developments provided all of the following standards
are met.



   (A)   Proposed conversions must be initially evaluated using the
same procedures as for Residential Planned Unit Developments involving all
new construction.  Inconsistencies between existing features of the
development and the PUD standards shall be identified.



   (B)   Deficiencies involving water supply and sewage treatment,
impervious surface coverage, open space and shore recreation facilities must
be corrected as part of the conversion, or as specified in the conditional
use permit.



   (C)   Shore and bluff impact zone deficiencies must be evaluated and
reasonable improvements made as part of the conversion.  These improvements
must include, where applicable, the following:



      (1)   Removal of extraneous buildings, docks, or other
facilities that no longer need to be located in shore or bluff impact zones;



      (2)   Remedial measures to correct erosion sites and improve
the vegetative cover and screening of buildings and other facilities as
viewed from the water; and



      (3)   If existing dwelling units are located in shore or bluff
impact zones, conditions that preclude exterior expansions in any dimension
or substantial alteration are attached to approvals of all conversions.  The
conditions must also provide for future relocation of dwelling units, where
feasible, to other locations meeting all setback and elevation requirements
when they are rebuilt or replaced.



   (D)   Existing dwelling unit or dwelling site densities that exceed
standards prescribed in § 151.224 of this chapter may be allowed to continue
but shall not be increased, either at the time of conversion or in the
future.  Efforts must be made during any conversion to limit impacts of high
densities by requiring seasonal use, improving vegetative screening,
centralizing shore recreation facilities, installing new sewage treatment
systems, or other means.



(Prior Code, § 66-232)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999




ADMINISTRATION




§ 151.240  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The position of Zoning Administrator is hereby established. 
The Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by the Park Rapids City Council
and shall serve at its pleasure.  The Zoning Administrator shall receive
compensation as the City Council may, from time to time, determine.



   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall:



      (1)   Act as inspector for the City of Park Rapids;



      (2)   Inspect all construction and development to ensure that
the standards of this chapter are complied with;



      (3)   Enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter;



      (4)   Issue permits for permitted uses and/or activities that
comply with the provisions of the chapter;



      (5)   Receive applications for conditional use permits and
forward, along with recommendations, to the Planning Commission;



      (6)   Receive applications for variance requests and forward,
along with recommendations, to the Board of Adjustment;



      (7)   Receive applications for zoning amendments and forward,
along with recommendations, to the Planning Commission;



      (8)   Maintain all records relating to the application for and
deliberations relating to the issuance or denial of permits;



      (9)   Develop and maintain a public information bureau
relating to local development issues; and



      (10)   Maintain the official zoning map as described in §§
151.040et seq.



(Prior Code, § 66-241)  (Ord. passed 1994)



§ 151.241  PERMITS.



   (A)   Permits shall be required for the following permitted
activities: building construction, alteration or demolition; signs; sewage
treatment systems in shoreland areas; and grading or filling in shoreland
areas.



   (B)   All contractors, subcontractors, builders or other persons
having charge of the erection, alteration, moving, change or remodeling of
any building or structure shall apply for a building permit from the Park
Rapids Building Inspector before beginning or undertaking the work.  After
the appropriate fee has been paid, and if the proposed work does not conflict
with any portion of the Park Rapids Zoning Chapter or Building Code, the
permit shall be granted.  If the permit is not granted, the reasons for the
denial will be provided, in writing, to the applicant.



   (C)   All building permit applications shall be examined and
processed within 30 days of receipt of all information needed to process the
application.



      (1)   Application for a building permit shall be made to the
Building Inspector on blank forms to be provided by the city.  Each
application for a permit to construct, alter, move or demolish a building
shall be accompanied by a plan, drawn to scale, showing: the dimensions of
the lot where the activity will occur; and the size and location of the
buildings and accessory building. Applications for building permits shall
contain other information as may be deemed necessary for the proper
enforcement of this chapter.



      (2)   Permits for the installation of sewage treatment systems
or grading and filling in shoreland areas must also be obtained from the
Zoning Administrator before the installation or shoreland alteration has
begun.



      (3)   Permits for the construction or placement of signs must
be obtained from the Zoning Administrator before the construction or
placement shall be allowed.



      (4)   (a)   All building, sign, sanitary, excavation, and
related permits shall expire 1 year from the date of approval if construction
has not started.



         (b)   A request for an extension may be considered by
the Board of Adjustment pursuant to M.S. 462, as it may be amended from time
to time.



(Prior Code, § 66-242)  (Ord. passed 1994)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.242  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Planning Commission consisting of 5
members.  The members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the
Mayor consistent with the Planning Commission bylaws as adopted by the Park
Rapids City Council.  The Planning Commission now in existence shall
continue as presently constituted.



   (B)   The Planning Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a
Vice-Chairperson from among its members.  It shall adopt rules or bylaws for
the transaction of its business and shall keep a permanent public record of
its proceedings, findings and determinations.  The Planning Commission shall
cause all records of its proceedings, findings, and determinations to be
filed at the Park Rapids city hall.



   (C)   (1)   The Planning Commission shall be advisory in nature,
and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council.



      (2)   In this advisory role the Planning Commission shall:



         (a)   Assist the City Council in the formulation of
goals, policies, and programs for the future development of the City of Park
Rapids;



         (b)   Assist the City Council in the preparation of
development controls designed to promote development consistent with adopted
goals and policies;



         (c)   Review applications for conditional use permits
and chapter amendments, conduct public hearings in accordance with the
provisions of the chapter, and make recommendations to the City Council;



         (d)   Review subdivision proposals for compliance with
the provisions of this chapter, conduct public hearings, and forward final
plat along with recommendation to the City Council; and



         (e)   Any other duties as required or requested by the
City Council to further goals and policies in furtherance of the intent of
this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 66-243)  (Ord. passed 1994)



§ 151.243  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   Any use listed as a conditional use in this chapter shall be
permitted only upon application to the Zoning Administrator, review and
recommendation of the Planning Commission, and approval and issuance of a
conditional use permit by the Park Rapids City Council.  The applicant for a
conditional use permit shall fill out and submit to the Zoning Administrator
an application for conditional use permit.  When the permit is submitted the
appropriate fee shall be paid in order for the application to receive
consideration by the Planning Commission.  A thorough site evaluation shall
be conducted by the Zoning Administrator and the Planning Commission prior to
consideration of the permit.



   (B)   In considering the granting of any conditional use permit
throughout the city, the Planning Commission and City Council shall evaluate
the effect of the proposed use upon:



      (1)   The maintenance of the public health, safety, and
welfare;



      (2)   The location of the site with respect to existing and
proposed access roads;



      (3)   Its compatibility with adjacent land uses; and



      (4)   Its compatibility with the intent of the zoning district
in which the use is proposed.



   (C)   In considering the granting of any conditional use permit in
shoreland areas, the Planning Commission and City Council shall evaluate the
effect of the proposed use upon:



      (1)   The prevention and control of water pollution, including
sedimentation and nutrient loading;



      (2)   Existing topography and drainage features and vegetative
cover on the site;



      (3)   The location of the site with respect to floodplains and
floodways of river or tributaries;



      (4)   The erosion potential of the site based upon the degree
and direction of slope, soil type, and existing vegetative cover;



      (5)   The need for the proposed use for a shoreland location;



      (6)   The amount of liquid waste to be generated and the
adequacy of the proposed sewage treatment system;



      (7)   The visibility of structures and other facilities as
viewed from public waters;



      (8)   Adequacy of the site for water supply and on-site sewage
treatment systems; and



      (9)   The types, uses and numbers of watercraft that the
project will generate in relation to the suitability of public waters to
safely accommodate these watercraft.



   (D)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the Planning
Commission may attach conditions, in addition to those required elsewhere in
this chapter, that it deems necessary for the furtherance of the purposes set
forth in this chapter.  These conditions attached to conditional use permits
may include, but shall not be limited to:



      (1)   Increased yards and setbacks;



      (2)   Periods and/or hours of operation;



      (3)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces;



      (4)   Type of construction;



      (5)   Deed restrictions;



      (6)   Landscaping and vegetative screening;



      (7)   Type and extent of shore cover;



      (8)   Specified sewage treatment and water supply facilities;



      (9)   Location of signs, parking, docks, and piers; and



      (10)   Any other reasonable requirements necessary to fulfill
the purposes and intent of this chapter.



   (E)   An applicant for a conditional use permit may be required to
furnish the Planning Commission, in addition to the information required for
the building or other permit, the following:



      (1)   A plan of the proposed project area showing contours,
soil types, ordinary high water level, ground water conditions, bedrock,
slope, and vegetative cover;



      (2)   Location of existing and proposed buildings, parking
areas, traffic access, driveways, walkways, piers, open spaces, and
vegetative cover;



      (3)   Plans of buildings, sewage treatment facilities, water
supply systems, and arrangements of operations;



      (4)   Specifications for areas of proposed grading, filling,
lagooning, dredging, or other topographic alterations; and



      (5)   Other pertinent information necessary to determine if
the proposal meets the requirements and intent of this chapter.



   (F)   The Planning Commission and the City Council, in evaluating
each conditional use application may request the Hubbard Soil and Water
Conservation District to make available expert assistance to assist in the
evaluation and consideration of the application.



(Prior Code, § 66-244)  (Ord. passed 1994)



§ 151.244  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Board of Adjustment vested with
the authority as is hereinafter provided, and as provided in M.S. Chapter
462, as it may be amended from time to time.  The City Council shall act as
the Park Rapids Board of Adjustment.



   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairperson and a
Vice-Chairperson from among its members.  It shall adopt rules or bylaws,
for the transaction of its business and shall keep a permanent record of its
proceedings, findings, and determinations.  The Board of Adjustment shall
cause all records of its proceedings, findings and determinations to be filed
at the Park Rapids city hall.



   (C)   The meeting of the Board of Adjustment shall be held as
specified in the rules or bylaws, and at other times as the Chairperson of
the Board of Adjustment shall deem necessary and appropriate.



   (D)   The Board of Adjustment shall have the exclusive power
concerning the following:



      (1)    To hear and decide any appeal from an order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator;



      (2)   To interpret any management district boundary on the
official zoning map;



      (3)   All decisions by the Board of Adjustment in granting
variances, or in hearing any appeals from administrative order, requirement,
decision or determination shall be final except that any aggrieved person,
department, agency, Board of Commission shall have the right to appeal to the
District Court within 30 days after receipt of the notice of the decision
made by the Board of Adjustment.



   (E)   The Board of Adjustment and Appeals authorizes the Planning
Commission, in its advisory role, to make the necessary findings for
variances and appeals.  The Board of Adjustment maintains authority to grant
variances from the strict enforcement of standards and provisions prescribed
by this chapter.  Variances shall only be granted based upon the criterion
prescribed in § 151.245 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 66-245)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 364, passed 5-14-2002)



§ 151.245  VARIANCES AND APPEALS.



   (A)   (1)   The Park Rapids Board of Adjustment shall have the
exclusive power to order the issuance of variances from the terms of any
official controls including restrictions placed on non-conformities.  A
variance is a modification or variation of the provisions of an official
control to a specific piece of property.



      (2)   Pursuant to M.S. § 462.357, Subd. 6, as it may be
amended from time to time, the Board of Adjustment may only grant
applications for variances where practical difficulties in complying with the
official controls exist and each of the following criteria are satisfied:



         (a)   The variance is in harmony with the general
purposes and intent of the zoning ordinance;



         (b)   The variance is consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan;



         (c)   The property owner proposes to use the property in
a reasonable manner not permitted by the zoning ordinance;



         (d)   The plight of the landowner is due to
circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner; and



         (e)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the locality.



         Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical
difficulties. Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to,
inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.



      (3)   The Planning Commission, at the public hearing must make
an affirmative finding on all of the 5 criteria listed in division (2) above
in order to recommend the granting of a variance to the Board of
Adjustment.  The applicant for a variance has the burden of proof to show
that all of the criteria listed above have been satisfied.  A variance shall
not be granted for a use that is not permitted under this chapter. A variance
may be granted to temporarily permit the use of a one-family dwelling as a
two-family dwelling.



      (4)   Variances shall be granted for earth shelter
construction as defined in M.S. § 216C.06, Subd. 14, when in harmony with
this chapter.



      (5)   The Planning Commission may recommend that the Board
impose conditions upon a variance that relate to the purposes and objectives
of this chapter.  The Board of Adjustment may impose conditions and the
variance shall not be effective until the conditions are fully complied
with.  A condition imposed in a variance must be directly related to and
must bear a rough proportionality to the



impact created by the variance. A conditional variance shall be in effect
only as long as the condition is complied with.  If a condition is not
complied with, the variance may be revoked and the city may pursue the
enforcement remedies set forth in § 151.999 herein.



   (B)   An applicant desiring a variance shall fill out and submit to
the Park Rapids Zoning Administrator an application for consideration of
variance request form, copies of which are available from the Zoning
Administrator.  The appropriate fee shall be paid in order for the
application to receive consideration by the Board of Adjustment.



   (C)   Upon receipt of a complete application for a variance, the
Zoning Administrator shall make a recommendation, in writing, to the Planning
Commission who shall make a recommendation to the Board of Adjustment after
conducting a public hearing in accordance with M.S. 462, as it may be amended
from time to time and the provisions of this chapter.  The Board of
Adjustment shall make the final decision within 60 days of the date that a
complete application is submitted to the Zoning Administrator.



   (D)   An appeal of any administrative decision made in the
enforcement of this chapter shall be made by filling out and submitting to
the Zoning Administrator an application for appeal, which is available from
the Zoning Administrator.  The appeal shall be heard and decided by the
Board of Adjustment within 60 days of the date that the application is
submitted to the Zoning Administrator.



(Prior Code, § 66-246)  (Ord. passed 1994; Am. Ord. 532, passed 8-23-2011)



§ 151.246  AMENDMENTS.



   The procedure for amendments to this chapter shall be as follows:



   (A)   An amendment may be initiated by a property owner, the
Planning Commission or the City Council.  Property owners wishing to
initiate an amendment shall fill out an application for amendment form,
available from the Zoning Administrator.  The application shall be filled
out and submitted to the Zoning Administrator together with the appropriate
fee;



   (B)   The applicant shall appear before the Planning Commission to
answer any questions that Commission members may have concerning the
amendment request;



   (C)   A public hearing on the amendment request shall be conducted
by the Planning Commission within 60 days following the initial meeting. 
The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with M.S. 462, as it may
be amended from time to time;



   (D)   The Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to the
City Council after the proceedings of this public hearing.  The applicant
shall be notified in writing of the recommendation that shall be forwarded to
the City Council; and



   (E)   The City Council shall consider the recommendation of the
Planning Commission within 30 days after the public hearing is conducted.



(Prior Code, § 66-247)  (Ord. passed 1994)



§ 151.247  PUBLIC NOTICE AND HEARING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   In addition to the procedures described in preceding sections
of this chapters, all conditional use permit requests, variance requests,
requests for amendments, and preliminary plat approval shall be reviewed at a
public hearing conducted at least 10 days following official public
notification including publication in the official newspaper of the City of
Park Rapids and notification of all property owners within the following
distances from affected property when the notice is applicable:  In the case
of variances and conditional uses, all property owners within 350 feet must
be notified.  In the case of amendments to official controls which involve
changes in district boundaries of 5 acres or less, all owners of property
within 350 feet must be notified.



   (B)   The Commission of Natural Resources must also receive at least
10 days notification of hearings to be conducted concerning applications for
conditional use permits, variances, amendments or final plat approvals, in
shoreland areas.  Notice of hearings to consider subdivisions must include
copies of the proposed final plat.



   (C)   The Commissioner of Natural Resources must also receive a copy
of approved conditional use permits, variances, zoning amendments and final
plats, in shoreland areas, postmarked within 10 days of final action.



(Prior Code, § 66-248)  (Ord. passed 1994)



§ 151.248  ACCESS TO PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   The Zoning Administrator or his or her agent shall have the right, at
all reasonable times, to enter upon private property for the purpose of
administration or enforcement of this chapter.  This includes the right to
conduct investigations, sampling, test borings, and other actions necessary
for the enforcement of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 66-249)  (Ord. passed 1994)



§ 151.249  FEES.



   In order to defray the administrative costs associated with the
processing of applications for building and related permits, conditional use
permits, variance requests, amendments and subdivision plat approval, a
schedule of fees has been adopted by the Park Rapids City Council.  The
schedule of fees shall be posted at the Park Rapids city hall, and may be
altered or amended only by resolution of the Park Rapids City Council.



(Prior Code, § 66-251)  (Ord. passed 1994)



§ 151.250  OPT-OUT OF MINNESOTA STATUTES § 462.3593.



   Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 462.3593, Subd. 9, the city
opts-out of the requirements of M.S. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates
temporary family health care dwellings.



(Ord. 566, passed 8-23-2016)



§ 151.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   In the event of violation or threatened violation of this
chapter, the City Council, in addition to other remedies including
prosecution under division (B) of this section, may institute appropriate
actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violations
or threatened violations, and it shall be the duty of the Park Rapids City
Attorney to institute this action.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions herein, or who shall fail to comply with any of the provisions
herein, or who shall make any false statement in any document required to be
submitted under these provisions, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by penalties and fines provided by
law.  Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.



(Prior Code, § 66-250)  (Ord. passed 1994)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 152:  RENTALS



Section




General Provisions




   152.001   Purpose



   152.002   Definitions



   152.003   Designation of unfit dwellings and condemnation



   152.004   Higher standards to prevail




Minimum Standards




   152.015   Basic equipment and facilities



   152.016   Light, ventilation, and heat



   152.017   Maintenance requirements



   152.018   Minimum space, use, and location requirements




Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants




   152.030   Public areas



   152.031   Cleanliness



   152.032   Rubbish



   152.033   Garbage



   152.034   Extermination of pests



   152.035   Plumbing fixtures




Registration of Rental Units




   152.050   Registration required; exemptions



   152.051   Registration requirements



   152.052   Manner of registration renewal



   152.053   Transfer of property



   152.054   Fees



   152.055   Maintenance of records



   152.056   Maintenance standards



   152.057   Failure to grant registration; revocation, suspension, or
failure to renew registration




Administration and Enforcement




   152.070   Authority to condemn or close off rentals



   152.071   Inspections and investigations



   152.072   Notice of violation



   152.073   Hearing



   152.074   Order of the Board



   152.075   Records at hearing



   152.076   Emergency action



   152.077   Further actions or injunctive relief



 



   152.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.001  PURPOSE.



   The city recognizes a need to ensure that housing units meet minimum
safety and health standards; to provide a system for ensuring that both
absentee and local landlords correct deficiencies and properly maintain
rental property within the city; to provide a system of organized inspection
of residential rental units in the city; and to develop a system to monitor
orderly occupancy of residential rental units.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.002  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Whenever the words DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT or PREMISES are
used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though followed by the words
“or any part thereof.”



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      BASEMENT.  A portion of a building located partly underground
but having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.



      BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.  The Park Rapids City Council shall act as
the Park Rapids Board of Adjustment.



      CELLAR.  A portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.



      DWELLING.  Any building, including a manufactured home, which is
wholly or partially used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by
human occupants; provided that temporary housing shall not be regarded as a
DWELLING.



      DWELLING UNIT.  Any building, room, or group of rooms, including
a manufactured home, located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable
unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking, and eating by human occupants.



      EXTERMINATION.  The control and elimination of insects, rodents,
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, or trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest
elimination methods approved by the city.



      GARBAGE.  The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.



      HABITABLE ROOM.  A room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for the purposes of living or sleeping, excluding bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or communicating corridors,
closets, and storage spaces. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for the purposes of cooking or eating shall be considered as a
room or space being used or intended to be used for the purpose of living
under this definition.



      INFESTATION.  The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents, or other pests.



      INSPECTOR.  Police Chief, City Administrator, and other persons
designated by the City Administrator.



      MULTIPLE DWELLING.  Any dwelling containing 2 or more dwelling
units.



      OCCUPANT.  Any person over 1 year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit.



      OPERATOR.  Any person who has charge, care, or control of a
building or part thereof in which dwelling units are let.



      ORDINARY MINIMUM WINTER CONDITIONS.  The temperature 15°F above
the lowest recorded temperature for the previous 10-year period.



      OWNER.  Any person who alone, jointly, or severally with others:



         (a)   Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling
unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or



         (b)   Shall have charge, care, or control of any
dwelling or dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor,
executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate
of the owner. Any such persons thus representing the actual owner shall be
bound to comply with the provisions of this section and of any rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if they were the
OWNER.



      PLUMBING.  Any of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal
units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins,
drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all
connections to water, sewer, or gas lines.



      RENTAL.  The leasing of a rental unit to a non-owner for a fixed
or non-fixed period of time and shall include LEASE TO BUY, CONTRACT FOR
DEED, INSTALLMENT SALES, PURCHASES whereby nonpayment of a periodic payment
means the occupants may be evicted without the necessity of either a
statutory mortgage foreclosure procedure, a statutory termination of contract
for deed procedure, or a statutory repossession procedure and other similar
procedures.



      RENTAL UNIT.  Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit.



      RUBBISH.  Combustible and noncombustible waste materials except
garbage, and the term shall include, but not be limited to the residue from
the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible material, paper, rags,
cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard
trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery, and dust.



      SUPPLIED.  Paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the
control of the owner or operator.



      TEMPORARY HOUSING.  Any tent, trailer, or other structure used
for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on
the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.003  DESIGNATION OF UNFIT DWELLINGS AND CONDEMNATION.



   The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human
habitation and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of such
unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the
following requirements:



   (A)   Placarding condemned dwellings. Any dwelling or dwelling unit
which is found to have any of the following defects shall be condemned as
unfit for human habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the
city.



      (1)   One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated,
unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to
the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.



      (2)   One which lacks illumination, ventilation, or sanitation
facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of
the public.



      (3)   One which because of its general condition or location
is unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants
or of the public.



   (B)   Vacating condemned dwellings. Any dwelling or dwelling unit
condemned as unfit for human habitation and so designated and placarded shall
be vacated immediately or at such future time as the inspector may order.



   (C)   Reuse of condemned dwellings. No dwelling or dwelling unit
which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall
again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from and
such placard is removed by the city. The city shall remove such placard
whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding
action were based have been eliminated.



   (D)   Defacing or removing placard. No person shall deface or remove
the placard from any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned as
unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except as provided in
division (C).



   (E)   Hearing. Any person affected by any notice or order relating
to the condemning and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for
human habitation may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter
before the Board of Adjustment under the procedures set forth in this chapter.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.004  HIGHER STANDARDS TO PREVAIL.



   In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health
ordinance or code of this city, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
people shall prevail.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



MINIMUM STANDARDS



§ 152.015  BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.



   No person shall occupy as owner/occupant or let to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping,
cooking, or eating therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:



   (A)   Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink
in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system.



   (B)   Toilets.  Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which
affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with a
flush water closet and a lavatory basin in good working condition and
properly connected to a water and sewer system.



   (C)   Bath.  Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which
affords privacy to a person within said room, a bathtub or shower in good
working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system.



   (D)   Water.  Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower,
and laundry facilities required under the provisions of this chapter shall be
properly connected with both hot and cold water lines in good working order.
If served by private wells, the water shall be tested annually. A copy of the
results of the test shall be filed with the city and posted on the site.



   (E)   Rubbish and garbage.  Every dwelling unit shall have adequate
disposal facilities or storage containers for rubbish, garbage, and
recyclables in accordance with the requirements of applicable city
ordinances. Rubbish and garbage shall be regularly disposed of at least every
2 weeks.



   (F)   Smoke detector.  Smoke detectors shall be installed in each
sleeping room, outside each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity
of the bedrooms and on each additional story of the dwelling, including
basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and un-inhabitable
attics.



   (G)   Hot water.  Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating
facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good
working condition, are properly connected with hot water lines required under
the provisions of this chapter.  The water-heating facility must be capable
of heating water to a temperature of 120°F to permit an adequate amount of
water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, or
shower.  Such supplied water-heating facilities shall be capable of meeting
the requirements of this chapter when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating
facilities required are not in operation.



   (H)   Exits.



      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means
of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level as required by the
laws of this state.



      (2)   No basement or cellar area or room may be tenant
occupied for sleeping purposes unless a properly sized and installed second
emergency exit is present and approved.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006; Am. Ord. 475, passed 2-27-2007)



§ 152.016  LIGHT, VENTILATION, AND HEAT.



   No person shall occupy as owner/occupant, or let to another for
occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling units for the purposes of living therein,
which does not comply with the following requirements:



   (A)   Emergency exit.  Every habitable room used for sleeping
purposes shall have at least 1 openable window or second door for egress
purposes as approved by current Minnesota State Building Code for the
licensure of a rental property.  Once a rental property is in compliance
with current Minnesota State Building Code standards and a rental license has
been issued, and the license has not lapsed or been revoked, the size of the
egress windows will be considered grandfathered until the window is replaced,
if changes have been made to the current Minnesota State Building Code in the
interim. If a rental license has lapsed or been revoked the rental property
must be brought to current Minnesota State Building Code standards prior to
the re-licensure of the property.



   (B)   Ventilation.  Every habitable room shall have at least 1
window or skylight which can easily be opened or such other means to
adequately ventilate the room as approved by Minnesota State Building Code.



   (C)   Bathroom light and ventilation.  Every bathroom and water
closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements
for habitable rooms contained in this section except that no window or
skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water
closet compartments equipped with ventilation.



   (D)   Electric outlets.  Where there is electric service available
from power lines which are not more than 300 feet away from a dwelling, every
habitable room of such dwelling shall contain at least 2 separate electric
convenience outlets or 1 such convenience outlet and 1 supplied ceiling type
electric light fixture; and every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry
room, furnace room and public hall shall contain at least 1 supplied ceiling
or wall-type electric light fixture. Every such outlet and fixture shall be
properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition,
and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner.
Every dwelling unit must have access to the fuse or circuit boxes serving
that unit for safety purposes. Kitchen, bath and u-1 occupancies must be
protected by G.F.I. outlets.



   (E)   Heating facilities.  Every dwelling shall have heating
facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good
working condition, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all
habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments in every dwelling
unit located therein to a temperature of at least 68°F, at a distance of 3
feet above floor level, under ordinary minimum winter conditions.



   (F)   Lighting halls and stairways.  Every hallway and stairway in
every multiple dwelling containing 4 or more dwelling units shall be
adequately lighted at all times. Every hallway and stairway in structures
devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and containing not more than 3 dwelling
units may be supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling
an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of
full-time lighting.



   (G)   Screens.  During that portion of each year when it is
necessary for protection against mosquitoes, flies, and other insects, every
window opening from a dwelling unit required for ventilation shall have
supplied screens.



   (H)   Rodent protection.  Every basement or cellar window used or
intended to be used for ventilation and every other opening to a basement
which might provide an entry for rodents shall be supplied with a screen or
such other device as will effectively prevent their entrance.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006; Am. Ord. 475, passed 2-27-2007)



§ 152.017  MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   No person shall occupy as owner/occupant, or let to another for
occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein
which does not comply with the following requirements:



   (A)   Foundation, floor, wall, ceiling, and roof.  Every
foundation, floor, wall, ceiling, and roof shall be reasonably weathertight,
watertight, and rodent proof, shall be capable of affording privacy, and
shall be kept in good repair.



   (B)   Exterior opening.  Every window, exterior door, and basement
hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, and rodent proof and
shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.



   (C)   Stairs and porches.  Every inside and outside stair, every
porch, and every appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe
to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be
placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Properly
installed and maintained handrails are required on all stairs with 3 risers
or more. Guardrails shall be present to prevent any opening from being over 4
inches on all porches, balconies, stairs, or landings which are higher than
30 inches off the ground. Guardrails may not be less than 36 inches in height.



   (D)   Plumbing fixtures.  Every plumbing fixture and water waste
pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working
condition, free from defects, leaks, and obstructions.



   (E)   Floor surfaces.  Every water closet compartment floor
surface, bathroom floor surface, kitchen floor surface, and kitchen counter
surfaces shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably
impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a
clean and sanitary condition.



   (F)   Supplied facilities.  Every supplied facility, piece of
equipment, or utility which is required under this section shall be so
constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively and
shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.



   (G)   Continuous service of facilities.  No owner, operator, or
occupant shall cause any service, facility equipment, or utility which is
required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or
discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by the owner,
operator, or occupant, except for such temporary interruption as may be
necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process.



   (H)   Fitness for occupancy.  No owner shall occupy or let to any
other occupant any vacant dwelling unit unless it is clean, sanitary, and fit
for human occupancy.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.018  MINIMUM SPACE, USE, AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.



   No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the following requirements:



   (A)   Living space.  Every dwelling unit shall contain for use as
living space at least 150 square feet of floor space of habitable room floor
space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet
of habitable room floor space for every additional occupant thereof. Sleeping
space to be contained within a dwelling unit shall be a separate requirement
in accordance within this section and shall not be counted in the calculation
of living space to be contained in the unit under this section.



   (B)   Sleeping space.  In every dwelling unit of 2 or more rooms,
every room occupied for sleeping purposes by 1 occupant shall contain at
least 70 square feet of habitable room floor space, and every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by more than 1 occupant shall contain at least 40
square feet of habitable room floor space for each occupant thereof.



   (C)   Access to toilet facilities.  No dwelling or dwelling unit
used for rental purposes containing 2 or more sleeping rooms shall have such
room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment
intended for use by occupants of more than 1 sleeping room can be had only by
going through another sleeping room, nor shall room arrangements be such that
access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping
room or a bathroom or water closet compartment.



   (D)   Ceiling height.  The floor area of that part of any room
where the ceiling height is less than 5 feet shall not be considered as part
of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the
purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.



   (E)   Basements.  No basement space shall be used as a habitable
room or dwelling unit unless:



      (1)   It shall comply with this chapter.



      (2)   The floor and walls must be constructed so as to
reasonably prevent leakage of underground and surface runoff water. Proper
drainage must be provided away from the building, and floors and walls must
be protected against dampness.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS



§ 152.030  PUBLIC AREAS.



   Every owner of a dwelling containing 2 or more dwelling units shall be
responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or
public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.031  CLEANLINESS.



   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises
thereof which the occupant controls.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.032  RUBBISH.



   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all
rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish or
recycling containers as required by city ordinance.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.033  GARBAGE.



   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all
garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents in a
clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities or
garbage storage containers required by this chapter. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to supply such facilities or containers for all
dwelling units in a dwelling containing 4 or more dwelling units and for all
dwelling units located on premises where more than 4 dwelling units share the
same premises. In all other cases, it shall be the responsibility of the
occupant to furnish such facilities or containers.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.034  EXTERMINATION OF PESTS.



   Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests
therein or on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than 1 dwelling unit shall be responsible for such
extermination whenever the dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
rodent or reasonably insect proof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in 2 or more of the
dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any
dwelling containing 2 or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be
the responsibility of the owner.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.035  PLUMBING FIXTURES.



   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures
therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the
exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



REGISTRATION OF RENTAL UNITS



§ 152.050  REGISTRATION REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   No rental unit shall be rented until it has been registered in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to hospital units, nursing
home units, retirement home units, nor other similar units which are owned or
operated by an agency or local unit of government.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.051  REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.



   No person shall hereafter occupy, allow to be occupied, or let to
another person for occupancy any rental unit within the city for which a
rental unit registration has not been issued by the city. An application for
registration shall be made upon forms furnished by the city for such purpose
and shall specifically require the following minimum information:



   (A)   Name, address, and phone number of the property owner.



   (B)   The street address of the rental property.  The PID# of the
rental property.



   (C)   The number of units within the rental property.



   (D)   The name, phone number, and address of the person authorized
to make or order repairs or services made to the property, if in violation of
any applicable city or state codes, if the person is different than the owner
or local administrator.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006; Am. Ord. 475, passed 2-27-2007)



§ 152.052  MANNER OF REGISTRATION RENEWAL.



   Registration shall be required every 3 years commencing upon adoption
and publication of this chapter. The city shall be required to mail renewal
forms to the property owner or designated local administrator on or before
May 1 of the year prior to the renewal date. Forms may be returned by mail at
the property owner or designated local administrator’s risk to the City of
Park Rapids, 212 Second Street West, Park Rapids, Minnesota 56470.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.053  TRANSFER OF PROPERTY.



   Every owner of a rental unit (whether as fee owner or contract
purchaser) shall be required to furnish to the city the new owner’s name,
address, and phone number before taking possession of the rental property
upon closing of the transaction. No registration fee shall be required of the
new owner when possession takes place during the 3-year period, provided that
the previous owner has paid all registration fees and has complied with all
requirements of this subchapter and any violations of zoning, fire, or other
safety codes of the city.  If any change in the type of occupancy as
originally registered is contemplated by the new owner, a new registration
application will be required.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006; Am. Ord. 475, passed 2-27-2007)



§ 152.054  FEES.



   The fees are listed in the fee schedule section of the city code and
may be altered or amended by City Council.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006; Am. Ord. 475, passed 2-27-2007)



§ 152.055  MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.



   All records, files, and documents pertaining to the rental registration
and rental unit inspection program shall be maintained by the city and made
available to the public as allowed or required by state law.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.056  MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.



   Every rental unit shall be maintained in accordance with the
requirements and standards of all applicable city and state ordinances, laws,
rules, and regulations.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.057  FAILURE TO GRANT REGISTRATION; REVOCATION, SUSPENSION, OR
FAILURE TO RENEW REGISTRATION.



   (A)   The city reserves the right not to register a unit unless the
rental unit or units for which registration is sought complies with the
requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Any registration issued under this section is subject to the
right, which is hereby expressly reserved by the city, to suspend, revoke, or
fail to renew the same should the registration holder or their agents,
employees, representatives, or lessees directly or indirectly operate or
maintain the rental dwellings contrary to the provisions of this chapter, any
ordinance of the city, of any special permit issued by the city, or the laws
of the state. Provided, however, registration shall not be suspended,
revoked, or failed to be renewed if the registration holder complies with a
compliance order or orders in a timely manner.



   (C)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall notify, in
writing, the applicant that his or her registration has been denied or the
registration holder that his or her registration is being suspended, removed,
or nonrenewed. The suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal shall occur 35 days
after the date of the order or at such later date as set out in the order.
The notice shall be served by mailing a copy of the order to the property
owner and the designated local property administrator, if any, as indicated
in the records on file with the city.



   (D)   The registration holder or designated local administrator
shall have the right to request a hearing before the Board of Adjustment by
filing a written appeal from the order at the office of the City
Administrator as set forth in this chapter.



   (E)   The decision of the Board of Adjustment may be appealed by the
registration holder by filing an appeal or an appropriate writ with the
District Court within 15 days of the date of the order of the Board of
Adjustment.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 152.070  AUTHORITY TO CONDEMN OR CLOSE OFF RENTALS.



   (A)   When the conduct of any registration holder or their agent,
representative, employee, or lessee is detrimental to the public health,
sanitation, safety, and general welfare of the community at large or
residents of the rental units so as to constitute a nuisance, fire hazard, or
other unsafe or dangerous condition and, thus, give rise to an emergency, the
Police Chief, City Administrator, or such other person designated by the City
Administrator shall have the authority to summarily condemn or close off
individual rental units or such areas of the rental dwelling as necessary in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Any person
aggrieved by such decision or action may appeal the decision following the
procedures set out herein.



   (B)   The decision of the Police Chief, City Administrator, or such
other person designated by the City Administrator, as set forth herein, shall
not be voided by the filing of such appeal. Only after the hearing by the
Board of Adjustment has been held will such decision or action be affected.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.071  INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.



   (A)   The Police Chief, City Administrator, and such other person
designated by the City Administrator are hereby authorized to make
inspections reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this chapter.



   (B)   All persons authorized herein to inspect shall have the
authority to enter, with a 24-hour notification to the landlord unless
consent to enter is granted either from the landlord or the tenant, any
dwelling, dwelling unit, rental dwelling or rental unit pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Persons inspecting any dwelling, dwelling unit, rental
dwelling, or rental unit as provided herein shall notify the owner of all
violations, if any, by written notice. The notice shall direct that
compliance be made within a reasonable time not to exceed 60 days, unless
extended by the compliance official based on good cause. The dwelling,
dwelling unit, rental dwelling, or rental unit shall be reinspected.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006; Am. Ord. 475, passed 2-27-2007)



§ 152.072  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   A notice of violation shall be deemed to be properly served upon such
owner or agent or upon such occupant if a copy thereof is served upon the
owner personally or if the owner is served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required under the laws of this state.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.073  HEARING.



   Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant hereto may request and shall be granted a hearing
on the matter before the Board of Adjustment, provided that such person shall
file with the city a written petition requesting such hearing and setting
forth a brief statement of the grounds therefore within 10 days after the
date the notice was served upon the person. Upon receipt of such petition,
the city shall set a time and place of such hearing and shall give the
petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be
given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be
modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced by the city within a
reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days after the date on which the petition
was filed, except that, upon request of the petitioner, a postponement of the
date for hearing beyond the 30 days could be granted by the city for good
cause shown.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.074  ORDER OF THE BOARD.



   After such hearing, the Board of Adjustment shall sustain, modify, or
withdraw the notice depending upon its finding as to whether the provisions
of this chapter and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto have
been complied with. If the Board of Adjustment sustains or modifies such
notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to this
chapter shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a
hearing is not filed with the city within 10 days after such notice is
served. The decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be final.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.075  RECORDS AT HEARING.



   The proceedings at any hearing, including the findings and decision of
the Board of Adjustment, shall be summarized, reduced to writing, and entered
as a matter of public record with the city. Such record shall also include a
copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.076  EMERGENCY ACTION.



   Whenever the Police Chief, City Administrator, or other designated
person finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to
protect the public health, the city, Police Chief, City Administrator, or
other designated person may, without notice or hearing, issue an order
reciting the existence of such an emergency requiring that such action be
taken as deemed necessary to meet the emergency and if deemed necessary,
closing off all or a portion of a rental dwelling or rental unit until the
emergency condition causing the emergency is corrected. Notwithstanding the
other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately.
Notice of the emergency action shall be posted at the units or areas of the
dwelling or dwelling units affected and shall be served upon the owner or
agency as set forth herein. No person shall remove the posted notice other
than the Police Chief, City Administrator, or other designated person. Any
person to whom such order is directed shall immediately comply therewith, but
upon petition to the city shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
After such hearing and depending upon whether compliance with the provisions
of the section and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto is
found, the city may continue such order in effect or modify or revoke it.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.077  FURTHER ACTIONS OR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from taking affirmative
action under any of its city fire, housing, zoning, or other health safety
codes or any other state or federal statutes or laws for violations thereof
to seek either injunctive relief or criminal prosecution for such violations
in accordance with the terms and conditions of a particular ordinance or code
under which the city would proceed against the property owner, designated
property administrator, or occupant of any residential rental dwelling unit
covered by these registration and inspection requirements. Nothing contained
in this section shall prevent the city from seeking injunctive relief against
a property owner or designated property administrator who fails to comply
with the terms and conditions of this chapter on registration to obtain an
order closing such rental units until violations of this particular section
or other section of this chapter have been remedied by the property owner or
designated property administrator.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



§ 152.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person found to be in violation of this chapter is guilty of
a misdemeanor. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.



   (B)   The city may also enforce this chapter administratively in the
following manner:



      (1)   First violation.  Violators shall pay an administrative
penalty of up to $250 and bring the dwelling, dwelling unit, or premises into
compliance as required under this chapter within 30 days or such other time
period as may be designated under this chapter.



      (2)   Second violation. Violators shall pay an administrative
penalty of up to $500 and bring the dwelling, dwelling unit, or premises into
compliance as required under this chapter within 30 days or such other time
period as may be designated under this chapter.



      (3)   Third violation. Violators shall pay an administrative
penalty of up to $1,000 and bring the dwelling, dwelling unit, or premises
into compliance as required under this chapter within 30 days or such other
time period as may be designated under this chapter, or suspension,
revocation, or refusal to renew registration of a rental unit or such other
provisions as set forth in this chapter.



(Am. Ord. 473, passed 12-12-2006)



CHAPTER 153:  SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS



Section




Purpose and Authority




   153.001   Purpose   



   153.002   Intent



   153.003   Authority



   153.004   Effective date




Definitions




   153.005   Definitions




General Provisions




   153.006   Scope



   153.007   Jurisdiction



   153.008   Administration



   153.009   Validity



   153.010   Liability




General Requirements




   153.011   Retroactivity



   153.012   Upgrade, repair, replacement and abandonment



   153.013   SSTS in floodplains



   153.014   Class V injection wells



   153.015   SSTS practitioner licensing



   153.016   Prohibitions




SSTS Standards




   153.017   Standards adopted by reference



   153.018   Amendments to the adopted standards



   153.019   Variances




SSTS Permitting




   153.020   Permit required



   153.021   SSTS permit



   153.022   Operating permit




Management Plans




   153.023   Purpose



   153.024   Management plan requirements



   153.025   Requirements for systems not operated under a management
plan




Compliance Management




   153.026   Compliance inspection program



   153.027   New construction or replacement



   153.028   Existing systems



   153.029   Periodically saturated soil disagreements



   153.030   Disclaimer




Enforcement




   153.031   Violations



   153.032   Prosecution




Fees




   153.033   Fees




Interpretation




   153.034   Interpretation




Severability




   153.035   Severability




Abrogation and Greater Restrictions




   153.036   Abrogation and greater restrictions




Ordinances Repealed




   153.037   Ordinances repealed




Adoption




   153.038   Adoption



PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY



§ 153.001  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum requirements for
regulation of individual subsurface sewage treatment systems (ISTS) and
midsized subsurface sewage treatment systems (MSTS) for the treatment and
dispersal of sewage within the applicable jurisdiction of the city to protect
public health and safety, groundwater quality, and prevent or eliminate the
development of public nuisances. It is intended to serve the best interests
of the city's citizens by protecting its health, safety, general welfare, and
natural resources.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.002  INTENT.



   It is intended by the city that this chapter will promote the following:



   (A)   The protection of lakes, rivers and streams, wetlands, and
groundwater in the City of Park Rapids essential to the promotion of public
health, safety, welfare, socioeconomic growth and development of the city.



   (B)   The regulation of proper SSTS construction, reconstruction,
repair and maintenance to prevent the entry and migration of contaminants,
thereby protecting against the degradation of surface water and groundwater
quality.



   (C)   The establishment of minimum standards for SSTS placement,
design, construction, reconstruction, repair and maintenance to prevent
contamination and, if contamination is discovered, the identification and
control of its consequences and the abatement of its source and migration.



   (D)   The appropriate utilization of privy vaults and other
non-water carried sewage collection and storage facilities.



   (E)   The provision of technical assistance and education, plan
review, inspections, SSTS surveys and complaint investigations to prevent and
control water-borne diseases, lake degradation, groundwater-related hazards,
and public nuisance conditions.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.003  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to M.S.§§ 115.55, 145A.01 through
145A.08, 375.51, or successor statutes, and Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080,
7081, 7082, or successor rules.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.004  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The provisions set forth in this chapter shall become effective on
August 5, 2015.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



DEFINITIONS



§ 153.005  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section. If not specifically defined in this section, terms used
in this chapter shall have the same meaning as provided in the standards
adopted by reference. Words or phrases that are not defined here or in the
standards adopted by reference shall have common usage meaning. For purposes
of this chapter, the words MUST and SHALL are mandatory and the words MAY and
SHOULD are permissive.



   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. An employee or agent of the City of Park
Rapids Planning Department.



   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The City Board of Adjustment as appointed by the
City Council of the City of Park Rapids.



   CITY.  City of Park Rapids.



   CITY COUNCIL. The Park Rapids City Council.



   COUNTY.  Hubbard County, Minnesota.



   DEPARTMENT.  The City of Park Rapids Planning Department.



   LOT.  A parcel of land in a plat recorded in the office of the County
Recorder or Registrar of Titles or a parcel of land created and conveyed,
using a specific legal description.



   MALFUNCTION. The partial or complete loss of function of a SSTS
component, which requires a corrective action to restore its intended
function.



   MINOR REPAIR. The repair or replacement of an existing damaged or
faulty component/part of an SSTS excluding septic tanks and soil dispersal
systems that will return the SSTS to its operable condition. The repair shall
not alter the original area, dimensions, design, specifications or concept of
the SSTS or be made to a septic tank (except for allowed baffle repair) or
soil dispersal system.



   MPCA.  Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   QUALIFIED EMPLOYEE. An employee or agent of the state or a local unit
of government, who performs site evaluations or designs, installs, maintains,
pumps, or inspects SSTS as part of the individual's employment duties and is
registered on the SSTS professional register verifying specialty area
endorsements applicable to the work being conducted.



   STATE.  The State of Minnesota.



   TYPE 4 WETLANDS. Inland deep fresh, marshes in which soil is usually
covered with 6 inches to 3 feet or more of water during the growing season.
Vegetation includes cattails, reeds, bulrushes, spikerushes, and wild rice.
In open areas, pondweeds, naiads, coontail, water milfoils, waterweeds,
duckweeds, water lilies, or spatterdocks may occur. These deep marshes may
completely fill shallow lake basins, potholes, limestone sinks, and sloughs,
or may border open water in such depressions.



   TYPE 5 WETLANDS. Inland open fresh water, shallow ponds, and reservoirs
in which water is usually less than 10 feet deep and is fringed by a border
of emergent vegetation similar to open areas of Type 4 Wetland.



   WETLAND TYPE or TYPE. A wetland type classified according to Wetlands
of the United States, United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular 39
(1956 and 1971 editions), as summarized in this subpart. "Classification of
Wetlands and Deepwater Habitats of the United States" (Cowardin et al., 1979
edition) is a separate, parallel wetland typing system that may be used to
characterize components of a wetland.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.006  SCOPE.



   This chapter regulates the siting, design, installation, alterations,
operation, maintenance, monitoring, and management of all SSTS within the
city's applicable jurisdiction including, but not necessarily limited to
individual SSTS and cluster or community SSTS, privy vaults, and other
non-water carried SSTS. All sewage generated in unsewered areas of the city
shall be treated and dispersed by an approved SSTS that is sited, designed,
installed, operated, and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or by a system that has been permitted by the MPCA.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.007  JURISDICTION.



   The jurisdiction of this chapter shall include all lands of the city
and within its orderly annexation areas or areas that otherwise fall under
the city's zoning authority.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.008  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   City administration.  The City Planning Department shall
administer the SSTS program and all provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   State of Minnesota.  SSTS serving establishments or
facilities licensed or otherwise regulated by the state shall conform to the
requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   Amendments. The procedure for amendments to this chapter shall
be as follows:



      (1)   An amendment may be initiated by a property owner, the
Planning Commission, or the City Council. Property owners wishing to initiate
an amendment shall fill out a Request for Zoning Amendment application
available from the Department. Such application shall be filled out and
submitted to the Department together with the appropriate fee.



      (2)   The applicant shall appear before the Planning
Commission to answer any questions that Commission members may have
concerning the amendment request.



      (3)   A public hearing on the amendment request shall be
conducted by the Planning Commission. The public hearing shall be conducted
in accordance with M.S. § 462.357.



      (4)   The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to
the City Council after the proceedings of this public hearing.



      (5)   The City Council shall consider the recommendation of
the Planning Commission.



   (D)   Appeals. An appeal of any administrative decision made in the
enforcement of this chapter shall be made within 15 days of the date of the
administrative decision by filling out and submitting to the Department a
Request for Variance Application form, which is available from the
Department. Such appeal shall be heard by the Board of Adjustment within 60
days of the date that such application is submitted to the Department and
found complete and accepted by the Department.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.009  VALIDITY.



   The validity of any part of this chapter shall not be affected by the
invalidity of any other parts of this chapter where the part can be given
effect irrespective of any invalid part or parts.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.010  LIABILITY.



   Any liability or responsibility shall not be imposed upon the
department or agency or any of its officials, employees, or other contract
agent, its employees, agents or servants thereof for damage resulting from
the defective construction, operation, or abandonment of any SSTS regulated
under this chapter by reason of standards, requirements, or inspections
authorized hereunder.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



GENERAL REQUIREMENTS



§ 153.011  RETROACTIVITY.



   (A)   All SSTS. Except as explicitly set forth in § 153.028, all
provisions of this chapter shall apply to any SSTS regardless of the date it
was originally permitted.



   (B)   Existing permits. Unexpired permits which were issued prior to
the effective date shall remain valid under the terms and conditions of the
original permit until the original expiration date or until a change in
system design whichever is earlier.



   (C)   SSTS on lots created After January 23, 1996. All lots created
after January 23,1996 must have a minimum of 2 soil treatment and dispersal
areas that can support trenches, seepage beds, mounds, and at-grade systems
as described in Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080.2200 through 7080.2230 or site
conditions described in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7081.0270, Subd. 3 through
7. If a lot has 1 or more existing SSTS, a compliance inspection that
includes an alternate site soil boring shall be conducted on each existing
SSTS and required in lieu of a site evaluation on that lot.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.012  UPGRADE, REPAIR, REPLACEMENT AND ABANDONMENT.



   Failure to protect groundwater. An SSTS that is determined not to be
protective of groundwater in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter
7080.1500, Subd. 4B shall be upgraded, repaired, replaced or abandoned by the
owner in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 12 months of
receipt of a Notice of Noncompliance.



   (A)   Imminent threat to public health or safety.



      (1)   An SSTS that is determined to be an imminent threat to
public health or safety in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter
7080.1500, Subd. 4A shall be upgraded, repaired, replaced or abandoned by the
owner in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 10 months of
receipt of a Notice of Noncompliance.



      (2)   An SSTS posing an imminent threat to public health or
safety shall be pumped within 24 hours of the determination that the SSTS is
an imminent threat and managed as a holding tank if the tank is sealed and
compliant until an SSTS upgrade is completed. If the tank is not compliant or
able to function as a holding tank, the building(s) serviced by the SSTS
shall not be occupied or inhabited per § 153.016 of this chapter until an
SSTS upgrade is completed or unless a Department approved alternative for
safe waste disposal is implemented.



   (B)   Abandonment. Any SSTS, or any component thereof, which is no
longer intended to be used, must be abandoned in accordance with Minnesota
Rules, Chapter 7080.2500.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.013  SSTS IN FLOODPLAINS.



   SSTS shall not be located in a floodway and wherever possible, location
within any part of a floodplain shall be avoided. If no option exists to
locate a SSTS outside of a floodplain, location within the flood fringe is
allowed if the requirements in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2270 and all
relevant local requirements are met.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.014  CLASS V INJECTION WELLS.



   All owners of new or replacement SSTS that are considered to be Class V
injection wells, as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40,
Part 144, are required by the federal government to submit SSTS inventory
information to the Environmental Protection Agency as described in CFR 40
part 144. Further, owners are required to identify all Class V injection
wells in property transfer disclosures.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.015  SSTS PRACTITIONER LICENSING.



   No person shall engage in site evaluation, inspection, design,
installation, construction, alteration, extension, repair, maintenance, or
pumping of SSTS without an appropriate and valid license issued by MPCA in
accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7083 except as exempted in 7083.0700.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.016  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Occupancy or use of a building without a compliant SSTS. It is
unlawful for any person to occupy, or use any building intended for
habitation that is not provided with a wastewater treatment system that
disposes of wastewater in a manner that complies with the provisions of this
chapter with the following exceptions:



      (1)   Building connected to SSTS that are non-compliant and
are imminent health threats may continue to be occupied or used during the
time period in which the system is noncompliant until it is upgraded if the
property complies with § 153.012 of this chapter.



      (2)   Building connected to SSTS that are non-compliant and
failing to protect groundwater may continue to be occupied or used during the
time period until the system is upgraded not to exceed the 12-month upgrade
time period allowed in § 153.012 of this chapter.



   (B)   Sewage discharge to ground surface or surface water. It is
unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, or use any SSTS system
regulated under this chapter that results in raw or partially treated
wastewater seeping to the ground surface or flowing into any surface water.
Any surface discharging system must be permitted under the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System program by the MPCA.



   (C)   Discharge of hazardous or deleterious materials. It is
unlawful for any person to discharge into any treatment system regulated
under this chapter any hazardous or deleterious material that adversely
affects the treatment or dispersal performance of the system or groundwater
quality.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



SSTS STANDARDS



§ 153.017  STANDARDS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   Adoption of Rules by reference. The city hereby adopts by
reference the provisions of Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080 through 7083 in
their entirety except as referenced under § 153.017 and except as otherwise
expressly modified by this chapter.



   (B)   Alternative local standards for new and existing SSTS. The
city hereby adopts the 2006 version of Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080 for all
new and existing residential Type I, Type II, and Type III SSTS and SSTS that
serve any food, beverage, and lodging establishment under 2,500 gallons per
day provided the effluent discharge does not exceed the standards in
Minnesota Rules, 7080.2150, Subd. 3(K). These aforementioned SSTS types may
be designed, permitted, installed, and inspected per either the 2006 version
or current version of Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.018  AMENDMENTS TO THE ADOPTED STANDARDS.



   (A)   List of more restrictive adopted standards.



      (1)   An inspection pipe of 4 inches in diameter shall be
installed on every drop box, cross pipe used to top-load, or distribution box.



      (2)   A SSTS shall be upgraded to conform in entirety with all
requirements of this chapter when additional bedrooms or water-using
appliances are added to a building or the SSTS is disconnected from a
building and being replaced and connected to a new building such as in the
case of replacement of mobile homes, modular homes, etc.



      (3)   The setback distance from an ISTS to the delineated
boundary of a Type 4 or Type 5 wetland greater than 10 acres in size shall be
150 feet and the bottom and sides of trenches and beds shall be in original
soils at least 3 feet above the saturated soil or bedrock. In cases where a
property owner can demonstrate through legal description, or plat, or
certified survey that there is insufficient depth on a lot to accommodate
placement of the drainfield at the 150 foot setback, the Zoning Administrator
may vary the setback administratively, but in no case shall the setback be
less than 75 feet.



      (4)   The top of sewage tanks shall be buried no deeper from
final grade than the tank manufacturer's maximum designed depth for the tank.
This provision is adopted per the city's ability to do so as stated in
Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2000, C.



      (5)   On holding tanks, the maintenance hole of at least 20
inches in least dimension must extend through the cover to above final
surface grade rather than follow the requirement in Minnesota Rules, Chapter
7080.2290, C.



      (6)   SSTS designs that will be used for a self-installed SSTS
must include detailed construction/installation specifications and
instructions meeting Department policy criteria for such designs.



   (B)   Determination of hydraulic loading rate and SSTS sizing. Table
IX entitled "Loading Rates for Determining Bottom Absorption Area and
Absorption Ratios Using Detailed Soil Descriptions" or Table IXa entitled
"Loading Rates for Determining Bottom Absorption Area and Absorption Ratios
Using Percolation Rests" from Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2150, Subd. 3(E)
and herein adopted by reference shall be used to size SSTS infiltration areas.



   (C)   Compliance criteria for existing SSTS.



      (1)   SSTS built before April 1,1996 outside of areas
designated as shoreland areas, wellhead protection areas, or SSTS providing
sewage treatment for food, beverage, or lodging establishments must have at
least 2 feet of vertical separation between the bottom of the dispersal
system and seasonal saturation or bedrock.



      (2)   SSTS built after March 31,1996 or SSTS located in a
shoreland area, wellhead protection area, or serving a food, beverage, or
lodging establishment as defined under Minnesota Rules, 7080.1100, Subd. 84
shall have a 3-foot vertical separation between the bottom soil infiltrative
surface and the periodically saturated soil and/or bedrock. Existing systems
that have no more than a 15% reduction in this separation distance (a
separation distance no less than 30.6 inches) to account for settling of sand
or soil, normal variation of separation distance measurements and
interpretation of limiting layer characteristics may be considered compliant
under this chapter. The vertical separation measurement shall be made outside
the area of system influence, but in an area of similar soil.



   (D)   Holding tanks.



      (1)   Holding tanks may be allowed for the following
applications: as replacements for existing failing SSTS and SSTS that pose an
imminent threat to public health or safety on lots with limitations that will
not allow for the installation of a Type I SSTS or for uses that are seasonal
or intermittent in nature and will not use more than 150 gallons of water per
day.



      (2)   Holding tanks meeting the above-mentioned criteria may
be used for structures with limited water use as determined by the Department
under the following conditions:



         (a)   The owner shall install a holding tank in
accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2290.



2015 S-13



         (b)   An alarm device shall be installed that identifies
when the holding tank is at 75% capacity per Minnesota Rules, Chapter
7080.2290 Subd. F.



         (c)   The owner shall maintain a valid contract with a
licensed maintainer to pump and haul the holding tank contents to a licensed
treatment facility or an MPCA approved land application site. This
requirement is waived if the owner is a farmer who is exempt from licensing
under M.S. § 115.56, subd. 2(b)(3).



         (d)   The holding tank shall be regularly pumped, no
less frequently than once a year or other regular schedule approved by the
Department based on water use.



         (e)   The maintainer shall certify each date the tank is
pumped, the volume of the liquid waste removed, the treatment facility to or
site on which the waste was discharged, and the water meter reading at the
time of pumping and report to the Department.



      (3)   Failure to meet these requirements shall constitute a
violation of this Ordinance and will result in enforcement actions being
taken by the city per § 153.031 of this chapter which may include, but not
be limited to, banning use/occupancy of the structure(s) served by the
holding tank(s).



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.019  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Variance requests. A property owner may request a variance
from the standards as specified in this chapter pursuant to § 151.241 of the
City of Park Rapids Zoning Ordinance and the following 2 conditions:



      (1)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a variance
issued pursuant to this chapter, or any violation of any provision of this
chapter relating to the specific issue of the variance, shall result in
immediate revocation of the variance.



      (2)   Any variance granted shall automatically expire if the
SSTS is not installed within 1 year of the date of the variance approval.



   (B)   Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall have the
authority only to consider variances to horizontal setbacks from property
lines, rights of way, structures, or buildings and other standards and
criteria per Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7082.0300 Subd. 3. Variances shall only
be permitted when they are in harmony with the general purposes and intent of
this chapter where there are practical difficulties in meeting the strict
letter of this chapter. Variance requests to deviate from the design flow
determination procedures in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7081.0110 if the
deviation reduces the average daily estimated flow from greater than 10,000
gallons per day to less than 10,000 gallons per day, or to provisions in
Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2150, Subd. 2 and 7081.0080, Subd. 2 through 5
regarding the vertical separation required beneath the treatment and
dispersal soil system and saturated soil or bedrock from the required 3 feet
of unsaturated soil material (except as provided in Minnesota Rules, Chapter
7082.1700, Subd. 4D) must be approved by MPCA. Variances to wells and water
supply lines must be approved by the Minnesota Department of Health.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



SSTS PERMITTING



§ 153.020  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, alter, modify,
repair, replace, or operate a SSTS without the appropriate permit and
accompanying compliance inspection resulting in the issuance of a certificate
of compliance from the City of Park Rapids Planning Department. The issuing
of any permit or variance under the provisions of this chapter shall not
absolve the applicant of responsibility to obtain any other required permit
or inspection.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.021  SSTS PERMIT.



   (A)   An SSTS permit shall be obtained by the property owner or an
agent of the property owner from the city prior to the installation,
construction, replacement, modification, alteration, repair, or capacity
expansion of a SSTS. The purpose of this permit is to ensure that the
proposed construction activity is sited, designed, and constructed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter by appropriately certified
and/or licensed practitioners).



   (B)   No permit will be issued to landowners or on property on which
there are unresolved violations of this chapter or any other ordinance unless
that permit is part of a Department approved plan to resolve the violation(s).



   (C)   Activities requiring an SSTS permit. An SSTS permit is
required for installation of a new SSTS, for replacement of an existing SSTS,
or for any repair or replacement of components that will alter the original
function of the system, change the treatment capacity of the system, change
the location of the system, or otherwise change the original system's design,
layout, or function.



   (D)   Activities not requiring an SSTS permit. An SSTS permit is not
required for minor repairs or replacements of system components that do not
alter the original function of the system, change the treatment capacity of
the system, change the location of the system, or otherwise change the
original system's design, layout, or function.



   (E)   SSTS permit required to obtain sewered structure building
permit. For any property on which an SSTS permit is required in the Shoreland
Overlay District, approval and issuance of a valid SSTS permit must be
obtained or a valid certificate of compliance for the SSTS, as applicable,
must be submitted to the Department before a building permit can be issued.



   (F)   Permit application requirements. SSTS permit applications
shall be made on forms provided or approved by the Department and signed by
the applicant or an authorized agent. The applications shall include, but is
not limited to the information and documents listed in division (F)(1)
through (5) below.



      (1)   Name, mailing address, telephone number, (and email
address, if available).



      (2)   Property identification number and address or other
description of property location.



      (3)   Site evaluation report as described in Minnesota Rules,
Chapter 7080.1730.



      (4)   Design report as described in Minnesota Rules, Chapter
7080.2430.



      (5)   Management plan as described in Minnesota Rules, Chapter
7082.0600.



   (G)   Application review and response. The Department shall review a
permit application and supporting documents. Upon satisfaction that the
proposed work will conform to the provisions of this chapter, the Department
shall issue a written permit authorizing construction of the SSTS as
designed. In the event the applicant makes a significant change to the
approved application such as a change in the soil dispersal system location,
distribution method, or treatment type, the applicant must file an amended
application with the Department detailing the changed conditions prior to
initiating or continuing construction, modification, or operation. Upon
satisfaction that the amended application will conform to the provisions of
this chapter, the Department shall issue a written permit authorizing
construction of the SSTS as amended and then construction may commence per
the amended and accompanying permit. If the permit application is incomplete
or does not meet the requirements of this chapter, the Department shall deny
the application. A notice of denial shall be provided to the applicant, which
must state the reason for the denial.



   (H)   Permit expiration.



      (1)   The SSTS permit is valid for a period of no more than 1
year from its date of issue. Satisfactory completion of construction shall be
determined by receipt of final record drawings and a signed certification
that the construction or installation of the system was completed in
substantial conformance with the approved design documents by a qualified
employee of the Department or a licensed inspection business, which is
authorized by the Department and independent of the owner and the SSTS
installer.



      (2)   If construction is not completed within the valid permit
period, the permit is automatically voided.



   (I)   Extensions and renewals. The Department may grant an extension
of the SSTS permit if the construction has commenced prior to the original
expiration date of the permit. The permit may be extended for a period of no
more than 6 months.



   (J)   Transferability. An SSTS permit may be transferred to a new
owner provided there are no proposed changes to the SSTS design.



   (K)   Suspension or revocation. The Department may suspend or revoke
an SSTS permit issued under this section for any false statements,
misrepresentations of facts on which the SSTS permit was issued, or
unauthorized changes to the system design that alter the original function of
the system, change the treatment capacity of the system, change the location
of the system, or otherwise change the original system's design, layout, or
function. A notice of suspension or revocation and the reasons for the
suspension or revocation shall be conveyed in writing to the permit holder.
If suspended or revoked, installation or modification of a SSTS may not
commence or continue until a valid SSTS permit is obtained.



   (L)   Posting. The SSTS permit shall be posted on the property in
such a location and manner so that the permit is visible and available for
inspection until construction is completed and certified.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.022  OPERATING PERMIT.



   (A)   SSTS requiring an operating permit.



      (1)   An operating permit shall be required of all owners of
new holding tanks, Type IV systems, Type V systems, or MSTS or any other
system deemed by the Department to require operational oversight. Sewage
shall not be discharged to a holding tank, Type IV system, Type V system, or
MSTS until the Department certifies that the holding tank, Type IV system,
Type V system, or MSTS was installed in substantial conformance with the
approved plans, receives the final as-builts of the holding tank, Type IV
system, Type V system, or MSTS, and a valid operating permit is issued to the
owner.



      (2)   Permit application requirements. Application for an
operating permit shall be made on a form provided by the Department including:



         (a)   Owner name, mailing address, telephone, (and email
address, if available).



         (b)   SSTS permit reference number and date of issue.



         (c)   Final as-builts of the SSTS.



         (d)   Owners of holding tanks must submit a copy of a
valid executed monitoring and disposal contract with a licensed maintenance
business.



      (3)   Monitoring and disposal contract. Owners of holding
tanks shall provide to the Department a copy of a valid monitoring and
disposal contract executed between the owner and a licensed maintenance
business, which guarantees the removal of the holding tank contents in a
timely manner that prevents an illegal discharge in accordance with Minnesota
Rules, Chapter 7082.0100, Subp. 3G. This requirement is waived if the owner
is a farmer who is exempt from licensing under M.S. § 115.56, subd. 3(b)(3)
and doing his/her own mamtaining. Owners of holding tanks shall hold a valid
monitoring and disposal contract with a licensed maintenance business at all
times until which time the holding tank is abandoned or the property sold and
provide to the Department a copy of each and every said contract within 30
days of the contract's execution.



   (B)   Department response. The Department shall review the record
drawings, operation and maintenance manual, management plan, maintenance and
servicing contract, and any other pertinent documents as appropriate for
accuracy and completeness. If any deficiencies are identified, the operating
permit shall be denied until the deficiencies are corrected to the
satisfaction of the Department. If the submitted documents fulfill the
requirements, the Department shall issue an operating permit.



   (C)   Operating permit terms and conditions. The operating permit
shall include the following:



      (1)   System performance requirements.



      (2)   System operating requirements.



      (3)   Monitoring locations, procedures and recording
requirements.



      (4)   Maintenance requirements and schedules.



      (5)   Compliance limits and boundaries.



      (6)   Reporting requirements.



      (7)   Department notification requirements for non-compliant
conditions.



      (8)   Valid contract between the owner and a licensed
maintenance business.



      (9)   Disclosure, location and condition of the additional
soil treatment and dispersal system site.



      (10)   Descriptions of acceptable and prohibited discharges.



      (11)   Any other information the Department deems necessary.



   (D)   Permit expiration and renewal.



      (1)   Operating permits shall be valid for the specific term
stated on the permit as determined by the Department.



      (2)   An operating permit must be renewed prior to its
expiration. If not renewed, the Department may require the system to be
removed from service or operated as a holding tank until the permit is
renewed. If not renewed within 90 calendar days of the expiration date, the
city may require that the system be abandoned in accordance with § 153.012
of this chapter.



      (3)   The owner must apply for renewal at least 30 calendar
days before the expiration date.



      (4)   Application shall be made on a form provided by the
Department including, but not limited to:



         (a)   Applicant name, mailing address, phone number,
(and email address, if available).



         (b)   Reference number of previous owner's operating
permit.



         (c)   Any and all outstanding compliance monitoring
reports as required by the operating permit.



         (d)   Evidence of all pumping done during the most
recent operating permit period such as paid receipts from a state-licensed
maintainer.



         (e)   Certified treatment system inspection signed
and/or sealed by a certified designer, maintenance contractor, or operator at
the discretion of the city.



         (f)   Any revisions made to the operation and
maintenance manual.



         (g)   Payment of application review fee as determined by
the city.



   (E)   Amendments to existing permits not allowed. The city may not
amend an existing permit to reflect changes in this chapter until the permit
term has expired and is renewed, unless an amendment is necessary to
eliminate an imminent threat to public health or safety.



   (F)   Transfers. The operating permit shall not be transferred. A
new owner shall apply for an operating permit in accordance with § 153.021
of this chapter. To consider the new owner's application, the Department may
require a performance inspection of the treatment system certified by a
licensed inspector or qualified employee.



   (G)   Suspension or revocation.



      (1)   The Department may suspend or revoke any operating
permit issued under this section for any false statements or
misrepresentations of facts on which the operating permit was issued or in
cases when a monitoring report shows the system is not operating per the
terms of the operating permit.



      (2)   Notice of suspension revocation and the reasons for
revocation shall be conveyed in writing to the owner.



      (3)   If suspended or revoked, the Department may require that
the treatment system be removed from service, operated as a holding tank, or
abandoned in accordance with § 153.022.



      (4)   At the Department's discretion, the operating permit may
be reinstated or renewed upon the owner taking appropriate corrective actions.



   (H)   Compliance monitoring.



      (1)   Performance monitoring of a SSTS shall be performed by a
licensed inspection business or licensed service provider hired by the holder
of the operating permit in accordance with the monitoring frequency and
parameters stipulated in the permit.



      (2)   A monitoring report shall be prepared and certified by
the licensed inspection business or licensed service provider. The report
shall be submitted to the Department on a form provided by the Department on
or before the compliance reporting date stipulated in the operating permit.
The report shall contain a description of all maintenance and servicing
activities performed since the last compliance monitoring report as described
below:



         (a)   Owner name, address, telephone number, (and email
address, if available).



         (b)   Property tax parcel identification number and
legal description.



         (c)   Operating permit number.



         (d)   Average daily flow since last compliance
monitoring report.



         (e)   Description of type of maintenance and date
performed.



         (f)   Description of samples taken (if required),
analytical laboratory used, and results of analyses.



         (g)   Problems noted with the system and actions
proposed or taken to correct them.



         (h)   Name, signature, license and license number of the
licensed professional who performed the work.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



MANAGEMENT PLANS



§ 153.023  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of management plans is to describe how a particular SSTS is
intended to be operated and maintained to sustain the performance required.
The plan is to be provided by the certified designer to the system owner when
the treatment system is commissioned.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.024  MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   SSTS requiring management plans. Management plans are required
for all new or replacement SSTS. The management plan shall be submitted to
the Department with the SSTS permit application. The Department shall be
notified of any system modifications made during construction and the
management plan revised and resubmitted prior to final construction
certification.



   (B)   Required contents of a management plan. Management plans shall
include:



      (1)   Operating requirements describing tasks that the owner
can perform and tasks that a licensed service provider or maintainer must
perform.



      (2)   Monitoring requirements.



      (3)   Maintenance requirements including maintenance
procedures and a schedule for routine maintenance.



      (4)   Statement that the owner is required to notify the
Department when the management plan requirements are not being met.



      (5)   Disclosure of the location and condition of the
additional soil treatment and dispersal area on the owner's property or a
property serving the owner's residence.



      (6)   Other requirements as determined by the Department.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.025  REQUIREMENTS FOR SYSTEMS NOT OPERATED UNDER A MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   SSTS that are not operated under a management plan or operating permit
must have treatment tanks inspected and provide for the removal of solids if
needed every 3 years. Solids must be removed when their accumulation meets
the limit described in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080.2450.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



COMPLIANCE MANAGEMENT



§ 153.026  COMPLIANCE INSPECTION PROGRAM.



   Department responsibility. It is the responsibility of the Department,
or its agent, to perform various SSTS compliance inspections periodically to
assure that the requirements of this chapter are met.



   (A)   SSTS compliance inspections must be performed:



      (1)   To ensure compliance with applicable requirements.



      (2)   To ensure system compliance before issuance of a permit
for addition of a bedroom unless the permit application is made during the
period of November 1 to April 30, provided a compliance inspection is
performed before the following June 1, the applicant submits a certificate of
compliance by the following June 30, and the Department deems it appropriate.



      (3)   For all new SSTS construction or replacement (includes
privies).



      (4)   For an evaluation, investigation, inspection,
recommendation, or other process used to prepare a disclosure statement if
conducted by a party who is not the SSTS owner. Such an inspection
constitutes a compliance inspection and shall be conducted in accordance with
Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7082.0700 using the SSTS inspection report forms
provided by MPCA.



   (B)   All compliance inspections must be performed and signed by
licensed inspection businesses or qualified employees certified as inspectors.



   (C)   The Department shall be given access to enter a property at
any reasonable time to inspect and/or monitor the SSTS system. As used in
this division, PROPERTY does not include a residence or private building.



   (D)   No person shall hinder or otherwise interfere with the
Department's employees in the performance of their duties and
responsibilities pursuant to this chapter. Refusal to allow reasonable access
to the property by the Department shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.027  NEW CONSTRUCTION OR REPLACEMENT.



   (A)   Compliance inspections shall be performed on new or
replacement SSTS during construction and installation of a SSTS before it is
covered with soil to determine compliance with Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080
or 7081.



   (B)   It is the responsibility of the SSTS owner or the owner's
agent to notify the Department that an SSTS permit installation inspection is
being requested no later than 9:30 a.m. on the workday the SSTS is being
installed.



   (C)   A certificate of compliance for new SSTS construction or
replacement, which shall be valid for 5 years, shall be issued by the
Department if the Department has reasonable assurance that the system was
built in accordance with the applicable requirements as specified in the
construction permit.



   (D)   The certificate of compliance must include a certified
statement by the certified inspector or qualified employee who conducted the
inspection that the SSTS is or is not in compliance with the ordinance
requirements. If the SSTS is determined not to be in compliance with the
applicable requirements, a notice of noncompliance must be issued to the
owner which includes a statement specifying those ordinance provisions with
which the SSTS does not comply.



   (E)   The certificate of compliance or notice of noncompliance must
be submitted to the Department no later than 15 calendar days after the date
the inspection was performed. The Department shall deliver the certificate of
compliance or notice of noncompliance to the owner or the owner's agent
within 15 calendar days of receipt from the certified inspector. No SSTS
shall be placed into operation until a valid certificate of compliance has
been issued.



   (F)   Certificates of compliance for new construction or replacement
shall remain valid for 5 years from the date of issue unless the Department
finds evidence of noncompliance.



   (G)   When additional inspections are required, an additional
re-inspection fee will be charged.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.028  EXISTING SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Compliance inspections shall be required when any of the
following conditions occur:



      (1)   When a construction permit is required to repair,
modify, or upgrade an existing system.



      (2)   Any time there is an addition or alteration to, or an
expansion of use of the building being served by an existing SSTS or a new
building is being connected to an existing SSTS.



      (3)   Any time there is a change in use of the property being
served by an existing SSTS which may impact the performance of the system.



      (4)   When an operating permit is to be renewed.



      (5)   During systematic lake or area-wide SSTS surveys by the
Department; and/or



      (6)   At any time as required by this chapter or the
Department deems appropriate such as upon receipt of a complaint or other
notice of a system malfunction.



   (B)   Compliance inspections of existing SSTS shall be reported on
the inspection report forms provided by MPCA. The following conditions, must
be assessed, or verified:



      (1)   Watertightness assessment of all treatment tanks
including a leakage report.



      (2)   Vertical separation distance between the bottom of the
soil treatment and dispersal system and the periodically saturated soil or
bedrock including a vertical separation verification report.



      (3)   Sewage backup, surface seepage, or surface discharge
including a hydraulic function report.



   (C)   The certificate of compliance must include a certified
statement by a qualified employee or licensed inspection business, indicating
whether the SSTS is in compliance with the ordinance requirements. If the
SSTS is determined not to be in compliance with the applicable requirements,
a notice of noncompliance must include a statement specifying those ordinance
provisions with which the SSTS does not comply. An SSTS permit application
must be submitted to the Department if the required corrective action is not
a minor repair.



   (D)   If the certificate of compliance is being performed for a
permit or variance application where the size of the SSTS tank(s) and
drainfield must be known in order to act on the permit or variance
application, then the quantity and capacity of tanks and size of the soil
dispersal system must be shown on the certificate of compliance.



   (E)   A copy of the certificate of compliance or notice of
noncompliance shall be provided to the property owner and the original
certificate of compliance or notice of noncompliance shall be provided to the
Department by the licensed inspector conducting the inspection within 15 days
of the date the inspection was performed.



   (F)   Certificates of compliance for existing SSTS shall remain
valid for 3 years from the date of issue unless the Department finds evidence
of noncompliance.



   (G)   SSTS found not to be in compliance with Minnesota Rules,
Chapter 7080.1500, Subd. 4A or 7081.0080, Subd. 3 must be repaired or
replaced within 10 months or as directed under M.S. Ch. 145A. SSTS that are
determined to have operation or monitoring deficiencies must immediately be
maintained, monitored or otherwise managed according to the operating permit
SSTS found to be noncompliant with other applicable requirements must be
repaired or replaced according to the Department's requirements.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.029  PERIODICALLY SATURATED SOIL DISAGREEMENTS.



   Resolution of disputes between SSTS certified individuals regarding
conflicting compliance inspections, determination of seasonally saturated
soils, and other technical issues shall follow Minnesota Rules, Chapter
7082.0700, Subd. 5.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.030  DISCLAIMER.



   Neither the issuance of permits, certificates of compliance, or notices
of noncompliance as requested or issued shall be construed to represent a
guarantee or warranty of the system's operation or effectiveness. Such
certificates signify that the system in question is or has been designed and
installed in compliance or non-compliance with the provisions of these
standards and regulations.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 153.031  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Cause to issue a Notice of Violation. Any person, firm, agent,
or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or who
fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter,
including violations of conditions and safeguards, or who knowingly makes any
material false statement or knowing omission in any document required to be
submitted under the provisions hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as defined by Minnesota
Statutes. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.



   (B)   Interference with Department access or
administration/enforcement prohibited.



      (1)   The Department shall be given access to enter a property
without prior notice at any reasonable time to inspect and/or monitor the
SSTS for any reason the Department deems necessary. As used in this division,
PROPERTY does not include a residence or private building.



      (2)   No person shall hinder or otherwise interfere with the
Department's employees in the performance of their duties and
responsibilities pursuant to this chapter. Refusal to allow reasonable access
to the property by the Department shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense.



   (C)   Notice of violation.  The Department shall serve, in person
or by mail, a notice of violation to any person determined to be violating
provisions of this chapter. The notice of violation shall contain:



      (1)   A statement documenting the findings of fact determined
through observations, inspections, or investigations.



      (2)   A list of specific violation(s) of this chapter.



      (3)   Specific requirements for correction or removal of the
specified violation(s).



      (4)   A mandatory time schedule for correction, removal and
compliance with this chapter.



   (D)   Cease and desist orders.  Cease and desist orders may be
issued when the Department has probable cause that an activity regulated by
this or any other city ordinance is being or has been conducted without a
permit or in violation of a permit. When work has been stopped by a cease and
desist order, the work shall not resume until the reason for the work
stoppage has been completely satisfied, any administrative fees paid, and the
cease and desist order lifted.



   (E)   Administrative fees and restoration.  Any application for a
permit that is made after the work has commenced and which requires a permit
or is done in violation of a permit shall be charged an additional
administrative fee. In addition, the Department may require correction and/or
restoration of the property to its original state should the application for
a permit be denied or if the action permitted does not include all or part of
the work commenced prior to approval of said permit.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



§ 153.032  PROSECUTION.



   In the event of a violation or threatened violation of this chapter,
the city may, in addition to other remedies, initiate appropriate civil
action or proceedings to prevent, prosecute, restrain, correct or abate such
violations or threatened violations and the City Attorney shall have
authority to commence such civil action. The Department and City Attorney may
take such actions as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



FEES



§ 153.033  FEES.



   From time to time, the City Council shall establish fees for activities
undertaken by the Department pursuant to this chapter. Fees shall be due and
payable at a time and in a manner to be determined by the Department.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



INTERPRETATION



§ 153.034  INTERPRETATION.



   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other
powers granted by Minnesota Statutes.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



SEVERABILITY



§ 153.035  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the remainder of this
chapter shall not be affected and shall remain in full force.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS



§ 153.036  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
other existing city ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of
this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this
chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



ORDINANCES REPEALED



§ 153.037  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   The City of Park Rapids Code of Ordinances §§ 50.27: Private Sewage
Disposal (Ordinance 234, passed 1987); 151.104: Non-Conforming Sewage
Treatment Systems (Ordinance passed 1994); 151.130: Sewage Treatment
Standards (Ordinance passed 1994 and amended by Ordinances 375, passed
11-26-2002 and 491, passed 5-22-2007); 151.131: Sewage Treatment Permit
Requirements (Ordinance passed 1994 and amended by Ordinance 491, passed
5-22-2007); 151.132: Revision to an Approved Plan (Ordinance passed 1994);
and 151.133: Sewage Treatment System Inspection (Ordinance passed 1994 and
amended by Ordinance 491, passed 5-22-2007)  are hereby repealed.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



ADOPTION



§ 153.038  ADOPTION.



   This chapter (Chapter 153: Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems) is
hereby adopted by City of Park Rapids City Council on July 28, 2015.



(Ord. 555, passed 7-28-2015)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES




[Reserved]




PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Minnesota Statutes





References to Prior Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES



 

M.S. Section
 
Code Section




12.25
 
37.01, 37.04


12.31
 
37.06


Ch. 13
 
38.02


13.01 et seq.
 
34.14


13.03
 
36.13


13D.01
 
30.03


13D.02
 
30.03


14.57 - 14.70
 
91.066, 91.999


15.73, Subd. 3
 
95.03


16B-70
 
36.08


16B.45(5)
 
73.08


16B.59 - 16B.75
 
150.03


16B.62, Subd. 1
 
150.01, 150.02


16B.65, Subd. 1
 
150.01


16B.69
 
150.99


16B.70
 
150.02


16C, Subd. 1(a)(2)
 
35.04


16C, Subd. 1(c)
 
35.04


65B.48, Subd. 5
 
73.08


84.787, Subd. 7
 
73.02


84.81 - 84.91
 
72.01


84.872
 
72.06


84.92, Subd. 8
 
73.02


84.92, Subd. 8 - 10
 
73.08


Ch. 86B
 
96.096


93.44 - 93.51
 
151.003


93.44 - 93.51Z
 
151.087


Ch. 103F
 
151.001


Ch. 103G
 
151.081


103G.005, Subd. 15-17b
 
151.003


115.55
 
153.003


115.56, Subd. 2(b)(3)
 
153.018


115.56, Subd. 3(b)(3)
 
153.022


116.07
 
97.25


Ch. 144D
 
151.057, 151.058, 151.060 - 151.062, 151.064


145A.01 - 145A.08
 
153.003


145A.05, Subd. 1
 
131.02


Ch. 152
 
96.091


157.16
 
91.037


161.242
 
97.16


Ch. 168B
 
97.15


168.10
 
97.16


Ch. 169
 
70.01, 72.01, 73.08


169.01
 
97.16


169.01, Subd. 3
 
70.09


169.041
 
97.16, 97.18


169.045
 
73.08


169.045, Subd. 1
 
73.08


169.045. Subd. 2
 
73.08


169.045(7)
 
73.08


169.045, Subd. 8
 
73.08


169.222
 
74.26


169.69
 
70.10


169.693
 
70.10


169.70
 
73.08


Ch. 176
 
37.07


216B.02
 
95.03


216C.06, Subd. 14
 
151.245


Ch. 216D
 
95.17, 95.38


216D.01 - 216D.09
 
95.38, 95.47


216D.04, Subd. 3
 
95.03, 95.32


237.04
 
95.03


237.16
 
95.01


237.74
 
95.03


237.79
 
95.01


237.81
 
95.01


237.162
 
95.01, 95.03, 95.40


237.162, Subd. 4
 
95.03


237.163
 
95.01, 95.03, 95.40


237.163, Subd. 2(b)
 
95.02


237.163, Subd. 6
 
95.52


Ch. 238
 
95.03


238.086
 
95.01


260B.198
 
130.05


278.01 - 278.14
 
111.07


299C.61
 
38.02


299C.62
 
38.02


300.06
 
95.18


307.08
 
151.003


Ch. 308A
 
95.03


Ch. 327.31, Subd. 3
 
151.003


Ch. 329
 
114.03


Ch. 340A
 
91.035, 91.036, 91.050, 91.053, 91.066, 91.999


340A.101
 
91.037, 91.052


340A.14, Subd. 6
 
91.052


340A.308
 
91.021


340A.404, Subd. 1(4)
 
91.085


340A.404, Subd. 4a
 
91.052


340A.404, Subd. 4b
 
91.052


340A.404, Subd. 5
 
91.052


340A.408, Subd. 2b
 
91.052


340A.408, Subd. 3
 
91.052


340A.408, Subd. 5
 
91.053


340A.409
 
91.055, 91.084


340A.413
 
91.085


340A.413, Subd. 3
 
91.050


340A.414
 
91.065


340A.503, Subd. 1(a)(1)
 
131.05


340A.504
 
91.063


340A.504, Subd. 3
 
91.052


340A.504, Subd. 3c
 
91.052


340A.504, Subd. 4
 
91.083


340A.509
 
91.036


340A.801
 
91.055


347.50, Subd. 2
 
90.001


347.50, Subd. 3
 
90.001


347.50, Subd. 4
 
90.001


347.50 through 347.565
 
90.064


347.51
 
90.065, 90.081, 90.999


347.51, Subd. 2a
 
90.065


347.51 to 347.52
 
90.065


347.52
 
90.081, 90.999


347.52(a)
 
90.065


347.52(c)
 
90.065


347.52(d)
 
90.081


347.515
 
90.065, 90.999


347.541
 
90.069


347.541, Subd. 4
 
90.069


364.03
 
91.019


364.03, Subd. 2
 
111.07, 111.09, 116.11


364.03, Subd. 3
 
111.07, 111.09, 116.11, 120.07


364.06
 
38.02


364.09
 
38.02


375.51
 
153.003


412.311
 
35.06


414.0325, Subd. 5
 
151.001


415.021
 
35.62


415.11
 
30.29


Ch. 429
 
35.07, 92.05, 95.45


429.061
 
92.05


429.101
 
92.05, 94.022, 94.037


444.075
 
51.01


444.075, Subd. 3
 
51.04


Ch. 453
 
95.03


Ch. 453A
 
95.03


Ch. 462
 
95.45, 151.001, 151.241, 151.244, 151.246


462.357
 
151.002, 153.008


462.357, Subd. 6
 
151.245


462.358
 
151.214


462.3593
 
151.250


462.3593, Subd. 9
 
151.250


463.15 - 463.261
 
94.035


463.26
 
94.040


Ch. 466
 
94.003


469.190
 
34.02


471.195
 
97.01


471.345
 
35.06


471.345, Subd. 2
 
35.04 - 35.06


471.345, Subd. 3 and 3a
 
35.06


471.345, Subd. 4
 
35.05


471.345, Subd. 4a
 
35.05


471.6985
 
91.083


Ch. 505
 
151.001


604.113, Subd. 2A
 
36.13


609.02, Subd. 7(a)
 
90.001


609.02, Subd. 8
 
90.001


609.74
 
92.01


Ch. 617
 
119.06


617.23 - 617.299
 
119.07


626.87
 
38.02


626.87, Subd. 1
 
38.02


626.862
 
10.20


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code Section
 
2007 Code Section




Preamble
 
151.001, 151.002


1-2
 
10.05


Art. II
 
151.025


2-1
 
30.01


2-2
 
30.02


2-3
 
30.03


2-16
 
35.01


2-17
 
35.02


2-18
 
35.03


2-19
 
35.04


2-20
 
35.05


2-21
 
35.06


2-31
 
30.15


2-32
 
30.16


2-33
 
30.17


2-34
 
30.18


2-35
 
30.19


2-36
 
30.20


2-37
 
30.21


2-38
 
30.22


2-39
 
30.23


2-40
 
30.24


2-41
 
30.25


2-42
 
30.26


2-43
 
30.27


2-44
 
30.28


2-45
 
30.29


2-62
 
30.40


2-63
 
30.41


2-64
 
30.42


2-65
 
30.43


2-121
 
31.01


2-123
 
31.03


2-147
 
31.40


2-148
 
31.41


2-149
 
31.42


2-150
 
31.43


2-171
 
35.20


2-200
 
35.50


2-201
 
35.51


2-202
 
35.52


2-203
 
35.53


2-204
 
35.54


2-205
 
35.55


2-206
 
35.56


2-207
 
35.57


2-208
 
35.58


2-209
 
35.59


2-211
 
35.60


2-212
 
35.61


2-213
 
35.62


6-26
 
91.001


6-27
 
91.002


6-41
 
91.015


6-42
 
91.016


6-43
 
91.017


6-44
 
91.018


6-45
 
91.019


6-46
 
91.020


6-47
 
91.021


6-48
 
91.022


6-49
 
91.023


6-50
 
91.999


6-92
 
91.063


10-1
 
90.001


10-26
 
90.015


10-27
 
90.016


10-28
 
90.017


10-29
 
90.018


10-30
 
90.019


10-43
 
90.021


10-44
 
90.022


10-45
 
90.023


10-46
 
90.080


10-47
 
90.085


10-48
 
90.082


10-55
 
90.040


10-56
 
90.041


10-57
 
90.042


10-65
 
90.055


10-66
 
90.056


10-67
 
90.999


14-16
 
150.01, 150.03


14-17
 
150.02


14-18
 
150.99


14-31
 
150.15


14-32
 
150.16


14-33
 
150.17


14-34
 
150.18


14-35
 
150.19


14-36
 
150.20


14-37
 
150.99


18-1
 
110.01


18-2
 
110.02


18-3
 
110.03


18-4
 
110.04


18-5
 
110.05


18-6
 
110.06


18-7
 
110.07


18-40
 
111.01


18-41
 
111.02


18-42
 
111.03


18-43
 
111.04


18-44
 
111.05


18-45
 
111.06


18-46
 
111.07


18-47
 
111.08


18-48
 
111.09


18-49
 
111.10


18-50
 
111.99


18-57
 
112.01


18-58
 
112.02


18-59
 
112.03


18-60
 
112.99


18-76
 
113.01


18-77
 
113.02


18-78
 
113.03


18-79
 
113.99


18-101
 
113.04


18-102
 
113.05


18-103
 
113.06


18-104
 
113.07


18-105
 
113.08


18-121
 
113.09


18-122
 
113.10


18-123
 
113.11


18-124
 
113.12


18-125
 
113.13


18-126
 
113.14


18-127
 
113.15


18-146
 
114.01


18-147
 
114.02


18-148
 
114.03


18-149
 
114.04


18-150
 
114.05


18-151
 
114.06


18-152
 
114.07


18-153
 
114.08


18-154
 
114.09


18-155
 
114.10


18-156
 
114.11


18-157
 
114.12


18-158
 
114.13


18-159
 
114.14


18-160
 
114.15


18-161
 
114.16


18-162
 
114.17


18-163
 
114.99


18-166
 
114.18


18-201
 
115.01


18-202
 
115.02


18-203
 
115.03


18-204
 
115.04


18-205
 
115.05


18-206
 
115.06


18-207
 
115.07


18-208
 
115.08


18-220
 
116.01


18-221
 
116.02


18-222
 
116.03


18-223
 
116.04


18-224
 
116.05


18-225
 
116.06


18-226
 
116.07


18-227
 
116.08


18-228
 
116.09


18-229
 
116.10


18-230
 
116.11


18-231
 
116.99


18-241
 
117.99


18-256
 
117.01


18-257
 
117.02


18-258
 
117.03


18-271
 
118.99


18-281
 
118.01


18-282
 
118.02


18-283
 
118.03


18-284
 
118.04


18-285
 
118.05


18-286
 
118.06


18-287
 
118.07


18-288
 
118.08


18-289
 
118.09


18-300
 
119.01


18-301
 
119.02


18-302
 
119.03


18-303
 
119.04


18-304
 
119.05


18-305
 
119.06


18-306
 
119.07


18-307
 
119.08


18-308
 
119.09


18-309
 
119.10


18-310
 
119.11


18-311
 
119.12


18-312
 
119.13


18-321
 
120.01


18-322
 
120.02


18-323
 
120.03


18-324
 
120.04


18-325
 
120.05


18-326
 
120.06


18-327
 
120.07


18-328
 
120.99


19-25
 
92.01


19-26
 
92.02


19-27
 
92.03


19-28
 
92.04


19-29
 
92.05


19-30
 
92.06


19-31
 
92.07


19-32
 
92.08


19-33
 
92.09


19-34
 
92.10


19-35
 
92.99


22-26
 
93.01


22-27
 
93.02


22-28
 
93.03


22-29
 
93.04


22-30
 
93.05


22-31
 
93.06


22-32
 
93.07


22-33
 
93.08


22-34
 
93.09


22-34A
 
93.10


22-34B
 
93.11


22-35
 
93.12


22-36
 
93.13


22-37A
 
93.14


22-37B
 
93.15


22-38
 
93.16


22-39
 
93.17


22-40
 
93.18


22-41
 
93.19


22-42
 
93.20


22-43
 
93.21


22-44
 
93.22


22-45
 
93.23


22-46
 
93.99


22-47
 
93.35


24-1
 
36.01


24-2
 
36.02


24-3
 
36.03


24-4
 
36.03


24-5
 
36.05


24-6
 
36.06


24-7
 
36.07


24-8
 
36.08


24-9
 
36.08


24-10
 
36.10


24-11
 
36.11


24-12
 
36.12


24-13
 
36.13


24-14
 
36.14


24-15
 
36.15


30-26
 
32.01


30-27
 
32.02


30-28
 
32.03


30-29
 
32.04


30-30
 
32.05


30-31
 
32.06


30-32
 
32.07


30-33
 
32.08


30-34
 
32.09


30-35
 
32.10


30-36
 
32.11


30-37
 
32.12


30-38
 
32.13


30-61
 
32.25


30-62
 
32.26


30-63
 
32.27


30-64
 
32.28


30-65
 
32.29


30-66
 
32.99


30-81
 
32.40


30-82
 
32.41


30-83
 
32.99


38-26
 
33.01


38-27
 
33.02


38-28
 
33.03


38-29
 
33.04


38-30
 
33.05


38-31
 
33.20


38-32
 
33.21


38-33
 
33.22


38-34
 
33.23


38-35
 
33.24


38-36
 
33.25


38-37
 
33.26


38-38
 
33.27


42-1
 
130.02


42-3
 
130.04


42-5
 
130.06


42-7
 
130.01


42-8
 
130.07


42-10
 
130.99


46-26
 
94.001


46-27
 
94.002


46-28
 
94.003


46-29
 
94.004


46-30
 
94.005


46-31
 
94.006


46-32
 
94.007


46-33
 
94.008


46-40
 
94.020


46-41
 
94.021


46-42
 
94.022


46-51
 
94.035


46-52
 
94.036


46-53
 
94.037


46-54
 
94.038


46-55
 
94.039


46-56
 
94.040


46-57
 
94.041


46-58
 
94.999


46-71
 
94.055


46-72
 
94.056


46-73
 
94.999


46-91
 
94.070


46-92
 
94.071


46-93
 
94.072


47-1
 
96.001


47-2
 
96.002


47-3
 
96.003


47-4
 
96.004


47-5
 
96.005


47-6
 
96.006


47-7
 
96.007


47-8
 
96.008


47-9
 
96.009


47-10
 
96.010


47-30
 
96.025


47-31
 
96.026


47-32
 
96.027


47-33
 
96.028


47-34
 
96.029


47-35
 
96.030


47-36
 
96.999


47-40
 
96.045


47-41
 
96.046


47-42
 
96.047


47-43
 
96.048


47-44
 
96.049


47-45
 
96.050


47-46
 
96.999


47-50
 
96.065


47-51
 
96.066


47-52
 
96.067


47-53
 
96.068


47-54
 
96.069


47-55
 
96.070


47-56
 
96.071


47-57
 
96.072


47-58
 
96.073


47-59
 
96.074


47-60
 
96.999


47-70
 
96.090


47-71
 
96.091


47-72
 
96.092


47-73
 
96.093


47-74
 
96.094


47-75
 
96.095


47-76
 
96.096


47-77
 
96.097


47-78
 
96.098


47-79
 
96.099


47-80
 
96.100


47-81
 
96.101


47-82
 
96.102


47-83
 
96.999


48-1
 
95.01


48-2
 
95.03


48-3
 
95.15


48-4
 
95.16


48-5
 
95.17


48-6
 
95.18


48-7
 
95.19


48-8
 
95.30


48-9
 
95.31


48-10
 
95.32


48-11
 
95.34


48-12
 
95.35


48-13
 
95.36


48-14
 
95.37


48-15
 
95.38


48-16
 
95.39


48-17
 
95.40


48-18
 
95.41


48-19
 
95.42


48-20
 
95.43


48-21
 
95.44


48-22
 
95.45


48-23
 
95.46


48-25
 
95.47


48-26
 
95.48


48-27
 
95.49


48-28
 
95.50


48-29
 
95.51


48-30
 
95.52


48-31
 
95.53


48-32
 
95.54


50-26
 
34.01


50-27
 
34.02


50-28
 
34.03


50-29
 
34.04


50-30
 
34.05


50-31
 
34.06


50-32
 
34.07


50-33
 
34.08


50-34
 
34.09


50-35
 
34.99


50-36
 
34.10


50-37
 
34.11


50-38
 
34.12


50-39
 
34.13


50-40
 
34.14


54-81
 
74.10


58-26
 
121.01


58-27
 
121.02


58-28
 
121.03


58-29
 
121.04


58-30
 
121.05


58-31
 
121.06


58-32
 
121.07


58-33
 
121.08


58-34
 
121.09


58-35
 
121.10


58-36
 
121.99


62-26
 
50.01


62-27
 
50.02


62-28
 
50.03


62-29
 
50.04


62-30
 
50.05


62-31
 
50.06


62-32
 
50.07


62-33
 
50.08


62-33
 
50.48


62-34
 
50.09


62-35
 
50.10


62-36
 
50.11


62-37
 
50.12


62-38
 
50.13


62-39
 
50.14


62-40
 
50.99


62-51
 
50.25


62-52
 
50.26


62-54
 
50.28


62-55
 
50.29


62-56
 
50.30


62-57
 
50.31


62-58
 
50.99


62-59
 
50.32


62-85
 
50.45


62-86
 
50.46


62-87
 
50.47, 50.99


66-1
 
151.003


66-2
 
151.004


66-3
 
151.005


66-4
 
151.006


66-5
 
151.007


66-6
 
151.008


66-7
 
151.009


66-8
 
151.010


66-31
 
151.026


66-32
 
151.027


66-33
 
151.028


66-41
 
151.040


66-42
 
151.041


66-43
 
151.042


66-50
 
151.055


66-51
 
151.056


66-52
 
151.057


66-53
 
151.058


66-54
 
151.059


66-55
 
151.060


66-56
 
151.062


66-57
 
151.063


66-60
 
151.064


66-61
 
151.065


66-62
 
151.066


66-63
 
151.067


66-64
 
151.068


66-66
 
151.069


66-71
 
151.080


66-72
 
151.081


66-73
 
151.082


66-74
 
151.083


66-75
 
151.084


66-76
 
151.085


66-77
 
151.086


66-78
 
151.087


66-101
 
151.100


66-102
 
151.101


66-105
 
151.102


66-106
 
151.103


66-121
 
151.115


66-134
 
151.133


66-135
 
151.134


66-146
 
151.145


66-147
 
151.146


66-148
 
151.147


66-149
 
151.148


66-150
 
151.149


66-151
 
151.150


66-152
 
151.151


66-153
 
151.152


66-154
 
151.153


66-155
 
151.154


66-156
 
151.155


66-157
 
151.156


66-158
 
151.157


66-159
 
151.158


66-160
 
151.159


66-161
 
151.160


66-162
 
151.161


66-163
 
151.162


66-164
 
151.163


66-165
 
151.164


66-211
 
151.205


66-212
 
151.206


66-213
 
151.207


66-214
 
151.208


66-215
 
151.209


66-216
 
151.210


66-217
 
151.211


66-218
 
151.212


66-219
 
151.213


66-220
 
151.214


66-221
 
151.215


66-222
 
151.216


66-223
 
151.217


66-224
 
151.218


66-225
 
151.219


66-226
 
151.220


66-227
 
151.221


66-228
 
151.222


66-229
 
151.223


66-230
 
151.224


66-231
 
151.225


66-232
 
151.226


66-241
 
151.240


66-242
 
151.241


66-243
 
151.242


66-244
 
151.243


66-245
 
151.244


66-246
 
151.245


66-247
 
151.246


66-248
 
151.247


66-249
 
151.248


66-250
 
151.999


66-251
 
151.249


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section


2001-121
 
- -
 
36.06


01-220
 
- -
 
36.07


2002-211
 
- -
 
36.12


2002-212
 
- -
 
36.12


 
 
 
 
 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




103
 
- -1944
 
130.04


104
 
- -1945
 
31.01


107
 
- -1946
 
121.01 - 121.03, 121.05 - 121.08, 121.10


123
 
7-12-1954
 
121.99


185
 
6-14-1971
 
91.001


218
 
11-10-1980
 
91.002


219
 
8-10-1981
 
50.01, 50.08, 50.48


223
 
9-12-1983
 
50.06, 50.07


231
 
- -1986
 
94.070, 94.072


233
 
- -1987
 
91.017


234
 
- -1987
 
50.25, 50.26, 50.28 - 50.32, 50.99


235
 
- -1987
 
50.45 - 50.47, 50.99


236
 
- -1989
 
50.10


238
 
- -1989
 
112.01, 112.02


241
 
- -1990
 
130.06


242
 
- -1989
 
94.056


245
 
- -1991
 
130.02


248
 
- -1992
 
34.01 - 34.14, 34.99


256
 
12-13-1993
 
121.04


–
 
- -1994
 
151.003 - 151.010, 151.026, 151.028, 151.040 - 151.042, 151.055, 151.056,
151.069, 151.080 - 151.087, 151.102, 151.103, 151.115, 151.134, 151.145 -
151.149, 151.152 - 151.155, 151.159, 151.160, 151.221 - 151.226, 151.240 -
151.249, 151.999


270
 
3-11-1996
 
92.04


280
 
- -1997
 
94.022


291
 
- -1998
 
30.42


296
 
- -1999
 
30.29, 36.06


297
 
- -1999
 
30.01, 30.02


299
 
5-11-1999
 
95.01, 95.03, 95.15 - 95.19, 95.30 - 95.32, 95.34 - 95.54


302
 
6-13-1999
 
33.20 - 33.27


313
 
- -2000
 
91.063


315
 
3-28-2000
 
31.43


331
 
- -2000
 
121.01


333
 
- -2000
 
34.13


–
 
- -2001
 
151.100, 151.101


337
 
- -2001
 
30.43


338
 
- -
 
36.07


341
 
- -2001
 
50.02


341
 
- -2001
 
50.05, 50.09, 50.10, 50.28, 50.46


342
 
- -
 
36.03


346
 
6-12-2001
 
151.214


347
 
6-12-2001
 
35.02


351
 
8-28-2001
 
36.03


352
 
8-28-2001
 
151.003, 151.067


353
 
8-28-2001
 
91.020


359
 
12-11-200 1
 
92.01 - 92.10, 92.99


360
 
2-12-2002
 
151.066


361
 
2-26-2002
 
31.42


363
 
5-14-2002
 
92.04


364
 
5-14-2002
 
151.244


369
 
8-27-2002
 
35.04 - 35.06


370
 
9-11-2002
 
151.222 - 151.225


371
 
9-11-2002
 
36.12


–
 
11-26-2002
 
151.027


372
 
1-1-2003
 
36.08


375
 
11-26-2002
 
151.069, 151.224


376
 
1-14-2003
 
151.060, 151.062, 151.063, 151.101


381
 
4-22-2003
 
93.01 - 93.09, 93.12 - 93.23, 93.35, 93.99


383
 
5-13-2003
 
151.065, 151.067


386
 
5-27-2003
 
36.08, 36.12, 36.13


389
 
- -
 
36.13


392
 
8-12-2003
 
151.224


395
 
- -
 
36.03


398
 
10-28-2003
 
91.063


399
 
10-28-2003
 
36.08, 36.10 - 36.13


400
 
11-25-2003
 
151.214


401
 
- -
 
36.03, 36.05


404
 
2-24-2004
 
36.08


409
 
- -
 
36.12


–
 
7-13-2004
 
36.12


417
 
11-29-2004
 
151.003, 151.163, 151.207


418
 
11-29-2004
 
151.063, 151.214


419
 
11-29-2004
 
36.14


421
 
1-25-2005
 
151.003, 151.063 - 151.065, 151.067


422
 
1-25-2005
 
36.13


425
 
1-25-2005
 
151.062


426
 
4-1-2005
 
36.08


427
 
4-12-2005
 
31.42


428
 
4-12-2005
 
93.02, 93.10, 93.11


429
 
4-26-2005
 
50.99


433
 
5-24-2005
 
36.10


437
 
6-28-2005
 
151.065, 151.067, 151.068, 151.150


438
 
6-28-2005
 
94.056


440
 
6-28-2005
 
36.11


441
 
7-12-2005
 
93.17


442
 
7-12-2005
 
151.164


444
 
8-9-2005
 
31.42


446
 
9-27-2005
 
36.03, 36.06, 36.08, 36.10, 36.11, 36.13


447
 
2-7-2005
 
30.29


450
 
1-10-2006
 
115.02 - 115.05


451
 
1-24-2006
 
151.003


454
 
2-28-2006
 
151.101, 151.102, 151.115


455
 
2-28-2006
 
90.001, 90.015 - 90.023, 90.040 - 90.042, 90.055, 90.056, 90.065 - 90.068,
90.080 - 90.086, 90.999


457
 
4-25-2006
 
118.05


458
 
4-25-2006
 
90.016, 90.065


459
 
4-25-2006
 
36.03, 36.07, 36.08


460
 
5-9-2006
 
36.15


462
 
6-13-2006
 
92.04


464
 
6-27-2006
 
36.08


468
 
10-10-2006
 
36.08


469
 
10-24-2006
 
151.062 - 151.064


471
 
11-11-2006
 
36.06


472
 
12-12-2006
 
36.09


473
 
12-12-2006
 
152.001 - 152.004, 152.015 - 152.018, 152.030 - 152.035, 152.050 - 152.057 ,
152.070 - 152.077, 15.999


474
 
2-27-2007
 
36.16


475
 
2-27-2007
 
152.015, 152.016, 152.051, 152.053, 152.054, 152.071


482
 
4-24-2007
 
36.09


491
 
5-22-2007
 
151.001 - 151.004, 151.025, 151.026, 151.040, 151.055, 151.057 - 151.069,
151.084, 151.115, 151.156, 151.160, 151.164, 151.206, 151.207, 151.209,
151.225


493
 
7-24-2007
 
151.003


494
 
9-25-2007
 
151.175 - 151.194


495
 
11-13- 2007
 
36.09


497
 
4-8-2008
 
36.09


512
 
2-24-2009
 
36.13


513
 
3-24-2009
 
36.08


515
 
8-25-2009
 
36.06


516
 
8-25-2009
 
36.09


517
 
8-25-2009
 
50.07


518
 
8-25-2009
 
151.164


519
 
9-22-2009
 
36.09


520
 
9-22-2009
 
36.09


522
 
2-23-2010
 
151.003, 151.057 - 151.068


524
 
5-11-2010
 
51.01 - 51.04


525
 
5-11-2010
 
36.09


526
 
5-25-2010
 
151.178


528
 
6-8-2010
 
36.09


529
 
11-9-2010
 
131.01 - 131.07, 131.99


530
 
12-14-2010
 
36.16


531
 
1-25-2011
 
35.01, 35.02, 35.04 - 35.07


532
 
8-23-2011
 
151.245


535
 
1-24-2012
 
151.003


536
 
3-27-2012
 
151.151


537
 
4-24-2012
 
151.057, 151.058, 151.060 - 151.064


540
 
10-9-2012
 
151.062


541
 
2-12-2013
 
38.01, 38.02


542
 
4-23-2013
 
151.176, 151.178 - 151.181, 151.184, 151.185, 151.187 - 151.190


543
 
6-11-2013
 
36.10


546
 
12-10- 2013
 
36.09


547
 
1-28-2014
 
30.42


548
 
4-22-2014
 
151.154 - 151.156


549
 
5-13-2014
 
96.011


553
 
2-10-2015
 
31.42


554
 
4-14-2015
 
151.062


555
 
7-28-2015
 
153.001 - 153.038


556
 
7-28-2015
 
Repealing 50.27, 151.104, 151.130 - 151.133


562
 
7-26-2016
 
30.29


563
 
7-26-2016
 
36.06


564
 
8-10-2016
 
36.06


565
 
8-23-2016
 
151.151


566
 
8-23-2016
 
151.250


567
 
9-13-2016
 
36.13


571
 
4-11-2017
 
91.083


572
 
4-25-2017
 
91.063


574
 
7-11-2017
 
73.08


575
 
7-25-2017
 
92.02, 92.05


576
 
7-25-2017
 
36.06, 36.13


577
 
9-26-2017
 
151.003


578
 
11-14- 2017
 
36.10, 36.13, 36.16


579
 
1-9-2018
 
95.01 - 95.03, 95.15 - 95.19, 95.30 - 95.54


580
 
2-27-2018
 
90.001, 90.063 - 90.066, 90.068, 90.069, 90.081, 90.082, 90.086 - 90.088,
90.999


 
 
 
 
 




 


