102266v1 DJK RB160-66
Robbinsdale City Code Table of Contents
(Rev. 2011)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER I GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 100 Title; citation; statutory reference
Section 105 Definition of terms; interpretation; conflicts
Section 110 Legislative procedure
Section 115 Penalties
Section 120 Enforcement
CHAPTER II COUNCIL - CITY GOVERNMENT
Section 200 Council rules and procedures
Section 205 Salaries of elected officials
Section 210 Election districts
CHAPTER III ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Section 300 Departments
Section 305 Personnel administration
Section 310 Contracts; bidding; filing fees
Section 315 City funds
Section 320 Commissions
Section 325 Disposal of abandoned property
CHAPTER IV BUILDING, HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS
Section 400 Building code
Section 405 Licensed construction activities
Section 410 Signs
Section 415 Parking ramps
Section 420 Housing and redevelopment
Section 425 Housing maintenance code
Section 430 Graffiti
Section 435 Point of sale housing disclosure
CHAPTER V PLANNING AND LAND USE REGULATION
Section 500 Subdivision regulations
Section 505 - 535 Zoning code (Appendix A - separate volume)
102266v1 DJK RB160-66
Robbinsdale City Code Table of Contents
(Rev. 2011)
CHAPTER VI PUBLIC HEALTH
Section 600 Private sanitary facilities
Section 603 Environmentally acceptable packaging
Section 605 Garbage and refuse
Section 610 (Repealed, Ord. No. 03-12)
Section 613 Therapeutic Massage
Section 615 Food establishments
Section 620 Premises conducive to high-risk sexual conduct
Section 625 (Repealed, Ord. No. 06-05)
Section 630 Regulating body art
Section 635 Provisions of Hennepin County Ordinance Adopted
CHAPTER VII PUBLIC UTILITIES
Section 700 Sewer and water connections
Section 705 Sewer, water and other service charges
Section 710 Storm sewer utility
Section 715 Telecommunications facilities and equipment
Section 720 Telecommunications towers and facilities
CHAPTER VIIII STREETS, ALLEYS AND PUBLIC WAYS
Section 800 Street excavations
Section 805 Ice and snow removal
Section 810 Improvements on public property
Section 815 Parks and recreation areas
Section 820 Street trees: vegetation
Section 825 Tree trimming and spraying
Section 830 Vacation of streets
Section 835 Tree disease program
Section 840 Courtesy benches
Section 841 Off-site directional sign (religious institutions)
Section 845 Permits for temporary placement of containers
Section 850 Right-of-way management
CHAPTER IX PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 900 Civil defense
Section 905 Fire department
Section 910 Fire prevention code
Section 915 Animals
Section 920 Alarm systems
102266v1 DJK RB160-66
Robbinsdale City Code Table of Contents
(Rev. 2011)
Section 925 Firearms and weapons
Section 927 Repeat Nuisance Service Call Fee
CHAPTER X LICENSES AND PERMITS; PROCEDURES AND FEES
PART A:
Section 1000 General provisions
Section 1005 Licensing procedures
Section 1010 Permit procedures
PART B:
Section 1015 Domestic Partnership Registry
CHAPTER XI BUSINESS AND TRADE REGULATIONS
Section 1100 Amusements
Section 1105 Lawful gambling
Section 1110 Public dances
Section 1115 Pet shops
Section 1120 Transient sales; transient merchant
Section 1125 Taxis
Section 1130 Miscellaneous activities
Section 1132 Tobacco and related products
Section 1135 Pawnbrokers and secondhand goods dealers, consignment house
dealers, auction house dealers, and traders
Section 1140 Adult establishments
Section 1145 Lawn fertilizer application control
Section 1150 Fireworks
CHAPTER XII LIQUOR AND BEER
Section 1200 Sale, consumption and display of alcoholic beverages - general
provisions
Section 1205 Intoxicating liquor licenses
Section 1210 On-sale wine licenses
Section 1215 3.2 malt liquor licenses
Section 1220 Enforcement, prosecution and penalties - beer and liquor
Section 1225 Consumption and display: intoxicating liquor
Section 1230 Municipal liquor dispensary
102266v1 DJK RB160-66
Robbinsdale City Code Table of Contents
(Rev. 2011)
CHAPTER XIII TRAFFIC, MOTOR VEHICLES AND OTHER VEHICLES
Section 1300 Highway traffic regulation
Section 1305 Parking regulations
Section 1310 Recreational vehicles
Section 1315 Bicycles
Section 1320 Idling – diesel engine powered commercial motor vehicles
CHAPTERS XIV - XIX LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY
CHAPTER XX MISDEMEANORS
Section 2000 General provisions
Section 2005 Miscellaneous special provisions
Section 2010 Public property
Section 2012 Skateboards and roller skates
Section 2015 (Repealed, Ord. No. 01-05)
Section 2020 (Repealed, Ord. No. 06-05)
Section 2021 Code enforcement abatement regulations
Section 2025 Conduct in or near school buildings or grounds
Section 2030 Nudity in certain establishments
Section 2035 Obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic
Section 2040 Crystal Lake speed restrictions
APPENDICES
APPENDIX A - ZONING CODE
APPENDIX B - LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES
APPENDIX C - FRANCHISES
Robbinsdale City Code 100.01 (Rev. 2017)
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 100 - Title; Citation; Statutory Reference
100.01. Title. This codification of the ordinances of the City of Robbinsdale may be referred to and cited as
"The Robbinsdale City Code of l990" or "this code."
100.03. Citation: reference: numbering system. For the purposes of internal references in this code and
citation by its users the following terms are used:
Code The Robbinsdale City Code of 1990
Chapter Roman numerals (e.g. Chapter XI)
Section Arabic numerals (e.g. Section 100)
Subsection Arabic numerals for section and subsection separated by
decimal (e.g. subsection 1100.01)
Clause Arabic letters, lower case, in parentheses (e.g. a))
Reference or citations made in a form other than the foregoing will not defeat the intent of the Council in
enacting an ordinance or the intent of a user in citing this code when that intent is otherwise clear. This code
is to be construed liberally to carry out its purposes.
100.05. Adoption by reference. Statutes or administrative rules or regulations of the state of Minnesota and
codes and ordinances adopted by reference in this code are adopted pursuant to authority granted by
Minnesota Statutes, section 471.62. At least one copy of any item so adopted, but not less than the number
of copies required by law, must be kept in the office of the City Clerk for use by the public.
100.07. Official statutes: codes: regulations: ordinances. References in this code to Minnesota Statutes are
to the current edition of Minnesota Statutes, as amended by Laws of Minnesota, unless otherwise provided
in this code. References in this code to rules and regulations of state agencies, codes, and ordinances of
other municipalities are to those documents currently in effect, unless otherwise provided in this code.
(Amended, Ord. Nos. 03-27; 08-07; 09-02; 10-11, 11-10, 12-08, 13-09, 14-12, 15-04).
100.09. Relation to state law. It is the intent of the Robbinsdale City Council that the provisions of this
code are the fullest exercise of the regulatory and other powers granted to it by state law. When this code
imposes a more stringent rule or standard of conduct than contained in similar provisions of state law, rule
or regulation, it is the intent of the council that the provisions of this code prevail over such state law, rule or
regulation to the extent permitted by law.
100.11 Severability. If any subsection or provision of this Code is held invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such finding of invalidity shall not affect any other subsections or provisions of this Code that
can be given force and effect without reference to the invalidated subsection or provision. (Added, Ord. No.
17-12)
Robbinsdale City Code 105.01
Section 105 - Definition of Terms;
Interpretation; Conflicts
105.01. Definitions: common terms. Subdivision 1. For purposes of this code, the terms defined in this
subsection have the meanings given them.
Subd. 2. "City" means the city of Robbinsdale and the territory lying within its boundaries over
which it has jurisdiction.
Subd. 3. "Code", "this code", or "code of ordinances" means the Robbinsdale City Code of l990, as
organized, compiled and codified herein.
Subd. 4. "Council" means the city council of the city.
Subd. 5. "Charter" means the home rule charter of the city.
Subd. 6. "Clerk" means the city clerk.
Subd. 7. "Minor", unless otherwise specified in this code, means an individual under the age of 18.
Subd. 8. "Owner" means, in the case of personal property, a person, other than a lien holder, having
the property in or title to personal property. In the case of real property, the term means the fee owner of
land, or the beneficial owner of land whose interest is primarily one of possession and enjoyment in
contemplation of ultimate ownership: the term includes, but is not limited to, vendees under contracts for
deed and mortgagors.
Subd. 9. "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, association or corporation; the term may
extend and be applied to bodies corporate and politic, and to partnerships and other unincorporated
associations.
Subd. 10. A reference to an elected or appointed city officer includes that officer's duly authorized
representative.
105.03. Definitions: statutory. For purposes of this code, the terms defined in Minnesota Statutes, sections
645.44 through 645.451 have the meanings given them by those sections; and terms defined by statutes,
rules or regulations, codes and ordinances adopted by reference have the meanings given them therein.
105.05. Definitions:_internal. Terms defined in other sections of this code have the meanings given them
by those sections.
105.07. Interpretation: conflicts. Subdivision 1. Common usage. Words and phrases used in this code are
to be interpreted and understood in accordance with common and accepted usage, but any technical words
or phrases or such other terms as have acquired a specific or peculiar meaning are to be interpreted and
understood in accordance with that meaning.
Subd. 2. Statutory_rules. It is the intent of the city council that the rules and canons of
construction, presumptions and miscellaneous provisions relating to statutory construction contained in
Minnesota Statutes, chapter 645, apply to this code and govern its interpretation, and that all questions of
Robbinsdale City Code 105.09
meaning, construction and interpretation of this code be resolved by application of the rules contained in
chapter 645. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes, chapter 645, are adopted by reference and are as much a
part of this code as if fully set forth herein.
105.09. Gender neutral: terminology. Amendments to this code and other ordinances of the city must be
prepared in a manner to eliminate gender specific references in the manner prescribed by Laws of
Minnesota, 1984 chapter 480, section 21.
Robbinsdale City Code 110.01
Section 110 - Legislative Procedure
110.01. Ordinances enactment. Ordinances are enacted in accordance with the procedure set forth in state
law and the charter. Ordinances must be integrated into this code in accordance with this section.
110.03. Form of amendments and new ordinances. An ordinance amending this code must specify the
subsection and subdivision to be amended. Language to be added is underlined; language to be repealed is
lined through. An ordinance repealing an entire chapter, section, subsection, subdivision or clause need
refer only to that chapter, section, subsection, subdivision or clause and the text need not be reproduced. An
ordinance adding only new provisions to the code need not be underlined.
110.05. Headnotes, etc. Chapter, section, subsection, subdivision, clause, headnotes, titles and cross
references are not substantive parts of this code, but merely matters to expedite and simplify its use.
110.07. Integration of ordinances into code. Subdivision 1. Duties of clerk and attorney. The clerk and
city attorney must recommend to the council a system for integrating ordinances into this code in the most
expeditious manner possible. They must recommend to the council rules consistent with this section for the
preparation, editing and format of ordinances to be presented to the council.
Subd. 2. Matters omitted. When an ordinance is integrated into this code, the following matters
may be omitted:
(a) title;
(b) enacting clause;
(c) section numbers;
(d) definition of terms identical to those contained in this code;
(e) validation and repealing clauses;
(f) validating signatures and dates;
(g) punctuation and other matters not an integral part of the text of the ordinance;
(h) penalty provisions.
Subd. 3. Errors. When integrating ordinances into this code, the clerk and attorney may: (i) correct
manifest grammatical, punctuation, spelling, and typographical errors; (ii) change reference numbers to
conform with sections, subsections, chapters and ordinances; (iii) substitute figures for written words and
vice versa; (iv) substitute dates for the words "the effective date of this ordinance"; and (v) perform like
actions to insure a uniform code of ordinances without, however, altering the meaning of the ordinances
enacted.
Robbinsdale City Code 110.07, Subd. 4
Subd. 4. Source notes. When an ordinance is integrated into this code, a source note will be added
at the end of each new chapter, section, subsection, subdivision or clause indicating the ordinance number
and section from which it was derived.
110.09. Ordinance records: special ordinances. The city clerk is responsible for the safe and orderly
keeping of ordinances in a manner directed by the council. An ordinance not included in this code by
council direction is a special ordinance. The clerk must maintain an up-to-date, indexed record of all special
ordinances. The council may direct that special ordinances and other material be included in appendices to
this code.
110.11. Effective date of ordinance. Ordinances are effective in accordance with section 3.09 of the
charter.
Robbinsdale City Code 115.01 (Rev. 1994)
Section 115 - Penalties
115.01. General rule. Except as provided in subsection 115.03, a person who violates a provision of this
code is guilty of a misdemeanor. Every day on which a violation occurs or continues is a separate violation.
The maximum penalty that may be imposed upon conviction for a violation of a provision of this code is the
same as the maximum penalty that may be imposed upon conviction for the same class of offense under
state law. (Amended, . 94-08)
115.03. Exceptions. Where a provision of this code or a statute adopted by reference therein sets a lesser
penalty or a different period constituting a violation than set in subsection 115.01, such code or statutory
provision prevails.
115.05. Applicability. It is the intention of the council that the penalty provided by this section or any other
section of this code applies to an amendment of any section of this code whether or not such penalty is
re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance, unless otherwise provided in the amendatory ordinance.
115.07. Failure of officers to perform duties. The penalty imposed by this section does not apply to the
failure of an officer or employee of the city to perform a duty imposed by this code unless a penalty is
specifically provided for such failure.
115.09. Misdemeanor defined. For purposes of this code, the term "misdemeanor" means a penal offense
or crime which the council is empowered to punish with fine or imprisonment and a petty misdemeanor as
defined by state law.
Robbinsdale City Code 117.01 (Rev. 2019)
Section 117 – Administrative Penalties
(Added, 11-02)
117.01. Purpose. Subdivision 1. The City Council finds that there is a need for alternative methods of
enforcing the City code. The criminal process is not always the most effective or efficient option for
addressing City code violations. Accordingly, the City Council finds that the use of administrative citations
and the imposition of civil penalties is a legitimate alternative method of enforcement for certain types of
City code violations. This method of enforcement is in addition to any other legal remedy that may be
pursued for City code violations.
Subd. 2. Administrative citations and civil penalties. This section governs administrative citations
and civil penalties for violations of the City code.
Subd. 3. Definitions.
(a) "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
(b) "Property owner" means those shown to be the owner or owners on the records of the
Hennepin County Department of Property Taxation; those identified as the owner or
owners on a vacant building registration form, a holder of an unrecorded deed, contract for
deed, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, a mortgagor or vendor in possession, an
assignee of rents, a receiver, an executor, a trustee, a lessee, other person, firm or
corporation in control of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein. An owner
also means any person, partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary having a legal or
equitable title or any interest in the property or building. This includes any partner, officer,
or director of any partnership, corporation, association or other legally-constituted business
entity.
(c) "Responsible person" means in the cases of offenses related to real property, an owner,
occupant, entity or person acting as an agent for the owner who has direct or indirect
control or authority over the building or real property upon which the building is located.
Any party having a legal or equitable interest in the property. Responsible party may
include, but is not limited to, a realtor, service provider, mortgager, leasing agent,
management company, or similar person or entity.
(d) "City Manager" means the City Manager or designated agent.
Subd. 4. Administrative offenses, schedule of fines and fees.
(a) A violation of any provision of the City Code may be designated by resolution as an
administrative offense, which may be subject to an administrative citation and civil
penalties pursuant to this subdivision. Each day a violation exists constitutes a separate
offense.
(b) An administrative offense may be subject to a civil penalty not exceeding $2,000, per
offense. To the extent that a violation exists for multiple days, each day may be subject to
the maximum fine provided herein. (Amended, Ord. No. 19-14)
Robbinsdale City Code 117.01, Subd. 4(c)
(Rev. 2019)
(c) The schedule of fines and fees for offenses subject to an administrative citation is set forth
in Appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No. 2018-02)
(d) The City Council may adopt a schedule of fees to be paid to administrative hearing officers.
(e) The City Manager must adopt written procedures for administering the administrative
citation program.
Subd. 5. Administrative penalties. (Amended, 13-01)
(a) A person authorized to enforce provisions of the City code may issue an administrative
citation upon the belief that a code violation has occurred. The citation must be issued in
person or by first class mail to the person who violated the code or a responsible person or
posted at the property or attached to the motor vehicle in the case of a vehicular offense.
The citation must state the date, time and nature of the offense, the identity of the person
issuing the citation, the amount of the scheduled fine and the manner for paying the fine or
appealing the citation.
(b) The persons receiving the citation must either pay the scheduled fine or request a hearing
within ten calendar days after the issuance of the citation. Payment of the fine constitutes
admission of the violation. A late payment fee per the scheduled amount will be imposed
in accordance with subdivision 10. (Amended. 13-01)
Subd. 6. Requests for a hearing/appeal.
(a) A person served with an administrative citation may file a notice of appeal in person or
postmarked within ten calendar days from the date of the administrative citation. Failure to
comply with such time limit shall be deemed to be a waiver of the right to a hearing.
(Amended, Ord. No. 19-14)
(b) The notice of appeal shall be made in writing, filed with the City Clerk, and contain the
following information:
(1) The reasons the appellant believes the administrative citation is objectionable or
that a violation did not exist or occur.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the appellant.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of any person in addition to the appellant
who will be attending the hearing.
(4) The signature of the appellant.
(c) A hearing request filing fee shall be paid simultaneously with the filing of the notice of
appeal. The hearing request fee is set forth in Appendix B. The fee is refundable if
provided in the hearing officer's decision. In cases where a violation was found to have
occurred, the hearing officer may apply the refund towards the citation payment as
provided in the hearing officer's decision. (Amended, Ord. No. 2018-02; Ord. No. 2019-
14)
Robbinsdale City Code 117.01, Subd. 7(a)
(Rev. 2013)
Subd. 7. Administrative hearing.
(a) The City Manager must periodically approve a list of persons, from which the City
Manager or designated agent will randomly select a hearing officer to hear and determine a
matter for which a hearing is requested. A person who has been issued a citation has the
right to request, no later than five calendar days before the date of the hearing, that the
assigned hearing officer be removed from the case. One such request for each case will be
granted automatically by the City Manager or designated agent. A subsequent request must
be directed to the City Manager who will decide whether the alternate hearing officer can
fairly and objectively review the case. If such a finding is made, the Manager must remove
that officer from the case, and the City Manager or designated agent must assign another
hearing officer. The hearing officer is not a judicial officer but is a public officer as defined
by Minnesota Statutes, section 609.415. The hearing officer must not be an employee of
the City. The City Manager or designated agent must establish a procedure for evaluating
the competency and neutrality of the hearing officers, including comments from citizens
and City staff. (Amended, . 13-01)
(b) Upon the hearing officer's own initiative or upon written request of an interested party
demonstrating the need, the officer may arrange for issuance of a subpoena for the
attendance of a witness or the production of books, papers, records or other documents that
are material to the matter being heard. The party requesting the subpoena is responsible for
serving the subpoena in the manner provided for civil actions and for paying the fees and
expenses of any witness. A person served with a subpoena may file an objection with the
hearing officer promptly but no later than the time specified in the subpoena for
compliance. The officer may cancel or modify the subpoena if it is unreasonable or
oppressive. A person who, without just cause, fails or refuses to attend and testify or to
produce the required documents in obedience to a subpoena is subject to penalties provided
by law. Alternatively, the party requesting the subpoena may seek an order from district
court directing compliance.
(c) Notice of the hearing must be served in person or by mail on the person responsible for the
violation and/or appellant at least ten calendar days in advance, unless a shorter time is
accepted by all parties. At the hearing, the parties will have the opportunity to present
testimony and question any witnesses, but strict rules of evidence do not apply. The
hearing officer must record the hearing and receive testimony and exhibits. The officer
must receive and give weight to evidence, including reliable hearsay evidence that
possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonable and prudent people in the
conduct of their affairs. (Amended, . 13-01)
(d) The hearing officer has the authority to determine that a violation occurred, to dismiss a
citation, to impose the scheduled fine, and to reduce, or stay all or part of the scheduled fine
either unconditionally or upon compliance with appropriate conditions. When imposing a
penalty for a violation, the hearing officer may consider any or all of the following factors:
(1) The duration of the violation;
(2) The frequency or recurrence of the violation;
(3) The seriousness of the violation;
(4) The history of the violation;
(5) The violator's conduct after issuance of the notice of hearing;
Robbinsdale City Code 117.01, Subd. 7(d)(6)
(Rev. 2013)
(6) The good faith effort by the violator to comply;
(7) The economic impact of the penalty on the violator;
(8) The impact of the violation upon the community; and
(9) Any other factors appropriate to a just result.
(e) The hearing officer may exercise discretion to impose a fine for more than one day of a
continuing violation, but only upon a finding that the violation caused a serious threat of
harm to the public health, safety, or welfare or that the accused intentionally and
unreasonably refused to comply with the code requirement. The hearing officer's decision
and supporting reasons must be in writing.
(f) The failure to pay the fine or request a hearing within ten calendar days after the issuance
date of the citation, or the failure to attend the hearing, constitutes a waiver of the violator's
rights to an administrative hearing and is an admission of the violation. A hearing officer
may waive this result upon good cause shown. Examples of good cause include: death or
incapacitating illness of the accused; a court order requiring the accused to appear for
another hearing at the same time; and lack of proper service of the citation or notice of the
hearing. "Good cause" does not include forgetfulness and intentional delay. If the accused
violator fails to attend a hearing without good cause the fee for the hearing will not be
returned to the accused. (Amended, 13-01)
(g) The decision of the hearing officer is final without any further right of administrative
appeal, except for matters subject to administrative review under subdivision 8. In a matter
subject to administrative review under subdivision 8, the hearing officer's decision may be
appealed to the City Council by submitting a request in writing to the City Manager or
designated agent within ten calendar days after the hearing officer's decision. (Amended, .
13-01)
Subd. 8. Administrative review.
(a) The hearing officer's decision in any of the following matters may be appealed by the
person responsible to the City Council for administrative review:
(1) An alleged failure to obtain a permit, license, or other approval from the City
Council as required by an ordinance;
(2) An alleged violation of a permit, license, other approval, or the conditions attached
to the permit, license, or approval, that was granted by the City Council; and
(3) An alleged violation of regulations governing a person or entity who has received a
license granted by the City Council.
(b) The appeal must be heard by the City Council after a notice has been served in person or by
registered mail at least ten calendar days in advance. The parties to the hearing must have
an opportunity to present oral and/or written arguments regarding the hearing officer's
decision. (Amended, 13-01)
(c) The City Council must consider the record, the hearing officer's decision, and any
additional arguments before making a determination. The Council is not bound by the
hearing officer's decision, but it may adopt all or part of the officer's decision. The
Council's decision must be in writing.
Robbinsdale City Code 117.01, Subd. 8(d)
(Rev. 2019)
(d) If the Council makes a finding of a violation, it may impose a civil penalty not exceeding
$2,000 per violation, with each day that such violation continues constituting a separate
violation, and it may consider any or all of the factors contained in subdivision 7(d). The
Council may also reduce, stay or waive a fine unconditionally or based on reasonable and
appropriate conditions. (Amended, Ord. No. 19-14)
(e) In addition to imposing a civil penalty, the Council may suspend or revoke any City issued
license, permit, or other approval associated with the violation, if the procedures on the City
code have been followed.
Subd. 9. Judicial review. An aggrieved party may obtain judicial review of the decision of the
hearing officer or the City Council in accordance with state law.
Subd. 10. Recovery of civil penalties.
(a) If a civil penalty is not paid within the time specified, it constitutes:
(1) A personal obligation of the violator in all situations, and
(2) A lien upon the real property upon which the violation occurred if the property or
improvements on the property were the subject of the violation and the property
owner was found responsible for that violation.
(b) A lien may be assessed against the property and collected in the same manner as taxes.
(c) A personal obligation may be collected by any appropriate legal means.
(d) A late payment fee per unpaid or portion thereof will be assessed per the schedule of fees.
(e) During the time that a civil penalty remains unpaid, no City approval will be granted for a
license, permit, or other City approval sought by the violator or for property under the
violator's ownership or control.
(f) Failure to pay a fine is grounds for suspending, revoking, denying, or not renewing a
license or permit associated with the violation.
Subd. 11. Criminal penalties. The following are misdemeanors, punishable in accordance with
State Law.
(a) Failure, without good cause, to pay a fine or request a hearing within ten calendar days after
issuance of an administrative citation. (Amended, . 13-01)
(b) Failure to pay a fine imposed by a hearing officer within ten calendar days after it was
imposed, or such other time as may be established by the hearing officer, unless the matter
is appealed under section 8. (Amended, . 13-01)
(c) Failure to pay a fine imposed by the City Council within ten calendar days after it was
imposed, or such other time as may be established by the City Council. (Amended, . 13-01)
Subd. 12. Applicable laws. Where differences occur between provisions of this section and other
applicable code sections, this section applies.
Robbinsdale City Code 120.01 (Rev. 1991)
Section 120 - Enforcement
120.01. Enforcement. Subdivision 1. Peace officers. Peace officers appointed by the city may enforce the
provisions of this code, the violation of which constitutes a misdemeanor, petty misdemeanor, or gross
misdemeanor. In connection with such authority, peace officers may make arrests and issue citations in lieu
of arrest in the manner provided by law.
Subd. 2. Community service officers and police reserve officers. Community service officers and
police reserve officers appointed by the city may, in the performance of their duties, and under the direction
of the chief of police, issue notices of violation and citations in lieu of arrest, but may not take persons into
custody for refusal to sign such citations.
Subd. 3. Employees of fire department. Employees of the fire department may issue notices of
violations which the fire department and its employees are, by this code, designated to administer and
enforce.
Subd. 4. Employees and agents: citations. Employees and agents of the code enforcement division
of the engineering department, the community development department and police department parking
monitors may issue notices of violations and citations in lieu of arrest for alleged violations of code
provisions which those employees are, by this code, designated to administer and enforce. Employees and
agents so authorized may not take persons into custody for refusal to sign such citations.
Subd. 5. Twin and South Twin Lakes: citations: additional authority. Non-sworn personnel from
the police departments of Brooklyn Center and Crystal are authorized to issue citations on any part of the
city lying on Twin Lakes, on islands in Twin Lakes, or on South Twin Lake, or on public lands adjacent to
Twin Lakes or South Twin Lake, for violation of any applicable laws, ordinances or regulations, under the
authorization and direction of the chief of police. Such personnel may not take persons into custody for
refusal to sign citations. (Added, . 91-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 200.01
(Rev. 2018)
CHAPTER II
COUNCIL - CITY GOVERNMENT
Section 200 - Council Rules and Procedures
200.01. Regular and special meetings. Regular meetings of the council are typically held on the 1st and
3rd Tuesday of each month in the council chambers of the city hall at 7:00 p.m. The City Council may
adjust meeting dates and times to avoid known conflicts during the first regular meeting of each year.
Meeting dates and times may also be adjusted by council motion when a conflict is identified. Meetings
may be adjourned from time to time to a specified date or subject to the call of the mayor or any three
members of the council upon at least twelve hours' notice to each member of the council and subject to
the provisions of law. Regular and special meetings of the council are held in compliance with section
3.01 of the charter. Meetings of the council are open to the public.
200.03. Quorum. A majority of council members elected constitutes a quorum, but a smaller number
may adjourn from time to time.
200.05. Presiding officer and secretary. The mayor presides at meetings of the council. The council
must choose from its members a Mayor pro tem in accordance with section 2.08 of the charter. The
secretary of the council is appointed by the council and performs those duties stated in section 3.02 of the
charter.
200.07. First meeting. At the first regularly scheduled council meeting in January following a regular
municipal election, newly elected members of the council shall assume their duties. At the first meeting
of each year the council must designate an official newspaper and depositories for official funds. The
council may appoint committees as it deems necessary.
200.09. Council rules; presiding officer. The presiding officer preserves order and decorum, decides
questions of order, and conducts meetings in accordance with these rules. The council is governed in its
procedure by the provisions of chapters 2 and 3 of the charter, and council resolution except where
otherwise provided by the charter, law, or by this chapter. The council may make and change its own
rules from time to time by resolution duly adopted and such changes supersede any contrary provisions of
Sturgis Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure. The presiding officer may speak on any question
being considered and has the rights, privileges, and duties of any other member of the council.
200.11. Motions reduced to writing. A motion must be reduced to writing at the request of member
present. Ordinances and resolutions must be presented in writing and read in full before a vote is taken
thereon unless the reading is dispensed with by unanimous consent.
200.13. Signing and publishing of ordinances. Ordinances must be signed in accordance with
section 3.08 of the charter, attested by the clerk, published after its passage by the council, and recorded
by the clerk in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose.
Robbinsdale City Code 200.15
200.15. Order of business. The order of business for council meetings is established by the council's
by-laws and rules of procedure.
[Editorial Note: There follows the rules and procedures governing city council meetings. These rules are
inserted for informational purposes only and are not part of this ordinance code.]
Robbinsdale City Code 205.01
(Rev. 2018)
Section 205 - Salaries of Elected Officials
205.01. Council salaries. Subdivision 1. Mayor. The salary of the mayor is $10,354 per annum
effective January 1, 2016 and $10,561 per annum effective January 1, 2018. The salary of the mayor is
$10,825 per annum effective January 1, 2019 and $11,095 effective January 1, 2020. (Amended, Ord.
Nos. 94-06; 96-6; 98-4; 00-02; 02-03; 04-03; 14-03; 16-4; 18-03)
205.03. Councilmembers. The salary of each member of the council is $8,259 per annum effective
January 1, 2016 and $8,424 per annum effective January 1, 2018. The salary of each member of the
council is $8,634 per annum effective January 1, 2019 and $8,850 per annum effective January 1,
2020.(Amended, Ord. Nos. 94-06; 96-6; 98-4; 00-02; 02-03; 04-03; 14-03; 16-4; 18-03)
205.05. Monthly payments. The salary of the mayor and councilmembers is payable once monthly.
205.07. Council salary committee. A committee composed of the chairpersons of the charter
commission, planning commission, parks and recreation commission, and human rights commission,
must convene no later than the first full week of June in years of a municipal election in which one or
more members of the city council are elected, for the purpose of reviewing the salaries of the mayor and
council. At their first meeting, the committee must name one of its members as chairperson. Members of
the council may not serve on the committee. If the chairperson of a commission is ineligible or unwilling
to serve on the committee, the commission may designate another member of the commission to serve on
the committee. A majority of the members is necessary to conduct business. The committee must
recommend no later than August 1 of the same year to the council that the salaries of the mayor and
councilmembers either remain the same or be changed to some specified amount in the manner prescribed
by law. (Amended, Ord. No. 06-01)
205.09. Workers' compensation. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, chapter 176, the elected officials of the
city, the Robbinsdale Economic Development Authority (REDA), and those municipal officers appointed
for a regular term of office are included in the coverage of the Minnesota Workers' Compensation Act.
(Amended, Ord. No. 91-15, Sec. 1)
Robbinsdale City Code 210.01
(Rev. 2012)
Section 210 - Election Districts
210.01. Wards. Subdivision 1. General. The city is divided into four wards known as the first, second,
third and fourth ward, respectively. The boundaries of each ward are described in this subsection. When
a street, alley, or avenue is named as a boundary the dividing line is the center line of the street, alley, or
avenue.
Subd. 2. The first ward consists of that portion of the city lying North and West of the following
described line: Commencing on 41st Avenue at the West city limit; thence, East on said 41st Avenue to
Yates Avenue; thence North on Yates Avenue to 42nd Avenue (County Rd. 9); thence East on 42nd
Avenue to Welcome Avenue; thence South on Welcome Avenue to 41st Avenue; thence East on 41st
Avenue to Vera Cruz Avenue; thence South on Vera Cruz Avenue to 40th Avenue North; thence East on
40th Avenue extending across the State Highway 100 right-of-way to Noble Avenue; thence North on
Noble Avenue to the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks; thence Southeasterly on said Railroad Tracks
to 40th Avenue; thence Northeasterly on 40th Avenue (Shoreline Drive); to Lake Road Avenue; thence
Northwesterly on Lake Road Avenue to Halifax Avenue; thence Northeasterly on Halifax Avenue to 42nd
Avenue; thence Easterly on 42nd Avenue to Islemount Place; thence North on Islemount Place to 43rd
Avenue; thence East on 43rd Avenue to France Avenue; thence North on France Avenue to 44th Avenue;
thence East on 44th Avenue to Drew Avenue; thence North on Drew Avenue to Lake Drive Avenue
(County Rd. 9); thence West on Lake Drive to France Avenue; thence North on France Avenue to the
easterly point of South Twin Lake; thence west following the north shore of the Lake to Trunk Highway
100; thence North on Trunk Highway 100 to France Avenue on the North city limit. (Amended, Ord. No.
92-2, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 02-02, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 05-12, Ord. No. 12-01)
Subd. 3. The second ward consists of that portion of the city lying East of the following
described line: Commencing on the North City Limit at France Avenue and Trunk Highway 100; thence
southwesterly along Trunk Highway 100 to the north shore of South Twin Lake; thence East on the north
shore of the lake to France Avenue; thence South on said France Avenue to Lake Drive Avenue (County
Road 9); thence East on Lake Drive Avenue to Drew Avenue; thence South on Drew to 44th Avenue;
thence West on 44th Avenue to France Avenue; thence South on France Avenue to 43rd Avenue; thence
West on 43rd Avenue to Islemount Place; thence South on Islemount Place to 42nd Avenue; thence West
on 42nd Avenue to Halifax Avenue; thence Southwesterly on Halifax Avenue to Lake Road; thence
Southeast on Lake Road Avenue to 40th Avenue (Shoreline Drive); thence Southwesterly on 40th Avenue
to County Road No. 81; thence Southeasterly on County Road No. 81 to East city limit. (Amended, Ord.
No. 92-2, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 002-02, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 05-12; Ord. No. 12-01)
Subd. 4. The third ward consists of that portion of the city lying generally South and West of the
following described line: Commencing on 41st Avenue at the West city limit; thence East on said
41st Avenue to Yates Avenue; thence North on Yates Avenue to 42nd Avenue (County Rd. 9); thence East
on 42nd Avenue to Welcome Avenue; thence South on Welcome Avenue to 41st Avenue; thence East on
41st Avenue to Vera Cruz Avenue; thence South on Vera Cruz Avenue to 40th Avenue North; thence East
said 40th Avenue extending across the Highway 100 right-of-way to Noble Avenue; thence North on
Noble Avenue to the Burlington Northern Railroad Tracks; thence Southeasterly on said Railroad Tracks
to 40th Avenue; thence Northeasterly on 40th Avenue to County Road No. 81; thence Southeasterly on
County Road No. 81 to France Avenue; thence South on France Avenue to West Broadway; thence
Northwesterly on West Broadway to 37th Avenue; thence Southwesterly on 37th Avenue to Hubbard
Avenue; thence Northwesterly on Hubbard Avenue to 38th Avenue; thence West on 38th Avenue to the
Burlington Northern Railroad tracks; thence South on the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks to 36th
Avenue; thence West on 36th Avenue to June Avenue and city limit. (Amended, Ord. No. 92-2, Sec. 3;
Ord. 12-01)
Robbinsdale City Code 210.01, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2012)
Subd. 5. The fourth ward consists of that portion of the city lying South and West of the
following described line: Commencing on County Road No. 81 at the East city limit; thence Northwest
on County Road No. 81 to France Avenue; thence South on France Avenue to West Broadway; thence
Northwesterly on West Broadway to 37th Avenue; thence Southwesterly on 37th Avenue to Hubbard
Avenue; thence North on Hubbard Avenue to 38th Avenue; thence West on 38th Avenue to the Burlington
Northern Railroad tracks; thence South on the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks to 36th Avenue;
thence West on 36th Avenue to June Avenue and the city limit. (Amended, Ord. No. 92-2, Sec. 4;
Ord. No. 12-01)
210.03. (Deleted, Ord. No. 05-12)
320.0Robbinsdale City Code 300.01
(Rev. 2013)
CHAPTER III
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Section 300 - Departments
300.01. Authority. This chapter is adopted pursuant to section 6.02, subdivision 8 of the charter. This
chapter is the administrative code of the city.
300.03. Departments: department heads. The administrative affairs of the city are conducted under the
supervision of the city manager. The administrative departments and department heads of the city
administration are as follows: (Amended, Ord. No. 03-03)
Department Department Head
Administration Director of Administrative Services
Finance Finance Director
Assessing City Assessor
Community Development Community Development Coordinator
Fire Fire Chief
Police Chief of Police
Parks, Recreation Director of Recreation Services
Engineering City Engineer
Public Works Public Works Director
(Amended, Ord. No. 03-03; Ord. No. 05-01; Ord. No. 05-11, Ord. No. 13-01)
300.05. Officers. The city manager, department heads, city attorney, assessor, clerk and treasurer are
officers of the city.
300.07. City manager: duties. Subdivision 1. General. The city manager is the head of the
administrative branch of the city government and is responsible to the council for the proper
administration of the affairs of the city. Subject to the provisions of the charter and council regulations
consistent therewith, the manager controls and directs the city's affairs. The manager exercises control
over the departments and divisions of the city administration created by the charter or by the council.
Subd. 2. Enforcement of law. The manager must see that the charter and the laws, ordinances
and resolutions of the city are enforced. The manager may make investigations into the city's affairs,
subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books and papers.
Subd. 3. Personnel. The manager appoints upon the basis of merit and fitness and subject to
applicable civil service rules, if any, employees of the city, except that (i) the appointment of officers and
department heads is made upon the advice and consent of the council and (ii) the appointment, removal
and suspension of the city attorney. The manager may remove or suspend an employee subject to
applicable civil service provisions, if any, except that the removal or suspension of officers and
department heads must be with the advice and consent of the council. (Amended, Ord. No. 05-07)
Robbinsdale City Code 300.07, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2003)
Subd. 4. Council meetings. The manager attends council meetings with the right to take part in
the discussion but not to vote. The council may exclude the manager from a meeting at which the
manager's removal is considered. The manager must recommend to the council for adoption such
measures as deemed necessary for the welfare of the people and the efficient administration of city
affairs.
Subd. 5. Budget. The city manager must prepare the estimates for the annual budget and submit
with the estimates such explanatory statements as deemed necessary including comparisons of the city's
finances with the three previous budgets of the city. The manager must explain the various items thereof
as fully as may be deemed necessary by the council at meetings so conducted as to give interested citizens
a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The city manager must enforce the provisions of the adopted
budget.
Subd. 6. Expenditures. The manager may not approve an order upon the city treasurer for an
expenditure unless an appropriation has been made in the adopted budget nor approve an expenditure
covered by the adopted budget unless there is a sufficient unexpended balance left after deducting the
total past expenditures and the sum of outstanding orders and encumbrances.
Subd. 7. Chief accounting officer. The manager serves as the chief accounting officer of the city.
The manager must submit to the council a statement each month showing the status of all funds, and such
other information about the finances of the city as the council may require. Once each year, on or before
the last day of June, the manager must submit a report to the council covering the financial operations of
the city for the past year. The report, or summary thereof, must be published by the clerk in the official
city newspaper as prescribed by law, on or before July 10th of each year. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-03)
Subd. 8. Assets. The manager must keep a current inventory showing all real and personal
property of the city and its location. The manager is responsible for the care and custody of property
which is not by charter, ordinance, or law assigned to some other officer or body for care and control.
Subd. 9. Amendments. The manager must from time to time suggest amendments to this
administrative code.
Subd. 10. Other duties. The manager performs such other duties as may be prescribed by the
charter, by law, by ordinance, or by resolution of the council.
300.09. Secretary of the council. The secretary of the council must (i) give notice of its meetings, (ii)
keep a journal of its proceedings, and (iii) perform such secretarial duties as the mayor and council
require. The council may designate any official or employee of the city, except the city manager, the
mayor, or a member of the council, as secretary.
300.10. Criminal history background check. The police department is authorized to conduct a criminal
history background investigation on applicants for positions with the city, as provided by this section.
This section applies only to applicants for paid or volunteer positions with the city, where the city
manager has determined that conviction of a crime may relate directly to the position sought. The police
department may not perform a background investigation unless the applicant consents in writing to the
investigation and to the release of the investigation information to the city manager and other city staff as
is appropriate. An applicant's failure to provide consent may disqualify the applicant for the position
sought. In administering this section, the city will comply with Minnesota Statutes, chapter 364, as may
be applicable. (Added, Ord. No. 95-13, Sec. 1)
Robbinsdale City Code 300.11 (Rev. 2000)
300.11. City attorney. Subdivision 1. General. The city attorney is legal adviser to the city council and
to city officers and employees on matters pertaining to their duties. The attorney represents the city in
council procedures and litigation except where the council directs otherwise; drafts contracts, ordinances
or other documents as requested by the city; and renders other legal services required by the council or the
manager.
Subd. 2. Criminal prosecution. The attorney prosecutes or defends suits or actions at law or
equity to which the city may be a party, or in which it may be interested, or which may be brought
against, or by, an officer of the city on behalf of the city, or in the capacity of such person as an officer of
the city.
Subd. 3. Judgments. The attorney is responsible for the enforcement of judgements, decrees, or
orders rendered or entered in favor of the city.
Subd. 4. Opinions. The attorney is the legal adviser of the city and renders advice on all legal
questions affecting the city when requested to do so by the manager. Upon request by the mayor or the
council the attorney will supply written opinions.
Subd. 5. Assessments. The attorney reviews special assessment proceedings and sees to the
completion of condemnation proceedings.
Subd. 6. Documents. The attorney drafts or supervises the phraseology of contracts, leases or
other documents or instruments to which the city is a party. On request of the council the attorney drafts
ordinances covering subjects within the power of the city.
Robbinsdale City Code 305.01 (Rev. 2006)
Section 305 - Personnel Administration
305.01. Retirement. Subdivision 1. Policy. In order to provide financial security for city employees of
retirement age, and to hold out the possibilities of promotion for city employees capable of performing
the municipal service of those who retire, and to attract capable persons to a career in public service, the
city participates in several pension plans. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-29)
Subd. 2. Mandatory retirement. City employees who are members of the Public Employee
Police and Fire Retirement Association Fund (PERA) must retire by their 70th birthday if eligible for
retirement benefits from the fund on that date. If not so eligible the employee may continue employment
if physically able, until eligible. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-29)
305.03. Organization chart; personnel policy. Subdivision 1. The manager is directed to prepare an
organizational chart, with explanatory job description for all positions in the various departments of the
city. The manager shall update the chart as necessary to keep it current for all positions within the city.
(Amended, Ord. No. 03-29)
Subd. 2. The manager is directed to prepare a personnel policy, establishing an efficient equitable,
and functional system of personnel administration. The policy will govern all aspects and conditions of
employment with the city. The manager shall revise the plan as necessary to keep it current with all
applicable laws or changes in policy as directed by the city council. The manager shall present all
substantive changes and revisions to the city council for review, ratification and adoption. The personnel
policy shall be inclusive of the various administrative procedures. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-29; Ord. No.
06-01)
Subd. 3. Filing. The organizational chart and personnel policy shall be kept on file in the office
of the clerk for reference by any interested person. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-29)
Robbinsdale City Code 310.01
(Rev. 2014)
Section 310 - Contracts; Bidding; Filing Fees
310.01. General rule. Contracts, bonds, and instruments of any kind with a value greater than $25,000 to
which the city is a party must be signed by the mayor and the manager on behalf of the city and executed
in the name of the city. Contracts, bonds, and instruments of any kind with a value greater than $5,000
and less than $25,000 must be signed by the Manager. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-03, Ord. No. 14-11)
310.03. Disbursement of funds. A disbursement of city funds may be made by a check ordering payment
from an account of the city, signed by the mayor and the manager, specifying the fund on which it is
drawn. The manager for purposes related to the banking and investment activities of the city, may initiate
electronic disbursements of funds. Other electronic disbursements of funds are to be carried out by the
manager upon determination of proper appropriation and approval. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-03)
310.05. Manager: purchasing agent. The manager is the chief purchasing agent of the city. City
purchases and contracts may be made or let by the manager when the amount of the intended purchases or
contract does not exceed $25,000. Department head, as defined in section 300, may initiate purchases and
enter into contracts with values less than $5,000 within the constraints of the provisions of the adopted
budget. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-03, Ord. No. 14-11)
310.07. Bid and quote procedures. The city will follow Minnesota State Statutes, chapter 471, regulating
all bid and quote procedures. For purchases of goods and services not covered by Minnesota State
Statutes, procedures are to be developed by the manager in accordance with sections 310.03 and 310.05
and under the provisions provided within the adopted budget. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-03)
310.09. Filing fees. Fees for filing various instruments with the city clerk are set by Appendix B.
Robbinsdale City Code 315.01 (Rev. 2003)
Section 315 - City Funds
315.01. PIR Fund. Subdivision 1. Established. The city has heretofore created and established a special
fund designated as the Permanent Improvement Revolving (PIR) Fund. It is the purpose of this
subsection, pursuant to the provisions of section 7.11 of the charter, to provide for the basis upon which
the PIR Fund will be operated, maintained, and used. The assets of the PIR Fund, whether in the form of
bank deposits, investments or receivables from other funds of the city, are referred to herein as the
"former funds". The permanent improvement revolving fund heretofore existing and to be maintained,
operated and used hereafter in accordance with this subsection is referred to as the "PIR Fund". The city
manager is directed to enter and establish such books, records and accounts as are hereafter provided or as
are necessary for the maintenance and operation of the PIR Fund. The books, records and accounts are to
be kept in the form and manner of other books, records and accounts of the city as far as consistent with
the terms hereof.
Subd. 2. Source of funds. The PIR Fund consists of:
(a) the former funds of the PIR Fund;
(b) amounts remaining in any construction fund or debt service fund established for an
assessable public improvement pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section 429.091,
subdivision 4, when
(1) all bonds or other obligations payable from said construction or debt service fund
have been retired; and
(2) anticipated collections of special assessments and other revenues pledged to a
construction or debt service fund for an assessable public improvement are
estimated by the city treasurer to be adequate to produce at least 5% in excess of
the amount needed to pay when due the principal of and interest payments on
bonds issued to finance the improvements for which the fund was established;
and
(c) any other amounts from time to time appropriated to the PIR Fund by the city council.
Subd. 3. Uses of the fund. The PIR Fund may be used for the following purposes subject to the
provisions of this subsection;
(a) the temporary or permanent financing of the cost of assessable public improvements
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, chapter 429 and/or state aid eligible public
improvements; (Amended, Ord. No. 03-03)
(b) the temporary or permanent financing of the cost of non-assessable public improvements
related to the improvement of streets and alleys; (Added, Ord. No. 03-03)
(c) loans to any other city fund or funds for any purpose when there is an established method
of repayment of such loan or loans to the PIR Fund;
(d) other lawful corporate purposes as authorized by this subsection.
Robbinsdale City Code 315.01, Subd. 4
Rev. 2003)
Subd. 4. Accounts. There are maintained in the PIR Fund the following equity accounts:
(a) PIR Fund balance appropriated. This account consists of the amount authorized by the
city council to be obligated for the construction of assessable public improvements.
(b) PIR Fund balance unappropriated. This account consists of the amount available for
appropriation by the city council for assessable public improvements.
Subd. 5. Maximum fund balance. The total sum of the equity accounts of the PIR Fund
appropriated and unappropriated, in excess of the sum of $720,000, may be permanently transferred to the
general fund of the city solely for the improvement of streets and street maintenance. Any such transfer
or transfers, if made, must be made annually in connection with the adoption of the annual budget of the
city and must be based upon the audited financial records of the PIR Fund as of the close of the preceding
calendar year.
Subd. 6. Fund uses. Loans and transfers from the PIR Fund, other than those made in the course
of investing PIR Fund monies along with other monies of the city, may be authorized by the city council
after receiving the recommendation of the city manager.
Subd. 7. Reports. Each year the city manager must prepare and submit to the city council, as a
part of the annual report of the financial operations of the city as provided by section 7.12 of the charter, a
detailed report of the condition of the PIR Fund.
315.03. Capital improvement fund. Subdivision 1. Established. There is created and continued a special
permanent fund for the purpose of accruing and investing appropriated money to be used for the purchase,
acquisition, construction, development or rehabilitation of municipal capital improvements within or by
the city designated the Capital Improvement Fund. Municipal capital improvements are defined to
include items, property or improvements thereof or thereon, the reasonable life expectancy of which is not
less than three years and which are not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessments levied
against benefitted property.
Subd. 2. Sources. The city council may from time to time, as a part of the certification of the
annual budget or otherwise, appropriate money to the fund with or without the designation of particular
uses to which such monies will ultimately be put. When such appropriations are made by the council, the
clerk must deposit money in the fund as soon as it is received.
Subd. 3. Uses. Money in the fund may be used only to pay for capital improvements. Payments
may be made whenever authorized by the council if provision for the payment for capital improvements
from the fund has been made in the annual budget. If no such provision has been made, payments may be
made from the fund only upon adoption of a resolution by not less than a four-fifths vote of the city
council. When money has been appropriated to the fund for a particular use it may not be used for any
other capital improvement unless the change is ordered by a resolution adopted by four-fifths vote of the
city council. Upon completion of a capital improvement, any excess appropriated unexpended balance
will become unappropriated and available. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-03)
Robbinsdale City Code 315.03, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2003)
Subd. 4. Investments. Money appropriated to the fund must be invested regularly by the
manager in such securities as are authorized by the laws and regulations of the state of Minnesota for
investment by municipalities or deposited according to law.
Subd. 5. Accounting and records. The fund must be kept separate and distinct from other funds
of the city, whether general or special. The city manager must prepare and maintain the necessary records
and books for the maintenance of the fund. The records and books must include appropriate means of
keeping separate and distinct the amounts of money in the fund appropriated for particular ultimate uses
as well as a general account for undesignated appropriations. At least annually the manager must furnish
to the council an accounting of the fund including receipts, disbursements, purposes of disbursements,
investments, income thereon and current balances.
Subd. 6. Interpretation. Nothing contained in this subsection is to be interpreted to vary or alter
the statutory, charter or ordinance requirements applicable to the general custody and control of municipal
funds or general municipal accounting practices.
Robbinsdale City Code 320.01 (Rev. 2006)
Section 320 - Commissions
320.01. Certain commissions. Subdivision 1. Established. There are created and continued the Planning
Commission and the Park and Recreation Commission, referred to in this subsection as "advisory
commissions". The advisory commissions have the powers and duties assigned them by this subsection
and law. (Amended, Ord. No. 05-10)
Subd. 2. Membership: qualifications. The planning commission is composed of one member
appointed from each ward of the city, and one member from the city at large. The Park and Recreation
Commission which is composed of (i) one member from each ward, (ii) three members from the city at
large with no more than two members from any one ward of the city on the commission, (iii) one
non-voting ex officio member from the Robbinsdale youth baseball association, and (iv) one non-voting
ex officio member from the Robbinsdale youth football association. Members must be citizens of the
United States and residents of the city. Before approval by the city council of an appointment, the person
being considered must submit a written description of qualifications and experience for the position
concerned on a form prepared by the city clerk and approved by the city council. Appointments to the
commissions require approval by four-fifths vote of the city council. Members serve without
compensation. (Amended, Ord. No. 05-10)
Subd. 3. Term of office. Members of the advisory commissions serve for a term of two years
expiring on December 31 of even numbered years.
Subd. 4. Commission officers. Each advisory commission must name one of its members to
serve as chairperson.
Subd. 5. Meetings and procedures. Unless designated otherwise, each advisory commission
must attempt to hold at least one regular meeting each month. The chair of each advisory commission
may cancel a regular meeting if, after consultation with the staff liaison, it is determined that there is
insufficient business to require that the meeting be held. Each commission must adopt rules for the
transaction of business and must keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions and findings. On or
before January 1 of each year each commission must submit to the city council a report of its work during
the previous year. The report must include the number of meetings held during the year and the number
of meetings attended by each member of the commission. Each commission must submit a written report
to the city council of its proceedings and recommendations. (Amended, Ord. No. 06-01)
Subd. 6. Conflict of interest. A member of a commission may not vote on a matter in which the
member is directly or indirectly interested.
Subd. 7. Removal of members. A commission member may be removed for cause by a majority
vote of the city council after written charges have been filed and a hearing granted after at least five days
written notice thereof to the member against whom such charges are filed.
Subd. 8. Vacancies. Vacancies are filed by appointment by the city council for the unexpired
term. Members serve until a successor is appointed or qualified.
Robbinsdale City Code 320.01, Subd. 9
(Rev. 2006)
Subd. 9. Powers and duties. In addition to other duties imposed by law and this code, the
advisory commissions have the following duties and powers:
(a) Planning commission. The planning commission must study, investigate and make
recommendations concerning the use of land, the location and the use of buildings, and
the arrangement of buildings on lots in the city. The commission must consider and
make recommendations concerning such other matters referred to it from time to time by
the city council and may suggest to the council matters which the commission believes
should be studied and considered. The planning commission is the planning agency of
the city as provided by law.
(b) Park and recreation commission. The park and recreation commission must study,
investigate and make recommendations as to the acquisition, development, construction,
maintenance and operation of the city parks and playgrounds. The commission must
consider and make recommendations concerning such other matters as may be referred to
it from time to time by the city council. The director of parks and recreation serves as an
advisor to the commission in matters concerning parks and recreation and assists in
coordinating long range planning. The commission may make such recommendations
relating to the public recreation program as they deem necessary in fulfilling the
recreational needs of the community. (Amended, Ord. No. 05-10)
320.03. Human rights commission. Subdivision 1. Policy. It is the public policy of the city of
Robbinsdale to strive to secure for all residents of the city freedom from illegal discrimination in
employment, housing and real property, public accommodations, public services and education consistent
with the Minnesota Human Rights Act. The human rights commission has been established to assist the
city council in carrying out this policy. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-03)
Subd. 2. Meetings and membership. There is established and continued a commission to be
known as the human rights commission consisting of 11 members. The commission is appointed by the
mayor and with the advice and consent of the city council. The commission must designate one of the
members as chairperson. The members are appointed and hold office concurrent with the term of the
mayor. The members of the commission serve at the pleasure of the council. A member's term may be
terminated upon a majority vote of the council. The commission must attempt to hold bi-monthly
meetings. The chair of the advisory commission may cancel a regular meeting if, after consultation with
the staff liaison, it is determined that there is insufficient business to require that the meeting be held.
Members of the commission serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for personal expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-03; Ord. No. 06-01)
Robbinsdale City Code 320.03, Subd. 3
(Rev. 2008)
Subd. 3. Duties. The duties of the Human Rights Commission are: (a) to advise the Council on
matters and problems relating to discrimination and human rights issues and behavior in the city; (b) to
recommend to the Council education, municipal and community programs designed to effectuate the
policies set forth in this subsection; (c) to implement such programs referred to in (b) as may be directed
for Commission action by the Council; (d) to recommend to the City Council the formulation and
implementation of programs designed to effectuate the policies stated in this subsection; (e) to study and
make recommendations to the City Council for referral to the Commissioner of Human Rights; (f) to
perform other functions, approved by the City Council and authorized for local commissions under the
Minnesota Human Rights Act. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-03)
Subd. 4. Cooperation. The services of city departments and agencies will be made available by
their respective heads to the Commission at its request, and information in the hands of any department or
agency will be furnished to the Commission when requested. Upon receipt of recommendations in
writing for the Commission, each department or agency under the direction of the city manager must
submit a written reply indicating the disposition of an action taken with regard to such recommendations.
Subd. 5. Consultation. The Commission must advise and consult with the mayor and City
Council on all matters involving legally prohibited prejudice or discrimination and recommend such
legislative action as it may deem appropriate to effectuate the policy of this subsection.
Subd. 6. Cooperation with civic groups and governmental agencies. The Commission must
invite and enlist the cooperation of racial, religious and ethnic groups, community organizations, labor
and business organizations, fraternal and benevolent societies, veteran's organizations, professional and
technical organizations, and other groups in the city in carrying on its work. The Commission may aid in
the formation of local community groups in neighborhoods as it may deem necessary or desirable to carry
out specific programs designed to lessen tensions or improve understanding in the city. The Commission
must cooperate with state and federal agencies whenever it deems such action appropriate in effecting the
policy of this subsection.
Subd. 7. Investigations, research, and publications. The Commission may research and
investigate allegations and complaints. In accordance with the Minnesota Human Rights Act, the
Commission may conduct public hearings to gather and disseminate information regarding illegal
discrimination in employment, housing and real property, public accommodations, public services and
education. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-03)
320.05. Senior commission. Subdivision 1. Title. There is established and continued a citizens'
advisory commission known as the Senior Commission. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-01)
Subd. 2. Purpose. The purpose of the Commission is to advise the City Council as to the status
and needs of seniors, age 55 and over, in the city and ways in which the needs of seniors may be met.
(Amended, Ord. No. 08-01)
Subd. 3. Duties. It is the responsibility of the Commission to:
(a) recommend the initiation of programs, grants and other governmental activities and
services to maintain or improve the quality of life for seniors in the city; (Amended, Ord.
No. 08-01)
(b) evaluate and assess the impact of current or proposed programs, grants and other
governmental activities and services on seniors in the city; and (Amended, Ord. No. 08-
01)
(c) serve as a liaison to existing seniors service agencies to assist in assessing resources,
disseminating information on services available and assisting seniors in availing
themselves to those resources and services. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-01)
Robbinsdale City Code 320.05, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2018)
Subd. 4. Appointments and composition. The Senior Commission consists of even members.
One member is elected by the Commission to serve as chairperson. Members must be at least 55 years
of age and be residents of the city. Members are appointed as follows: (Amended, Ord. No. 08-01)
(a) seven members appointed at large. (Amended, Ord. No 09-07; Ord. No. 14-17; Ord.
No. 18-06)
Subd. 5. Term.
(a) Members of the Senior Commission serve for a term of two years. The terms are
staggered as follows: (Amended, Ord. No. 08-01)
(i) fou1· representatives appointed at large have terms expiring on December 31,
of even numbered years; (Amended, Ord. No. 08-01; Ord. No. 14-17; Ord.
No. 18- 06)
(ii) three representatives appointed at large have terms expiring on December 31,
of odd numbered years. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-01, Ord. No. 14-17)
Subd. 6. Meetings and procedures. The Seniors Commission must attempt to hold at least one
regular meeting each month, except during the summer months. The chairperson of the Commission, after
consultation with the staff liaison may cancel a regular meeting if it is determined that there is insufficient
business to require that the meeting be held. The Commission must adopt rules for the transaction of
business and mu s t keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, or findings. The Commission must
submit to the City Council each year a report of its work during the previous year. The report must include a
summary of the Commission's proceedings and recommendations. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-01)
Robbinsdale City Code 325.01
Section 325 - Disposal of Abandoned Property
325.01. Disposal of impounded motor vehicles. Subdivision 1. Holding period. The city may dispose of
motor vehicles coming into its custody, whether impounded by the city or abandoned, and remaining
unclaimed by the owner. The city or the designated custodian of the motor vehicle must deliver the
vehicle to its owner upon tender of storage and hauling fees. Prior to disposal of the motor vehicle, the
city clerk must mail to the registered owner, if any, as shown by the records of the state registrar of motor
vehicles, notice of the possession and intent to dispose of the motor vehicle. The motor vehicle must be
sold to the highest bidder at public auction or sale following publication of one notice of sale in the
official newspaper. The sale must be held no sooner than ten days nor later than 20 days after date of
publication of notice of sale. The sale must not be conducted until the motor vehicle has been in the
possession of the city for a period of not less than 15 days after mailing of notice to the registered owner,
if any.
Subd. 2. Proceeds. The net proceeds of the sale are paid into the general fund of the city. The
net proceeds are the sale price less any cost of handling, storage or sale of the vehicle. Net proceeds will
be paid to the former owner of the motor vehicle upon application and satisfactory proof of ownership
within six months of the sale.
325.03. Disposal of other personal property. Subdivision 1. Holding period. Personal property other
than motor vehicles in the custody or possession of the city that has been abandoned by the owner thereof
or for which no owner has been found, may be disposed of after the property has been held by the city for
a period of at least one month. The city may dispose of perishable property in the manner hereinafter
provided prior to the expiration if the one month waiting period would result in a substantial reduction in
the value of the property.
Subd. 2. Notice. After the expiration of the one month period, notice of sale of the property at
public auction must be given one publication in the official newspaper. The sale must be held no sooner
than ten nor later than 20 days after publication of notice of sale.
325.05. Conduct of sale. Sales of motor vehicles and other personal property may be conducted by the
manager or by a licensed auctioneer employed by the city. Money received from the sale is deposited in
the general fund, but must be held for a period of six months from the date of the sale subject to the right
of the former owner to receive payment of the sale price upon application and satisfactory proof of
ownership within that six month period. The city is not liable for the condition of property sold, and no
warranty, express or implied, is given by the city in connection with the property sold.
Robbinsdale City Code 400.01 (Rev. 2015)
CHAPTER IV
BUILDING, HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS
Section 400 - Building Code
400.01. Title. Subdivision 1. Building code. This section is the building code of the city.
Subd. 2. State building code adopted.
(a) Codes adopted by reference. The Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the
Commissioner of Labor and Industry pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Chapter 326B,
including all of the amendments, rules and regulations established, adopted and published
from time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Labor and Industry, through the
Building Codes and Standards Unit, is hereby adopted by reference. The Minnesota State
Building Code is hereby incorporated in this ordinance as if fully set out herein
(b) (Amended, Ord. Nos. 98-15; 03-10; 07-12, 15-03)
Subd. 3. Enforcement. The building inspector in the department of public works (referred to in this
chapter as the "director") is the building official of the city and has primary responsibility for the
application, administration, and enforcement of this chapter. The building official has the authority granted
by the State Building Code in the discharge of official duties and for the purpose of making inspections or
tests of any construction, installation or device. The application, administration and enforcement of the code
shall be in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 1300. The code shall be enforced by the Minnesota
Certified Building Official designated by the city of Robbinsdale to administer the code in accordance with
Minnesota Statutes Section 326B.133, subdivision 1. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-10, Ord. No. 15-03)
Subd. 4. Demolition of buildings. The demolition of buildings or structures in the city, except for
residential structures, must be approved by the city council. Residential structures may be demolished only
after a permit is issued from the city. Demolition must be carried out in accordance with specifications
approved by the city council and placed on file with the city.
Subd. 5. Moving buildings. Building or structure moving activities must be carried out in
accordance with specifications approved by the city council and placed on file with the city. The city
council must review and approve any building moving when the destination is in the city.
Subd. 6. Penalties. A person who violates a provision of this section or fails to comply therewith,
or who violates or fails to comply with any order or regulation made hereunder, or who builds in violation
of a detailed statement or specifications or plans submitted and approved hereunder, or a certificate or
permit issued hereunder, is guilty of a misdemeanor for each violation or failure to comply. The imposition
of one penalty for a violation of this section does not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. A person
will be required to correct or remedy a violation or defect within a reasonable time. When not otherwise
specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained constitutes a separate offense. The owner of a
building, structure or premises where anything in violation of this section is placed or exists, and an
architect, building contractor, agent or person employed in connection therewith, and who may have assisted
in the commission of the violation are each guilty of a separate offense. The imposition of any penalty for
violation of this section does not prevent the enforced removal or correction of prohibited conditions.
Robbinsdale City Code 400.03 (Rev. 2018)
400.03. Window air conditioners and air conditioning condensing units: installation and placement.
Window air conditioning units and air conditioning condensing units must be so placed or so installed so as
not to:
(a) disturb the peace and quiet of a neighborhood;
(b) disturb the repose and rest and sleep of any person residing on premises abutting the
premise on which a window air conditioner or an air conditioning condensing unit (or
conditioners or units) is placed or installed; or
(c) constitute a nuisance.
400.05. Permit fees. Subdivision 1. Fee Schedule. The fees for building, plumbing, mechanical, and other
permits required by this chapter are set by Appendix B. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees
shall be as authorized by Minnesota Rules Chapter 1300. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on
all permits issued for work governed by this code in accordance with Minnesota Statutes Section 326B.148.
(Amended, Ord. Nos. 15-03, 2018-02)
Subd. 2. Violations. Unless otherwise provided in this code, the continued violation of a provision
of this chapter constitutes a separate offense for each day the violation continues.
Robbinsdale City Code 401.01 (Rev. 2011)
Section 401 – Minnesota Electrical Act
(Added, Ord. No. 11-11)
401.01. Purpose. The purpose of this amendment is to establish an electrical inspections program in the
City of Robbinsdale that is administered and enforced by the City when such services are not provided by
the State of Minnesota.
401.03. Authority to inspect. The City of Robbinsdale hereby provides for the inspection of all electrical
installations, pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section 326B.36, subdivision 6.
401.05. Adopted by reference. The Minnesota Electrical Act, as adopted by the Commissioner of Labor
and Industry pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, chapter 326B, sections 326B.31 to 326B.399. The Minnesota
Electrical Act is hereby incorporated into this section as if fully set out herein. The Minnesota State
Building Code incorporates by reference the National Electrical Code pursuant to Minnesota Rules
1315.0200. All such codes incorporated herein by reference constitute the electrical code of the City of
Robbinsdale.
401.07. Compliance. All electrical installations shall comply with the requirements of the electrical code of
the City of Robbinsdale and this section.
401.09. Permits and fees. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in
Minnesota Statutes, section 326B.37. Any inspection or handling fees will be payable to the City of
Robbinsdale. In addition, a state surcharge fee of 50 cents shall be collected on all permits issued for work
governed by this section in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, section 326B.148.
401.11. Notice and appeal. All notices of violations and orders issued under this section shall be in
conformance with Minnesota Statutes, section 326B.36, subdivision 4.
401.13. Violations and penalties. A violation of the Minnesota Electrical Act is a misdemeanor.
(Minnesota Statutes, section 326B.082, subdivision 16)
401.15. State to provide services when able. This section of City Code is suspended during any period of
time when the State of Minnesota is able to provide the electrical inspection services described herein.
Robbinsdale City Code 405.01
(Rev. 2018)
Section 405 - Licensed Construction Activities
405.01. Plumbing. No person may engage in the business of installing, altering, extending, repairing or
maintaining plumbing work or house drainage or connecting plumbing installations without a license from
the city. Licenses will be issued only to individuals or contractors as provided by the applicable statutes of
the state. A person not so licensed may do plumbing work which complies with the provisions of the
minimum standards prescribed by this chapter on premises or that part of premises owned and actually
occupied by the person as a homestead if the person files with the building official an affidavit showing that
the person performed the actual work in the homestead. Application for the license is made to the city
council and such license will be granted upon proof of the applicant's qualifications and upon the filing of a
certificate of insurance to the city with public liability insurance of not less than $1,500,000 combined single
limit issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota. In lieu of the
insurance requirements above, insurance with the state of Minnesota will be accepted in accordance with
Minnesota Statutes, section 326.40. The annual fee for a license to engage in the business of plumbing is set
forth in Appendix B. Plumbing licenses expire annually on December 31. Applications for licenses are
considered by the city council, and, if approved by the city council, a license will be issued by the city clerk.
Licenses are not transferable. The license fee is paid to the city clerk at the time of filing on the application.
The license fee may not be prorated. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-22, Ord. No. 13-01, Ord. No. 18-02)
405.03. Electrical. No person may engage in the business of installing, altering, extending, repairing, or
maintaining electrical work of any kind or nature unless a license to do such work is first obtained from the
state. Anyone not so licensed may do electrical work which complies with the provision of the minimum
standards prescribed by this chapter on premises or that part of premises owned and actually occupied by
that person as a homestead if the person files with the director an affidavit showing that the person
performed the actual work in the homestead.
405.05. Heating and air conditioning. No person may engage in the business of installing or repairing
heating or air conditioning plants, equipment or work for any purpose whatsoever in the city without first
having procured a license therefor. Licenses shall be issued only to individuals or contractors who show a
thorough understanding of the laws and regulations governing heating and air conditioning installation and
who demonstrate sufficient knowledge, skill and training to enable them to carry on such work. Application
for license is made to the city council and may be granted upon proof of the applicant's qualifications
therefor and upon the filing of a certificate of insurance with the city with public liability insurance of not
less than $1,500,000 combined single limit issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the
state of Minnesota. The annual fee for a license to engage in the business of installing and repairing heating
and air conditioning is set in Appendix B. A heating and air conditioning license expires annually on
December 31. Applications for licenses will be considered by the city council, and if approved by the city
council, a license will be issued by the city clerk. Licenses are not transferable. The fee for the license will
be paid to the city clerk at the time of filing on the application. The license fee may not be prorated.
(Amended, Ord. No. 03-22, Ord. No. 13-01)
405.07. Sewer maintenance. No person may engage in the business of placement, replacement, alteration
or repair of a sewer or house drainage system without a license from the city council. The applicant must
provide a certificate of insurance with the city with public liability insurance of not less than $1,500,000
combined single limit issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota.
Application for a license is made to the city council and may be granted upon proof of the applicant's
qualifications conditioned upon compliance with this chapter. The annual license fee is fixed by
Appendix B. The license expires annually on December 31. Licenses are issued by the city clerk. Licenses
are transferable from one person, firm or corporation to another person, firm or corporation. (Amended,
Ord. No. 03-22, Ord. No. 13-01)
Robbinsdale City Code 405.09
(Rev. 2013)
405.09. Excavators. No person may fill, excavate, dig or grade the surface of the earth nor open any pits or
excavated areas in the earth nor do any other acts which would raise or lower the grade of any land, if the
same has an area of more than 1,000 square feet and a depth of more than 1 foot or will raise the grade more
than 1 foot, without a license. Persons licensed as general contractors or movers and wreckers do not
require an excavator's license. The applicant must provide a certificate of insurance with the city with
public liability insurance of not less than $1,500,000 combined single limit issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota. Application for a license is made to the city council and
the license will be conditioned upon compliance with this chapter. The annual license fee is fixed by
Appendix B. Licenses expire annually on December 31. Applications for licenses will be considered by the
city council, and, if approved by the city council, a license will be issued by the city clerk. Licenses are not
transferable. The annual license fee is paid to the city clerk at the time of filing the application. The license
fee may not be prorated. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-22, Ord. No. 13-01)
405.11. Plastering, stucco, and lathing. No person may engage in the business of plastering, stucco work,
or any lathing work without a license from the city council. Licenses will be issued only to individuals or
contractors as provided by the applicable statutes of the state. Anyone not so licensed may nevertheless do
plastering, stucco, and lathing work, which complies with the minimum standards established by this
chapter on that person's homestead if the person first files with the inspector an affidavit to that effect. The
applicant must provide a certificate of insurance with the city with public liability insurance of not less than
$1,500,000 combined single limit issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of
Minnesota. Application for such license is made to the city council and such license will be granted by a
majority vote of the council upon proof of the applicant's qualifications conditioned upon compliance with
this chapter. The annual license fee is fixed by Appendix B. Licenses expire annually on December 31.
Applications for licenses will be considered by the city council, and, if approved by the city council, a
license will be issued by the city clerk. Licenses are not transferable. The annual license fee must be paid to
the city clerk at the time of filing the application. License fees may not be prorated. (Amended, Ord. No.
03-22, Ord. No. 13-01)
405.13. Contracting. No person may engage in the business of subcontracting the construction, alterations,
or repair of any building without a license. Licenses will be issued only to individuals or contractors as
provided by the applicable statutes of the state of Minnesota. Application for a license is made to the city
council and will be granted upon proof of the applicant's qualifications conditioned upon compliance with
this chapter. The annual license fee is fixed by Appendix B. The contractor must provide a certificate of
insurance with the city with public liability insurance of not less than $1,500,000 combined single limit
issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota. Licenses expire
annually on December 31. Licenses are issued by the city clerk. Licenses are not transferable. The annual
license fee is paid to the city clerk at the time of filing the application. License fees may not be prorated.
(Amended, Ord. No. 03-22, Ord. No. 13-01)
405.15. Masonry work. No person may engage in the business of doing masonry work without a license
from the city council. Licenses will be issued only to individuals or contractors as provided by the
applicable statutes of the state of Minnesota. A person not so licensed may nevertheless do masonry work
which complies with the minimum standards established by this chapter on the persons own homestead if
the person first files with the building official an affidavit to that effect. The applicant must provide a
certificate of insurance with the city with public liability insurance of not less than $1,500,000 combined
single limit issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota.
Application for the license is made to the city council and the license will be granted upon proof of the
applicant's qualifications conditioned upon compliance with this chapter. The annual license fee is fixed by
Appendix B. Licenses expire annually on December 31. Licenses are issued by the city clerk. Licenses are
not transferable. The annual license fee is paid to the city clerk at the time of filing the application. License
fees may not be prorated. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-22, Ord. No. 13-01)
Robbinsdale City Code 405.17
(Rev. 2013)
405.17. Roofing license. No person may engage in the business of roof surfacing, roof resurfacing, or any
roofing work without a license from the city. Licenses are issued only to individuals or contractors as
provided by the applicable statutes of the state of Minnesota. A person not so licensed may do roofing work
which complies with the minimum standards established by this chapter on the person's own homestead if
the person first files with the building official an affidavit showing that the person will perform the actual
work in the homestead. The applicant must provide a certificate of insurance with the city with public
liability insurance of not less than $1,500,000 combined single limit issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota. Application for the license is made to the city council
and the license will be granted upon proof of the applicant’s qualifications conditioned upon compliance
with this chapter. Licenses expire annually on December 31. Licenses are issued by the city clerk. The
license fee must be paid to the city clerk at the time of filing the application. License fees may not be
prorated. The license fee is fixed by Appendix B. Licenses are not transferable. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-
22, Ord. No. 13-01)
405.19. Excavations. Subdivision 1. Permits required. No person may fill, excavate, dig or grade the
surface of the earth nor open any pits or excavated areas in the earth nor do any other acts raising or
lowering the grade of any land, if the same has an area of more than 1000 square feet and a depth of more
than one foot or will raise the grade more than one foot, without first obtaining a permit. A permit is not
required for excavating necessary for construction of a building for which a building permit has been issued.
Subd. 2. Application - permit fee. A person desiring an excavation permit must apply to the
director of public works setting out the name of the applicant, the general description of the grading or
excavating to be covered by the permit, the location of the proposed filling, grading or excavating, the purpose,
area, depth and grade, the estimated quantity of materials to be removed or filled into the premises, the
route of travel in the city upon which hauling will take place, the time that work will begin and the time of
anticipated completion, and such other information as the director may require. The permit fee is fixed by
Appendix B.
Subd. 3. Granting. The council will examine the application with the purpose in mind of protecting
and preserving the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. The council may, either
as a prerequisite to the granting of such a permit, or as a condition to the granting of a permit, require the
applicant to do any act or not do any act which it may deem reasonably necessary for the protection of
property.
Subd. 4. Bond. The council may require the filing of a surety bond or cash deposit with the city,
conditioned to pay the city any extraordinary expense the city may have by reason of the excavating or
grading.
Subd. 5. Violations. A person who, having obtained a permit, fails to comply with the conditions
of the permit or fails to complete the excavating or grading in the time prescribed in the application or
permit, or who fails to act in accordance with the work authorized by the permit, is guilty of a violation of
this subsection.
Subd. 6. Revocation. The council may revoke an excavation permit for non-compliance with the
terms and conditions of the permit. The director may order the permittee by ten day's written notice to
perform additional work to bring the excavation into compliance before further work is done under the
permit.
Robbinsdale City Code 405.21
(Rev. 2013)
405.21. Crane license. No person may stand a crane in the right-of-way to engage in business without a
license from the city council. Licenses will be issued only to individuals or contractors as provided by the
applicable statutes of the state of Minnesota. The applicant must provide a certificate of insurance with the
city with public liability insurance of not less than $1,500,000 combined single limit issued by an insurance
company authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota. Application for the license is made to the city
council and the license will be granted upon proof of the applicant’s qualifications and conditioned upon
compliance with this chapter. The annual license fee is fixed by Appendix B. Licenses expire annually on
December 31. Licenses are issued by the city clerk. Licenses are not transferable. The annual license fee
is paid to the city clerk at the time of filing the application. License fees may not be prorated. (Added,
Ord. No. 03-22, Ord. No. 13-01)
Robbinsdale City Code 410.01 (Rev. 2007)
Section 410 - Signs
410.01. Title. This section may be referred to as the Robbinsdale sign ordinance.
410.03. Purpose. This section is adopted to protect and promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare. It is the intent of this section to protect and preserve the integrity of residential areas, to reduce
traffic and safety hazards, to promote an aesthetically pleasing environment, to promote equity in sign
communication, and to otherwise implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive
municipal plan by the application of uniform regulations and exterior signage.
410.05. Definitions. Subdivision 1. For the purposes of this section the terms defined in this subsection have
the meanings given them. Where a question arises regarding the definition of a term not defined herein, the
definition of the term has the meaning given by the zoning code. (Appendix A)
Subd. 2. "Advertising sign" means a sign that is used to advertise business, professions, uses,
products, goods, or services (including entertainment) not related to the premises at which the sign is located.
Subd. 3. "Business sign" means a sign that identifies a business or group of businesses, a profession
or use located upon the premises where the sign is located; or a sign that identifies or promotes products,
goods, or services (including entertainment) offered for sale or sold upon the premises at which the sign is
located.
Subd. 4. "District" means a zoning district established and defined by the zoning code.
Subd. 5. "Enforcement officer" means an individual appointed by the city manager responsible for
administering and enforcing this section.
Subd. 6. "Establishment" means any of the following:
(a) A distinct business entity situated as the sole occupant of a single structure.
(b) A distinct business entity, with a separate exterior entrance, located in a separate structure
attached to other structures by common walls or facade, or attached by means of an enclosed
arcade.
(c) A distinct business entity contained within a multiple tenant structure, possessing a single,
common entrance for all establishments, or
(d) A distinct business entity contained within a single structure, not separated by walls or other
physical barriers, where the business entity is made distinct by its existence as a separate
leasehold, by its operation by separate entrepreneurs, or by its singularity of purpose.
Robbinsdale City Code 410.05, Subd. 7
(Rev. 2014)
Subd. 7. "Flashing sign" means a sign illuminated by lights that are varied in intensity or color
and that is capable of rapidly changing copy or images in intervals of less than one hour; the term does
not include time and temperature or electronic message center signs governed by subsection 410.07.
(Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
Subd. 8. "Exterior sign" means a sign which is erected exterior to a structure. The term does not
include signs erected interior to a structure in such a manner as to be visible from the exterior.
Subd. 9. "Free-standing sign" means a stationary or portable self-supporting sign.
Subd. 10. "Ground elevation" means the average curb elevation along the street frontage upon
which a free standing sign is to be erected, or a roof or wall sign is to face.
Subd. 11. Non-conforming sign means any of the following:
(a) Legal - means a sign lawfully in existence that does not conform with the provisions of
this section.
(b) Illegal - means a sign that does not conform to the provisions of this section.
Subd. 12. “Message center sign” means a sign that is remotely programmable to change copy or
messages, and which is equal to less than one-half of the available wall or ground sign in which it is
included, and which, in no case, is larger than 25 square feet. The sign may include letters or numbers,
but it cannot create the effect of movement, or change messages in intervals of less than one hour except
that public transit message center signs may change messages more frequently. Examples of message
center signs include signs which display scheduled worship services, events in churches, gasoline prices
or movie marquees information. A message center sign’s light intensity shall be limited to one-footcandle
as measured anywhere on any abutting parcel or right-of-way. (Added, Ord. No. 07-07)
(Amended, Ord. 14-08)
Subd. 13. "Off-site directional sign" means a sign directing visitors to a specific property but not
located on the said property. (Added, Ord. No. 01-06)
Subd. 14. "Roof sign" means a sign mounted on a building roof. A sign mounted on a roof in
such a manner that it extends more than one foot below eave height or the top of a parapet wall is both a
roof sign and a wall sign for the purposes of applying the provisions of subsection 410.09. (Amended,
Ord. No. 07-07)
Subd. 15. “Shingle sign” means a three-dimensional sign that projects from the front of a
building façade over a sidewalk, but not over a street or alley. Generally, the sign is perpendicular to the
plane of the building façade. (Added, Ord. No. 07-07)
Subd. 16. "Sign" means letters, words, symbols, poster, billboard, picture, device, reading matter,
or representation in the nature of an advertisement, announcement, message, or visual communication
whether painted, printed, posted, affixed, digital, video, constructed, or displayed for purposes of
information or communication: the term includes structural supports, uprights, bracing, and framework
and architectural or graphic features that are intrinsically associated with a particular product, good,
service, business, firm, corporation, or profession. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
Robbinsdale City Code 410.05, Subd. 17
(Rev. 2016)
Subd. 17. "Sign area" means the physical area of a sign constituted of the face upon which the
advertisement is borne. In the case of signs constituted of individual figures, symbols, or components
attached directly to a building wall or other integral construction feature of a building, sign area is that area
included in the smallest square or rectangular geometric figure that can be drawn to circumscribe the entire
message or communication. The permitted sign area for a sign applies to the area of each individual face
when a sign displays no more than two faces. When a sign displays more than two faces, the maximum area
of each sign face may not exceed the amount determined by multiplying the stipulated sign area by two and
dividing by the total number of sign faces proposed. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
Subd. 18. "Sign face" means a separate planar or curved surface created by a sign upon which an
advertisement is borne: when a sign is constituted of more than one planar surface bearing advertising,
separate planar surfaces intersecting at greater than 160 degrees interior angle constitute a single face.
(Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
Subd. 19. "Special purpose sign" means a sign erected for the purpose of fulfilling a purpose other
than that performed by a business or advertising sign: The term includes but is not limited to political
campaign signs, real estate sale and lease signs, construction signs, institutional identification signs,
directional signs, public information signs, identification signs, and other signs of a solely non-commercial
nature. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
Subd. 20. “Teardrop banner” means a free-standing fabric banner attached to a ground mounted
frame or pole that causes the banner to remain taut in the absence of wind. (Added, Ord. No. 16-11)
Subd. 21. "Wall sign" means a sign that is affixed to the wall of a building, including signs attached
to windows, doors, marquees, canopies, or parapet walls: a sign affixed to a wall in such a manner that it
extends more than one foot above eave height or the top of a parapet wall is both a wall sign and a roof sign
for the purposes of applying the provisions of section 410.09 of this section. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
410.07. General provisions. Subdivision 1. Permit required. Except as provided in subsection 410.25,
exterior signs proposed to be erected in the city require a permit. The permit number and date of the
permitted sign's erection must be prominently displayed on the sign structure.
Subd. 2. Construction. A sign may not be attached to or supported by rocks, fences, trees, or utility
poles. A sign may not be erected so as to interfere with utility wires or supports thereof. Signs must be
constructed in conformance with Chapter 4 of the 1976 edition of the Uniform Sign Code promulgated by the
International Conference of Building Officials which is adopted by reference. Electric signs must conform
with the electrical code and require an electrical permit. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
Subd. 3. Motion. A sign may not display any moving parts. Signs, except barber poles, may not
rotate. A sign may not be subject to visible movement from normal wind pressure.
Subd. 4. Illumination. A sign may not be illuminated by flashing or intermittent lights.
Electronically or electrically controlled time and temperature signs and message centers that display changing
copy by means of a lamp bank of relatively constant light intensity are exempt from this subdivision,
however, such message center signs may not flash, blink, flicker or exhibit rapidly changing information, or
create the effect of movement. Light from illuminated signs must be shielded to prevent direct reflection onto
adjacent private property or a public right-of-way. A sign may not be illuminated in such a manner as to
imitate an official traffic control device, nor may the intensity of illumination of a sign obstruct the visibility
of an official traffic control device. Incandescent light bulbs utilized for illumination of signs are limited to a
maximum of 20 watts per bulb when mounted on the exterior of a sign. Signs located on property abutting
Robbinsdale City Code 410.07, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2016)
residential property, except time and temperature signs and public transit message center signs, may not be
illuminated between the hours of 11 o'clock p.m. and six o'clock a.m. The provisions of this subdivision
apply to an interior sign visible from the exterior, the provisions of subsection 410.05, subdivision 8
notwithstanding. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-01, Ord. No. 14-08)
Subd. 5. Projection. A wall sign may not project more than 18 inches from the surface to which it is
affixed. A sign, except for wall signs possessing a maximum projection of 18 inches or affixed to a canopy
or marquee, may not project over public right-of-way or a public or private access route (sidewalk, etc.). A
sign that projects over public right-of-way or public or private access routes must be located a minimum of
eight feet above surface grade. Shingle signs are exempt from this section. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
Subd. 6. Height. A wall sign may not exceed the building eave in height. A roof sign may not be
erected the top of which measures more than 30 feet in height when measured from ground elevation. A free
standing sign may not exceed 30 feet in height when measured from ground elevation.
Subd. 7. Setback and placement. Except for traffic control or traffic directional signs, signs in the B-
1, B-2, B-3, B-4, and B-W zoning districts must be located behind the required front building setback in the
district in which the premises are located. Except for traffic control or traffic directional signs, signs in the R-
1, R-2, R-3, and R-B zoning districts must be located not closer than five feet from a property line. A wall
sign possessing a maximum projection of 18 inches will not be considered as encroachment on any required
setback. A free standing sign may not be erected within 15 feet of a street intersection, as measured from the
street surfaces. No sign, except that of a governmental agency, may be erected or placed in a public right-ofway
without the approval of the city council. Signs may not be placed on or within a private right-of-way
without the approval of the city council. Signs may not be placed in such a manner as to create a hazard to
public health or safety, nor may a sign by reason of its placement obstruct the visibility of any traffic control
device. A sign may not be placed so as to prevent free egress from or access to any door, window, or fire
escape. A sign may not be affixed to any stand pipe or fire escape or be placed so as to obscure emergency
equipment or information (e.g. fire extinguishers, fire hoses, first aid kits, alarms, emergency procedures,
etc.), or to obstruct a fire lane.
Subd. 8. Number of faces and sign area. A single sign may display any number of faces. The
permitted sign area applies to the area of each individual face when a sign displays no more than two faces.
When a sign displays more than two faces, the maximum area of each sign face may not exceed the amount
determined by multiplying the stipulated sign area by two and dividing by the total number of sign faces
proposed; i.e., a = 2x : y where "a" represents the maximum area of an individual sign face, "x" represents the
maximum permitted area of the sign, and "y" represents the total number of faces proposed for a given sign.
Subd. 9. Obscene material. A sign may not display material determined to be obscene, as defined by
law.
Subd. 10. Maintenance and repair. Signs must be properly maintained and kept in a safe state of
repair. Signs must be maintained free of peeling or chipping paint or rust. A sign structure that is determined
to be rotted, deteriorated, defaced, or otherwise hazardous must be repaired or replaced by the owner of the
sign upon written notification by the enforcement officer.
Robbinsdale City Code 410.09 (Rev. 2007)
410.09. Zoning district provisions. Subdivision 1. Residential districts. Except as provided for in
subsection 410.11 special provisions, signs may not be erected in the R-1, R-2, or R-3 residential zoning
districts. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
Subd. 2. Residential-business district. Except as provided for in subsection 410.11 signs erected in
the R-B residential district must comply with the following:
(a) Type. An establishment may erect wall signs or freestanding signs, or combinations thereof
as regulated by clauses (b) and (c). (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
(b) Number. An establishment may erect any number of wall signs provided that the total area
of all wall signs erected along any one building wall may not exceed the total permitted area
established by clause (c). An establishment may also erect a maximum of one free standing
sign along each building wall. For the purposes of this section building walls lying upon the
same planar surface or parallel planar surfaces facing the same direction are considered one
wall; and building walls lying upon separate planar surfaces but intersecting at greater than
160 degrees interior angle are considered one wall. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
(c) Size.
(1) The cumulative area of wall signs erected on one building wall may not exceed 25
square feet plus one square foot of area for each additional one foot that the required
sign setback is exceeded, up to a maximum of 50 square feet of sign area.
(2) The maximum size of a free standing sign is 25 square feet of sign area plus one
square foot of sign area for each additional one foot that the building wall, or street
frontage, if greater, along which the sign is erected exceeds 50 feet in length, up to a
maximum of 50 square feet of sign area. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
(3) The total area of all signs erected upon and along an individual building wall may
not exceed 75 square feet. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
Subd. 3. Business districts. Except as provided for in subsection 410.11 signs erected in the B-1, B-
2, B-3, B-4, and B-W zoning districts must comply with the following:
(a) Type. An establishment may erect wall signs or free standing signs, or combinations thereof
as regulated by clauses (b) and (c). (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
Robbinsdale City Code 410.09, Subd. 3(b)
(Rev. 2007)
(b) Number. An establishment may erect any number of wall signs provided that the total area
of all wall signs does not exceed the total permitted area established by clause (c). An
establishment may erect a maximum of one free standing sign along each building wall.
Building walls lying upon the same planar surface or parallel planar surfaces facing the same
direction are considered one wall; and building walls lying upon separate planar surfaces but
intersecting at greater than 160 degrees interior angle are considered one wall. (Amended,
Ord. No. 07-07)
(c) Size.
(1) The cumulative area of all wall signs erected on one building wall may not exceed
50 square feet plus one square foot of area for each additional one foot that the
required sign set back is exceeded, up to a maximum of 100 square feet of sign area.
(2) The maximum size of a shingle sign is six square feet and there shall be a minimum
of ten feet clearance between the sign and the sidewalk. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-
07)
(3) The maximum size of a free standing sign is 50 square feet of sign area plus one
square foot of sign area for each additional one foot that the building wall, or street
frontage if greater, along which the sign is erected exceeds 50 feet in length, up to a
maximum of 100 square feet of sign area.
(4) The total area of all signs erected upon and along an individual building wall may
not exceed 150 square feet.
410.11. Special provisions. Subdivision 1. Special purpose signs. The special purpose signs described in
this subsection are permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the restrictions specified.
Subd. 2. Safety, warning, and hazard signs. A sign required by the Minnesota Occupational Safety
and Health Administration (OSHA) or its federal counterpart, is permitted within any district. Such signs
must conform to the size and placement standards established by OSHA, or if no standards have been
adopted, then the sign shall conform to size and placement specifications of the enforcement officer. Such
signs are not included in the maximum number of signs allowed under subsection 410.09.
Subd. 3. Identification signs. A sign of less than five square feet in area which serves solely to
identify that name of the business, manager, resident, or address of the premises where the sign is located, is
permitted in all districts. Such signs may include no advertising material, and may not include the names of a
permissible home occupation within residential districts. Placement of identification signs is limited to one
such sign for each street frontage from which either a principal or service entrance to the building is provided.
Permitted identification signs are not included in the maximum number of signs allowed under subsection
410.09.
Robbinsdale City Code 410.11, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2010)
Subd. 4. Holiday and business hours signs. A sign of less than five square feet that serves to solely
identify a holiday is permitted in all zoning districts. The sign may not be displayed for more than 30
consecutive days preceding the holiday identified and must be promptly removed on the day following the
holiday. A sign of less than five square feet that serves to identify the operational hours of an establishment
is permitted in all zoning districts. Neither permitted holiday nor business hours signs are included in the
maximum number of signs allowed under subsection 410.09.
Subd. 5. Real estate sale and rental signs. Signs erected for the sole purpose of sales or rental of
property, structures, or space therein are permitted in all zoning districts, provided that the sign is erected on
the premises to which the sign refers. The sign may not exceed one quarter square foot of sign area for each
foot of property frontage, along which the sign is to be erected, up to a maximum size of 25 square feet in
area. Only one real estate sign may be erected along each street frontage. If the sign is erected as a free
standing sign, it may not exceed four feet in height and must be securely anchored to prevent its dislodgement
by normal wind pressure. The sign must be removed within seven days of sale or rental. The signs are not
included in the maximum number of signs allowed under subsection 410.09.
Subd. 6. Political campaign signs. Signs placed for the sole purpose of announcing support for or
opposition to either a candidate or issue in a forthcoming special or general election are permitted in all
zoning districts. The signs may not exceed five square feet in area when placed within an R-1, R-2, R-3, or
R-B district, nor exceed 25 square feet in any B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 or B-W district. All political campaign
signs of any size may be placed in any number from 46 days before the state primary in a state general
election year until ten days following the state general election. Political campaign signs, other than above,
may not be displayed for a period exceeding 46 days preceding the election which is the subject of the sign.
The signs must be removed within ten days following the election. Political campaign signs must be
confined to private property and must be securely anchored to prevent their dislodgement by normal wind
pressure. The signs are not included in the maximum number of signs allowed under subsection 410.09.
(Amended, Ord. 05-01; Ord. 05-09; Ord. 10-14)
Subd. 7. Construction and occupancy signs. Signs erected for the sole purpose of displaying the
names of responsible persons, firms, contractors, etc. involved with the construction, alteration, or repair of a
structure are permitted in all zoning districts. The signs are limited to one per street frontage. The signs may
not exceed 25 square feet in any R-1 or R-2 district or 50 square feet in any R-3, R-B, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, or
B-W district. The signs must be securely anchored to prevent their dislodgement by normal wind pressure.
A sign intended principally to identify the name or nature of a future tenant or occupant of a structure under
construction is permitted in all districts, subject to the same restrictions as construction signs. A premises
may display either one construction sign or one occupancy sign per street frontage. The signs are not
included in the maximum number of signs allowed under subsection 410.09.
Subd. 8. Informational and directional signs. Signs erected principally for the purpose of providing
information, instructions, or directions to employees, visitors, or delivery vehicles, etc. are permitted in all
districts. The sign may contain the name of an establishment, but the sign must predominantly represent an
informational or directional sign. The signs may not exceed ten square feet in area, and if erected as a free
standing sign, eight feet in height. The signs must be permanently affixed to the ground or a structure. The
signs are not included in the maximum number of signs allowed under subsection 410.09.
Robbinsdale City Code 410.11, Subd. 9
(Rev. 2016)
Subd. 9. Institutional and governmental signs. Signs erected for the sole purpose of identifying an
institutional use (e.g. church, hospital, nursing home, etc.) or governmental use (e.g. public park, public
building, etc.) are permitted in all zoning districts wherein the institutional use or governmental use is
permitted. When such signs are to be located within any R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-B district, the signs must
conform to the provisions of subsection 410.09, subdivision 2. When such signs are to be located within any
B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 or B-W district, the signs must conform to the provisions of subsection 410.09,
subdivision 3. In instances of governmental uses where the principal use is not contained in a structure, such
as parks, free standing signs may be substituted for wall signs, and when access to the premises of a
governmental use is provided by means other than by street frontage (e.g. pedestrian walks) an additional sign
may be located at each such access.
Subd. 10. Integral signs. Signs constructed as an integral part of a building such as memorial
plaques, building names or dates, etc. are permitted in all zoning districts. The signs are not included in the
maximum number of signs allowed under subsection 410.09.
Subd. 11. Garage sale signs. Signs erected to advertise a sale such as a garage or estate sale are
permitted in all zoning districts. The signs may be erected only for the day of the advertised sale and must be
removed upon close of the sale. The signs are limited to placement only upon the premises where the
advertised sale is to be conducted. The signs may not exceed five square feet in area.
Subd. 12. Portable signs, pennants; temporary permits. A sign of a portable nature, pennant,
teardrop banner or similar sign may not be erected in any zoning district, except by temporary permit issued
by the enforcement officer. Temporary permits are valid for a period not to exceed ten days. A temporary
permit for a sign may not be renewed more than twice. Temporary permits for a portable sign, pennant,
teardrop banner, etc. may not be issued to the same premises for the same type of sign more than three times
in any 12 month period. For the purpose of this subsection a renewal constitutes a separate permit and each
separate sign represents a separate permit request. Teardrop banners are not allowed in the DD-1, DD-2 or
other properties within the downtown architectural design guidelines overlay district. The signs are not
included in the maximum number or maximum permitted sign area allowed under subsection 410.09, but
such signs are otherwise subject to all restrictions applied under that subsection. A temporary permit
application must include a site plan showing the proposed location of the sign and its proximity to property
lines, sidewalks, driveways and other features as needed for review by staff. A temporary sign permit request
may be denied by city staff if: (Amended, Ord. Nos. 90-18, Sec. 2; 09-10; 16-11)
(a) The proposed location interferes with a visibility triangle as described in Section 510.25;
(Amended, Ord. No. 16-11)
(b) The proposed sign occupies required parking or a fire lane; (Amended, Ord. No. 16-11)
(c) The proposed sign is located in public right-of-way; or (Amended, Ord. No. 16-11)
(d) Strong winds or other forces could bend the sign into an adjacent right-of-way. (Amended,
Ord. No. 16-11)
Exceptions: A temporary sign of five square feet or less promoting a civic or community event or benefit for
or by a non-profit or service organization may be approved by the City Council for a period not exceeding ten
days and if approved by the City Council, such signs may be placed on an off-site private or public location
with the permission of the property owner or agency. (Added, Ord. No. 09-10)
Subd. 13. Banners. Banners may be displayed in any B, R-B or DD district or public right-of-way
subject to the following conditions: (Added, Ord. No. 09-10)
Robbinsdale City Code 410.11, Subd. 13(a)
(Rev. 2016)
(a) A banner(s) promoting a product, service or event on the premises for which it is intended
may be displayed on up to 30 different days annually by administrative permit provided the
banner is maintained in good repair, not faded or torn. The permit and permit application
must include banner locations. Permitted banners shall be attached to building walls,
canopies or parapets. In no case may banners extend above a roof line. Permitted banners
shall be no larger than 50 square feet. (Added, Ord. No. 09-10)
(b) Banners may be authorized by the City Council for a time period exceeding 30 days.
(Added, Ord. No. 09-10)
(c) A civic or community event banner promoting a civic function or community event may be
displayed at an off-site location or right-of-way with approval by the City Council for a
period not exceeding ten days provided: (Added, Ord. No. 09-10)
(1) The banners must be securely fastened to buildings, structures or fences in
conformance with subdivision 13(a) of this code. (Added, Ord. No. 09-10)
(2) The banners must be individually approved for specific locations. (Added, Ord. No.
09-10)
(3) There may be no more than one banner per location. (Added, Ord. No. 09-10)
(4) Banners shall be no larger than 50 square feet. (Added, Ord. No. 09-10)
Subd. 14. Street spanning community event banners. Community event banners may be displayed
spanning the West Broadway public right-of-way between the south edge of 41st Avenue North and the north
edge of 42nd Avenue North subject to the following conditions: (Added, Ord. No. 11-09)
(a) A banner promoting a noncommercial, community-wide event open to the general public
may be displayed on a City-owned banner wire spanning West Broadway with approval by
the City Council; and (Added, Ord. No. 11-09)
(b) Banners may only be authorized for City special events, City partnership events and "not for
profit organizations" that are promoting a public event of substantial community-wide
interest; and (Added, Ord. No. 11-09)
(c) All banners must conform to administrative guidelines prepared by the City Manager and
adopted and amended by Council resolution including, but not limited to the following:
(Added, Ord. No. 11-09)
(1) Application process;
(2) Banner material and size specifications;
(3) Design and content approval process;
(4) Scheduling and conflict resolution;
(5) Exceptions; and
(Added, Ord. No. 11-09)
Robbinsdale City Code 410.11, Subd. 14(d)
(Rev. 2016)
(d) Cost/fees/procedures: (Added, Ord. No. 11-09)
(1) A banner application and banner policy and procedure form must be obtained from
the City Clerk's office and completed by the party making the request and returned
to the City Clerk's office no less than 30 days prior to the date requested to hang the
banner; (Added, Ord. No. 11-09)
(2) A diagram showing the exact text and artwork for the banner must be included with
the application; (Added, Ord. No. 11-09)
(3) The fee for the banner installation and any insurance requirement shall be set by
Appendix B; (Added, Ord. No. 11-09)
(4) All approved banners must be delivered to the police/fire building by noon the
Friday prior to the Monday hang date. Late fees shall be set by Appendix B.
(Added, Ord. No. 11-09)
(5) Banners must be picked up from the police/fire building within seven days after the
display week(s). The City assumes no responsibility for banners and any banners
left more than one week may be discarded; and (Added, Ord. No. 11-09)
(e) City staff has the authority to refuse the placement of cross-street banners which, because of
previous use, are in poor condition; and (Added, Ord. No. 11-09)
(f) City staff may remove any banner in the event that it becomes a danger to public safety, due
to banner deterioration, storms, high winds, etc. (Added, Ord. No. 11-09)
Subd. 15. Civic and charitable events signs. Signs erected for the sole purpose of announcing a civic
or charitable event or activity sponsored by a non-profit organization are permitted in all zoning districts. The
signs may not be displayed for a period exceeding 14 days preceding the event or activity advertised, and the
signs must be removed immediately upon completion of the event or activity. The sign may not be displayed
for more than 30 consecutive days. The signs must be securely anchored to prevent their dislodgement by
normal wind pressure. When placed within a residential district, civic or charitable event signs are restricted
to placement only upon the premises where the event or activity will take place. The signs are not included in
the maximum number of signs allowed under subsection 410.09. (Amended, Ord. No. 09-10; Ord. No. 11-
09)
Subd. 16. Area identification signs. Signs erected for the sole purpose of identifying the name and
address of a recognized neighborhood, residential subdivision, or multiple family residential complex are
permitted in all zoning districts. The signs must conform in all respects to the provisions of subsection
410.09, subdivision 2. Signs erected for the sole purpose of identifying the name of a recognized commercial
area (not shopping center) are permitted in commercial districts, subject to the approval of the City Council.
The signs must generally conform in all respects to the provisions of subsection 410.09, subdivision 3,
provided that the City Council may authorize alternative standards for such signs. (Amended, Ord. No. 09-
10; Ord. No. 11-09)
410.13. Multiple tenant structures. Subdivision 1. General rule. Structures containing multiple tenants or
establishments or structures connected to other structures must conform to the provisions of this subsection,
in addition to the applicable district provisions contained in subsection 410.09.
Subd. 2. Structures with common entrance. Establishments contained within a multiple tenant
structure, for which a common exterior entrance for all tenants is provided, are collectively limited to the
same types, numbers, and sizes of signs permitted for an establishment contained in a single tenant structure.
Robbinsdale City Code 410.13, Subd. 3
(Rev. 2012)
Subd. 3. Structures connected by common walls or facade. Establishments contained within
structures connected to other structures by means of common walls or a common facade but each
possessing a separate exterior entrance, may display the same number, sizes, and types of signs that
would be permitted for establishments contained within separate structures. In the case of establishments
contained in shopping centers, each establishment may erect only wall signs and roof signs in
conformance with the applicable district provisions. However, one free standing sign to serve the entire
center may be erected along each building wall of the shopping center. The maximum size of such free
standing sign is 50 square feet of sign area plus one square foot of sign area for each additional one foot
that the building wall, or street frontage if greater, along which the sign is to be erected exceeds 50 feet in
length, up to a maximum of 200 square feet of sign area. Establishments located in structures connected
by common walls or a common façade shall only be permitted to have individual wall signs when all of
the wall signs on the structure are consistent in design, materials and character. Individual wall signs may
be placed on a sign raceway comprised of individual block letters or script, and may include a logo,
located on a plane parallel to the sign raceway. Said letters and logo may be interior illuminated. Signs
that do not conform to the above, must be compliant with a sign policy adopted for the shopping center
that is approved by the City Council. In the case where proposed signs do not conform with the
aforementioned requirements, and if the shopping center does not have an integrated sign policy that has
been approved by the City Council, then each establishment’s sign must be approved by the City Council.
For the purpose of this section a "shopping center" means a commercial area (i) planned and developed as
an integrated whole with an undivided or unsegregated parking area serving the entire center, or
(ii) advertised or promoted as a shopping center. (Amended, Ord. No. 12-06)
410.15. Public service facility signs. Signs provided in conjunction with a public service facility are
exempt from the requirements of section 410.09. Public service facilities include, but are not limited to,
the provision of benches and trash receptacles for public use on public or private property. The provision
of signs in conjunction with such public service facility requires the approval of the city council. The city
council in approving such signs may stipulate conditions it deems necessary to insure consistency with
the purposes and intent of this section. The city council may revoke the approval of such signs for cause.
The total sign area of signs placed in conjunction with any individual public service facility may not
exceed a total of 12 square feet. The signs are not included in the maximum number of signs allowed
under subsection 410.09. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
410.16. Off-site directional signs for religious institutions. Off-site directional signs for religious
institutions surrounded predominately by R-1 and R-2 zoned property may be permitted for those
religious institutions located within the city and zoned R-1 or R-2. A maximum of two sites for the
installation of such an off-site sign, shall be permitted for each religious institution provided that the site
is located in the public right-of-way, or on private property immediately adjacent to a collector, arterial,
or minor arterial road leading to the religious institution. Each site may contain a single or double-faced
sign. Double-faced signs means two signs placed back to back on a single pole. Approval of the
proposed sign(s) and its/their location(s) must be obtained from the governing transportation jurisdiction
or property owner and the city. Such sign(s) shall be designed and maintained per section 841.07. No
sign permit shall be required. However, a fee will be charged for installation, review and approval. City
approval shall include approval of a license pursuant to section 841 of the city code. For purposes of this
section, a religious institution is an institution recognized as such under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Service Code. No more than two off-site directional signs are allowed for any property. If more
than one religious institution occupies the same building or property the maximum of two signs/sites still
applies. (Added, Ord. No. 01-06; Amended, Ord. No. 02-11; Ord. No. 07-07)
Robbinsdale City Code 410.17
(Rev. 2012)
410.17. Non-conforming uses. A legal non-conforming use may display signs in conformance with the
provisions for the most restrictive district in which the use may be permitted by the zoning code.
410.19. Discontinuance of advertised uses. Signs which advertise or identify a use, establishment,
product, or service no longer located or provided on the premises where the sign is placed, must be
removed by the property owner within seven days of the discontinuance of the use, establishment,
produce, or service.
410.21. Non-conforming signs. A non-conforming sign may not be changed to another non-conforming
sign. A non-conforming sign may not be removed for a period in excess of 30 days and thereafter be
reestablished. Any premises determined to be non-conforming as regards the maximum number of signs
permitted to be displayed, may erect no additional signs requiring a permit under subsection 410.25
unless it first reduces the existing total number of signs on the premises by an amount equal to the number
of new signs proposed for erection. (Ed. note: All non-conforming signs were to have been made
conforming by December 31, 1983 or the subject of a variance after that date.)
Robbinsdale City Code 410.22 (Rev. 2007)
410.22. Expansion of non-conforming signs - special permit. (Added, Ord. No. 90-18, Sec. 1) Subdivision
1. Permit. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections 410.15 and 410.21, the city council may issue a
special permit to permit the expansion of a non-conforming sign if it finds the following requirements have
been satisfied: (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
(a) The sign for which the special permit is requested is non-conforming by reason of
subsection 410.15. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
(b) At the time the sign was made non-conforming it was located upon property which was then
zoned community business district B-4. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
(c) The proposed expansion involves only the addition of one additional sign face to the back of
the existing sign. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-07)
(d) The additional sign structure shall be no larger in any dimension than the existing sign
structure, and shall not extend beyond the rectangular sign face of either sign. (Amended,
Ord. No. 07-07)
(e) The additional sign shall be located parallel to the existing sign and each sign shall
substantially shield the back of the other from public view.
(f) The additional sign will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, nor will it
detract from the general aesthetic appearance of the area.
Subd. 2. Permit fee. Fees are set by Appendix B.
Subd. 3. Conditions. The city council may place conditions upon the permit which it deems to be
appropriate under the circumstances.
Robbinsdale City Code 410.22, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2002)
Subd. 4. Effect of special permit on non-conformity. The special permit is intended only to permit
the expansion of a non-conforming advertising sign. Following issuance of the special permit, the existing
sign and its expansion will be deemed non-conforming.
Subd. 5. Other permits and licenses. The special permit is in addition to all other permits, licenses
and approvals required under this code for the erection of advertising signs.
410.23. Building addresses. Structures fronting upon a public or private right-of-way must at all times
conspicuously display the address number of the subject premises. If the structure also abuts an alley,
building numbers must also be attached in a conspicuous location to the alley side of the structure. If a
garage or similar accessory building obstructs the view of the main structure from the alley, the building
numbers for the structure must be placed in a conspicuous location on the garage or accessory building.
Address numbers are issued by the enforcement officer or upon the request of the owner of the subject
premises. No address number may be changed except upon the order or approval of the enforcement officer.
Upon notification of a change in address number for a structure, the owner thereof must immediately replace
the posted address number with the correct new number. The enforcement officer must maintain a
permanent, public record of all issued address numbers. Erection of address numbers must comply with
subsection 410.11, subdivision 8. Address numbers must measure a minimum of four inches in height and
may not exceed one foot in height. When address numbers are proposed to exceed one foot in height, the
address numbers are considered as an exterior sign subject to applicable regulations of this section. For
address numbers measuring less than one foot in height no sign permit is required.
410.25. Sign permits. Subdivision 1. Exterior signs proposed to be erected within the city require a permit.
The following signs are exempt from this requirement:
(a) Safety, warning, and hazard signs.
(b) Identification signs.
(c) Holiday and business hours signs.
(d) Real estate sales and rental signs.
(e) Political campaign signs.
(f) Construction and occupancy signs.
(g) Informational and directional signs.
(h) Integral signs.
(i) Garage sale signs.
(j) Civic or charitable event signs.
(k) Address numbers measuring less than one foot in height.
(l) Off-site directional sign for religious institutions. (Added, Ord. No. 02-11)
Portable signs, pennants, and banners require a temporary permit as provided in subsection 410.11,
subdivision 12. (Amended, Ord. No. 90-18, Sec. 3)
Robbinsdale City Code 410.25, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2003)
Subd. 2. Application. Application for a regular sign permit, special sign permit, or temporary sign
permit is made to the enforcement officer upon an approved application form, accompanied by required
supporting information and fees. (Amended, Ord. No. 90-18, Sec. 3)
Subd. 3. Fees. Fees are set by Appendix B.
410.27. Sign hanger license. Subdivision 1. License required. A person engaged in the business or
occupation of sign hanging or repair may not install, reconstruct, alter, repair, or remove an exterior sign
requiring a permit without first having obtained a license.
Subd. 2. License application. Application for a sign hanger's license is filed with the city clerk upon
an approved application form, accompanied by required supporting information and fees.
Subd. 3. License validity. Sign hanger licenses expire annually on December 31. Licenses will not
be issued to a minor. Licenses are not transferable.
Subd. 4. License fee. The annual fee for a sign hanger's license is fixed by Appendix B. A license
application will not be accepted nor a license issued unless the fee is paid. The license fee may not be
prorated.
Subd. 5. Insurance required. The applicant must provide a certificate of insurance with the city with
public liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota. Application for the license is made to the city council
and the license will be granted upon proof of the applicant’s qualifications conditioned upon compliance with
this chapter. The annual license fee is fixed by Appendix B. Licenses expire annually on December 31.
Licenses are issued by the city clerk. Licenses are not transferable. The annual license fee is paid to the city
clerk at the time of filing the application. License fees may not be prorated. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-22)
410.29. Variances, amendments, appeals. Variances from the literal provisions of this section and appeals
from administrative decisions made under this section are made pursuant to the provisions of section 535 of
the zoning code (Appendix A to this code) except that amendments are approved by a majority vote of the
city council.
Robbinsdale City Code 415.01 (Rev. 2018)
Section 415 - Parking Ramps
415.01. Parking ramps. Subdivision 1. Definitions. For purposes of this section the terms defined in this
subsection have the meanings given them.
Subd. 2. "Director" means the director of public works/engineer.
Subd. 3. "Parking ramp" means a building or structure, or part thereof, in which a structural level
other than a slab on grade is used for parking, storage, or maintenance of motor vehicles.
Subd. 4. "Qualified civil or structural engineer" or "engineer" means a person registered by the
state of Minnesota as a professional engineer whose field of practice is civil or structural engineering.
415.03. Certificates required. No person may own or operate a parking ramp in the city without having first
applied for and obtained a parking ramp operating certificate.
415.05. Certificates. Subdivision 1. Issuance. A person desiring a certificate must make application
therefor to the clerk on a form provided for that purpose. The application must be reviewed by the director
and will be approved by the director if the application complies with the provisions of this section. Upon
receipt of an approved application and the fee set forth in Appendix B, the clerk must transmit the
application to the council. If the council grants the certificate the clerk will issue to the applicant a
certificate. (Amended, Ord. No. 2018-02)
Subd. 2. Form. The application must contain (i) the name, business address and telephone number
of the owner of the parking ramp; (ii) the address of the parking ramp; (iii) the number of parking spaces;
(iv) the year in which the ramp was constructed; and (v) other information that the director requires. The
application must also state the name, address and telephone number of the person that operates the parking
ramp, if other than that of the owner.
Subd. 3. Expiration. Unless revoked sooner, a parking ramp certificate expires on June 30th next
after the issuance. An applicant wishing to renew the operating certificate must, at least 30 days before the
expiration date, file an application for renewal on forms provided and must submit proof of inspection
services performed by a qualified structural engineer. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-05)
415.07. Annual inspection. Subdivision 1. Required. A parking ramp operating certificate will not be
issued or renewed unless the owner or operator has caused the parking ramp to be inspected annually by an
engineer.
Subd. 2. Nature. The inspection must consist of an annual on-site inspection. Prior to the initial
issuance and, unless otherwise determined by the city’s engineer, once every three years thereafter the
inspection must also consist of a sufficient number of destructive or equivalent tests and non-destructive
tests to properly determine the structural condition of the parking ramp. Tests must include, but are not
limited to, chain-dragging or coring or chloride testing or equivalent tests. (Amended, Ord. No. 05-06)
Robbinsdale City Code 415.09 (Rev. 2002)
415.09. Affidavit of engineer's report. Not later than June 1st of each year the owner or operator of a
parking ramp must file with the clerk an affidavit stating that the parking ramp has been inspected in
accordance with this section by an engineer. The owner or operator shall file with the affidavit a copy of the
engineer's report. The report must contain the engineer's findings including percentage of design capacity
remaining, any structural repairs required and the immediacy of the repairs. The report must indicate
whether the structure is capable of supporting the loads for which it is used. The report must contain a
statement by the engineer that the engineer's field of practice is structural engineering and that the engineer
carries the insurance coverage required by this section. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-05)
415.11. Insurance required for engineer. A qualified civil or structural engineer conducting inspection
under this section must maintain professional liability insurance with an insurance company authorized to
do business in Minnesota in the sum of $1,000,000. Proof of insurance coverage must be filed with the
director in the form of a certificate of insurance. The certificate must be submitted annually with the
engineer's report.
415.13. Operation: insurance required. An operating certificate will not be granted unless the owner
carries liability insurance with an insurance company authorized to do business in Minnesota. The liability
insurance may not contain an "XC" (explosion, collapse) exclusion. The liability insurance must include the
following minimum coverages: garage liability insurance on premises and operations in the sum of
$1,500,000; garagekeepers legal liability insurance in the sum of $100,000. The city must be named as an
additional insured in the policy. A certificate of insurance evidencing the above minimum coverages must
be filed with the clerk at the time of making application for certification or renewal of the annual operating
certificate. Cancellation of a required insurance policy is not valid except upon 30 days prior written notice
to the clerk and the operator must be supplied with a copy of this subsection at the time of application or
renewal of the certificate.
415.15. Certificate posted. The owner or operator of a parking ramp must post the operating certificate in a
conspicuous location in the office of main collection booth of the parking ramp. If the notice is not posted,
the director may require that motor vehicles be removed from the parking ramp and that no further parking
of motor vehicles be allowed until operating certificate has been obtained and posted.
415.17. Penalty for failure to obtain or renew operating certificate. It is unlawful to operate a parking ramp
without having a valid operating certificate. The owner or operator must, when subsequently securing the
certificate, pay double the certificate fee.
415.19. Revocation; non-renewal; penalties. An operating certificate will not be issued or renewed unless
the owner or operator of the parking ramp has obtained the annual inspections and filed the annual affidavits
and reports required by this section. The certificate may be revoked by the council after a hearing upon a
finding that the parking ramp constitutes a hazard to the public health and safety.
Robbinsdale City Code 420.01
Section 420 - Housing and Redevelopment
420.01. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the appointments of members to the board of
commissioners of the housing and redevelopment authority (HRA). The procedures set forth are designed
to promote maximum coordination and cooperation between that body and the city council.
420.03. Composition. The board of commissioners of the HRA consists of five members. A member is
either a public member or a private member and is appointed as provided in this section.
420.05. Terms and conditions. Subdivision 1. Public member. A public member is a member of the city
council at the time of the appointment. No more than two members may be public members. The term of
office is for the remainder of the appointee's current term as a member of the city council, or for the unexpired
term of the resigning HRA member, whichever term is shorter. Appointment is made by the mayor
with the advice and consent of the council.
Subd. 2. Private member. A member of the city council may not be a private member. Private
members are appointed at large according to the terms and conditions set forth in Minnesota Statutes,
chapter 469.
Subd. 3. Time of appointment. Appointments of members may not be made in the months of
November and December in a year in which there is a general election of city officials.
420.07. Policy plans. The law requires the HRA to obtain the approval of the city council on
redevelopment plans and projects. Policy plans are of necessity a part if not a prerequisite of redevelopment
plans and projects. Therefore, the HRA must present to the city council for council approval policy plans
and no redevelopment plan or project may be initiated or implemented without the initial and continuous
approval by the city council of policy plans. HRA rules, regulations, and by-laws must conform to the
policy plans.
Robbinsdale City Code 425.01 (Rev. 2014)
Section 425 – Property Maintenance Code
425.01. Legislative finding. It is found that there exist in the City, properties, structures, site
improvements, landscaping and buildings used for commercial enterprise and human habitation which are
now, or may become in the future, substandard with respect to structure, equipment, or maintenance, and
further that such conditions, together with inadequate provisions for light and air, insufficient protection
against fire hazards, blight, lack of proper heating and other utilities, unsanitary conditions, and
overcrowding, constitute a menace to public health, safety, and welfare. It is found therefore that
adequate protection of public health, safety, and welfare requires the establishment and enforcement of
minimum property maintenance standards. (Amended, Ord. No. 10-13; Ord. 14-02)
425.03. Title. This section may be known, cited, and referred to as "the Robbinsdale Property
Maintenance Code" or "the PMC." (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 10-13; 14-02)
425.05. Purpose. The purpose of the PMC is to protect, preserve, and promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the people of the City; to prevent property conditions that adversely affect or are
likely to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare, and health, including the physical, mental, and
social well-being of persons occupying dwellings or other structures within the City; to provide minimum
standards for basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, and thermal conditions, for safety from
fire, for the use and location and amount of space for human occupancy and for an adequate level of
maintenance; to preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the City; reduce or eliminate the
effects of blight, and to provide for the administration and enforcement thereof. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-
06; 14-02)
425.07. Discrimination and privacy. The PMC is to be enforced exclusively for the purpose of
promoting public, as opposed to private, welfare. Except as may be specifically provided herein or
incidental to the enforcement hereof, the PMC is not intended to interfere with personal privacy or with
private legal rights and liabilities, including without limitation landlord/tenant and lessor/lessee
relationships. In enacting and enforcing the PMC, the City neither expressly nor by implication assumes
any obligations or liabilities respecting such private rights or disputes, including those which involve or
arise out of the non-conformity of any premises in the City to the provisions of the PMC. (Amended,
Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 10-13; Ord. No. 14-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.09
(Rev. 2014)
425.09. Applicability. A building and its premises used in whole or in part as a residence or as an
accessory structure thereof, for a single family or person, and every building used in whole or in part as a
residence for two or more persons or families living in separate units, except rest homes, convalescent
homes, nursing homes, boarding houses, hotels, and motels, and a building and its premises used in whole
or in part for assembly, commercial or office uses must conform to the requirements of the PMC,
irrespective of when such building may have been or may be constructed, altered, or repaired. Every
residential rental dwelling and its premises shall be inspected on a regular basis as a requirement for
licensing. Enforcement action, under the PMC, against owner occupied dwellings, buildings with
assembly, commercial or office uses is limited to violations of subsections 425.13, 425.15, and 425.33.
This limit does not apply to rental dwellings, rented portions of dwellings or their common areas,
including utility areas. These rental dwellings, portions of dwellings and common areas, including utility
areas, shall comply with chapter 425 in its entirety and shall be licensed and inspected for compliance
with the PMC. Condominium and cooperative housing public areas shall be subject to inspection and
licensing if one or more dwellings in such a building is a rental dwelling. The PMC establishes minimum
standards for erected dwelling units, accessory structures, and related premises. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-
06; 14-02)
425.11. Definitions. Subdivision 1. For purposes of the PMC, the terms defined in this subsection have
the meanings given them. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 14-02)
Subd. 2. Accessory building or use means a subordinate building or subordinate use which is
located on the same premises on which the main building or use is situated and which is incidental to the
conduct of the primary use of such building or main use.
Subd. 3. Basement means that level of a building where the vertical distance from average grade
to the floor below is more than the vertical distance from average grade to the floor next above.
Subd.4. Blighted means more than 50 percent of the building ore related premises is structurally
substandard. (Added, Ord. No. 14-02)
Subd. 5. Boarding house means a building or structure or enclosure, or any part thereof, used as,
maintained as, or advertised as, or held out to be an enclosure where meals or lunches are furnished to
five or more regular boarders, whether with or without sleeping accommodations, for periods of one week
or more.
Subd. 6. Building means a structure erected for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattel, or movable property of any kind.
Subd. 7. Common areas means halls, corridors, passageways, utility rooms, recreational rooms
and extensively landscaped areas in or adjacent to a multiple dwelling or building, not under the exclusive
control of one person or family. (Amended, Ord. No. 10-13; 14-02)
Subd. 8. Condominium means a form of individual ownership within a multifamily building
which entails joint responsibility for maintenance and repairs; in the condominium each apartment or
townhouse is owned outright by its occupant.
Robbinsdale City Code 425.11, Subd. 9
(Rev. 2014)
Subd. 9. Cooperative housing means a multiple family dwelling owned and maintained by the
residents: the entire structure and real property is under common ownership as contrasted to a
condominium dwelling where individual units are under separate individual occupant ownership.
Subd. 10. Criminal activity means prostitution, criminal street gang activity, threatening,
intimidating or assaultive behavior, the unlawful possession and/or discharge of firearms, or any other
activity on or near the premises that jeopardizes the health, safety and welfare of the owner, the owner's
agent, other resident, neighbor or other third party, or involving imminent or actual serious property
damage. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Subd. 11. Crime free/drug free housing lease addendum means the addendum to written leases
required by section 425.31, subdivision 5, and shall also include the written tenant acknowledgement
required under section 425.31, subdivision 5 in situations where there is no written lease. (Added, Ord.
No. 10-13)
Subd. 12. Dwelling means a building, or portion thereof, designed or used for residential
occupancy, including one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multiple-family dwellings.
Whenever the word "dwelling" is used in the PMC, it shall be construed as though it was followed by the
words "or any part thereof." (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 14-02)
Subd. 13. Dwelling, single-family means a dwelling designed exclusively for occupancy by one
family. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
Subd. 14. Dwelling, two-family means a dwelling designed exclusively for occupancy by two
families living independently of each other.
Subd. 15. Dwelling, multiple family means a dwelling or portion thereof containing three or
more dwelling units.
Subd. 16. Dwelling units means a room or rooms connected together, constituting a separate,
independent housekeeping unit for owner occupancy, or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer
basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same
structure, and containing independent cooking, toilet and sleeping facilities. Whenever the term
"dwelling unit" is used in the PMC, it is to be construed as though it was followed by the words "or any
part thereof." (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 14-02)
Subd. 17. Enforcement officer means a person designated by the City Manager to administer and
enforce the PMC. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 14-02)
Subd. 18. Excessive calls means four substantiated repeat nuisance service calls occurring within
any 12 month period. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.11, Subd. 19
(Rev. 2014)
Subd. 19. Exit means a continuous and unobstructed means of egress to the outdoors and
includes intervening doors, doorways, corridors, ramps, stairways, smokeproof enclosures, horizontal
exists, exit passageways, exit courts and yards.
Subd. 20. Family means one or more persons each related to the other by blood, marriage, or
adoption, or a group of not more than four persons not all so related maintaining a common household in
a dwelling unit and using common cooking and kitchen facilities.
Subd. 21. Floor area, gross means the sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a
structure or structures measured from the exterior faces and exterior walls or from the center line of
common walls separating dwelling units and other building types. Basements devoted to storage and offstreet
parking or either of them are not included. (Amended, Ord. No. 14-02)
Subd. 22. Flush water closet means a toilet bowl flushed with water under pressure with a water
sealed trap above the floor level.
Subd. 23. Garbage means putrescible animal and/or vegetable wastes, including those resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. (Amended, Ord. No. 10-13)
Subd. 24. Group homes means any group quarter or other residential facility that is licensed by
any governmental agency or as determined by the City of Robbinsdale. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06).
Subd. 25. Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, but excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments,
laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, utility rooms, foyers, corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces,
workshops, hobby and recreation areas, and basements lacking required ventilation, required electrical
outlets, or required exit facilities.
Subd. 26. Hotel or motel means a building or structure or enclosure, or any part thereof, kept,
used as, maintained as, or advertised as, or held out to the public to be an enclosure where sleeping
accommodations are furnished to the public and furnishing accommodations for periods of less than one
week: the term includes any facility licensed as a hotel or motel by Hennepin County.
Subd. 27. Kitchen means a space used or intended to be used for food preparation, which
contains a sink, adequate space for installing cooking and refrigeration equipment, and space for the
storage of cooking utensils.
Subd. 28. Nuisance means:
(a) A public nuisance known as such under common law or in equity or recognized by
Minnesota Statutes or the City code.
(b) A public nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the
premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to,
any abandoned wells, shafts, basements, or excavations; abandoned refrigerators in a
hazardous condition; unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicles; or any structurally
unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, garbage, rubbish, fences or debris which
Robbinsdale City Code 425.11, Subd. 28(b)
(Rev. 2016)
may become a hazard for inquisitive minors.
(c) Overcrowding a room or dwelling with occupants. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
(d) Insufficient ventilation or illumination.
(e) Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.
(f) Uncleanliness.
(g) Any situation or activity which renders air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to
the health of human beings.
(h) Any other activity or situation that is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health.
(i) Overcrowding a room or portion of dwelling with long-term storage so as to prevent
upkeep, maintenance or regular housekeeping. A room may be considered overcrowded
when storage covers an excessive amount of the floor area of a room, constitutes a
potential excessive fire load, prevents access to windows or doors, prevents access to or
obstructs mechanical systems or air movement, effectively eliminates use and access to
required electrical devices, impedes access and movement of emergency personnel,
blocks hallways, limits the operation of doors or provides potential pest harborage.
(Added, Ord. No. 03-06)
(j) An illegal occupancy by a person of any residential, or non-residential structure, building,
or premises, or portion thereof, that is not in compliance with all applicable building
codes, fire codes, local laws and ordinances. (Added, Ord. No. 16-07).
(k) Discharge onto a public right-of-way, sidewalk or alley from a sump pump or drain tile
which can result in hazardous ice conditions, standing water that could create a possible
insect breeding area and or erosion that would degrade a public right-of-way. (Added,
Ord. No. 16-15).
Subd. 29. Occupant means a person (including owner or operator) living, sleeping, cooking,
eating or working in a building. (Amended, Ord. 14-02)
Subd. 30 . Openable area means that part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
Subd. 31. Operator means the owner or owner's agent who has charge, care, control, or
management of a building, or part thereof, including but not limited to those buildings in which dwelling
units or rooming units are let or offered for occupancy. (Amended, Ord. No. 14-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.11, Subd. 32
(Rev. 2014)
Subd. 32. Owner or owner of record means the fee owner of the building, dwelling, dwelling unit
or rooming unit, and includes vendees under a recorded contract for deed. For purposes of this section the
term includes any agent of owner designated in writing by owner for such purposes. (Amended,
Ord. No. 03-06; 10-13; 14-02)
Subd. 33. Owner-occupied dwelling means a dwelling unit occupied by the property owner,
including for purposes of the PMC, a single-family dwelling or the discrete portion of any two-family or
multi-family dwelling where the owner resides in one dwelling unit. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord.
No. 14-02)
Subd. 34. Paint blistered means a surface area where paint is cracked, flaked, chipped, or loose.
Subd. 35. Plumbing means the following supplied facilities and equipment in a dwelling: gas
pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, steam pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets,
sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch
basins, drains, vents, and any other similar fixtures and the installation thereof, together with all
connections to water, sewer, or gas lines.
Subd. 36. Premises means platted lot(s) or unplatted parcel(s) of land, or any portion thereof,
either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling structure, including such building,
accessory structure, or other structure thereon.
Subd. 37. Proper connection to an approved sewer system means a functioning sewer connection
free from defects, leaks, illegal modifications or obstructions with sufficient capacity to drain all fixtures
or appliances which feed into it. The sewer system (be it municipal or private) must be capable of
disposing of sewage in a safe, legal, sanitary, and adequate manner. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
Subd. 38. Proper connection to an approved water system means a functioning plumbing
connection free from defects, leaks, or obstructions providing an uncontaminated, controlled flow of
water.
Subd. 39. Public areas means those areas which are normally open to the general public or the
occupants of more than one dwelling unit of a multiple family dwelling.
Subd. 40. Public hall means a corridor, or passageway for providing egress from a commercial,
office, or dwelling unit to the outdoors and not within the exclusive control of one business or family.
(Amended, Ord. 14-02)
Subd. 41. Refuse means putrescible and nonputrescible waste solids including garbage and
rubbish.
Robbinsdale City Code 425.11, Subd. 42
(Rev. 2014)
Subd. 42. Rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit means any dwelling unit not occupied by the
owner of record regardless of familial relationship or whether rent or other compensation is paid to the
owner. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 10-13)
Subd. 43. Repeat nuisance service calls shall have the meaning given in section 927 of the code
to the extent the call involves police services. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Subd. 44. Responsible tenant means, for the purposes of excessive calls and crime free/drug free
lease addendum violations, any tenant of a rental dwelling occupied by individuals, whether or not
tenants, who are engaged in the conduct described in the notice given pursuant to section 425.23.
(Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Subd. 45. Retaining wall means a wall or structure constructed of stone, concrete, wood, or other
materials, used to retain soil, as a slope transition, or edge of a planting area.
Subd. 46. Rodent harborage means a place where rodents are liable to live, nest, or seek shelter.
Subd. 47. Rodent-proof means a condition where a structure and all parts thereof are protected
from rodent, insect and vermin infestation by eliminating ingress and egress openings such as cracks in
walls and holes in screens. For the purpose of the PMC the term "rodent-proof" shall be construed as
though it included "insectproof" and "vermin-proof." (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No 14-02)
Subd. 48. Rooming unit means a room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or
intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking and eating purposes.
Subd. 49. Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, grass and shrubbery clippings, wood, glass,
brick, plaster, bedding, crockery, and similar materials.
Subd. 50. Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor
and the upper surface of the floor next above or the ceiling or roof next above such floor. A basement
shall not be counted as a story.
Robbinsdale City Code 425.11, Subd. 51
(Rev. 2014)
Subd. 51. Structurally substandard means a building
(1) that was inspected by the applicable governing body and cited for one or more housing,
maintenance, or building code violations involving one or more of the following:
(a) a roof and roof framing element;
(b) support walls, beams and headers;
(c) foundation, footings and subgrade conditions;
(d) lights and ventilation;
(e) fire protection, including egress;
(f) internal utilities including electricity, gas and water;
(g) flooring and flooring elements; or
(h) walls, insulation and exterior envelope; and
(2) where such housing, maintenance or building code violation(s) have not been corrected
after two notices to correct the violation(s) and the cot to correct the violation(s) exceeds
50 percent of the estimated market value of the building, excluding land value as
determined under Minnesota Statutes, Section 273.11 for property taxes payable in that
year. (Added, Ord. No. 14-02)
Subd. 52. Structure means anything erected, the use on which requires more or less permanent
location of the ground; or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. Whenever
the word "structure" is used in the PMC, it shall be construed as though it was followed by the words "or
any part thereof." (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 10-13; Ord. No. 14-02)
Subd. 53. Tenant means any individual named as such in any lease, or in non-lease situations,
any individual obligated to owner for the payment of rent. If there is no lease, and no rent is payable, the
term means all occupants of the rental dwelling. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Subd. 54. Townhome means a single family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or
more attached units in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with open space on at least
two sides. (Added, Ord. No. 08-08)
Subd. 55. Use means the purpose or activity for which the land or building is designated, or
intended, or for which it is occupied, utilized, or maintained, including the performance of such activity as
defined by the performance standards of this chapter.
Subd. 56. Ventilation means the process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical
means to or from any space.
Subd. 57. Waste system means that part of the plumbing system which drains waste water from
individual fixtures to the sewer system.
Subd. 58. Yard means all ground, lawn, court, walk, driveway, or other open space constituting
part of the same premises.
Robbinsdale City Code 425.13
(Rev. 2016)
425.13. Responsibilities of owners and occupants. Subdivision 1. Responsibilities of owners. The
owner of a building is responsible for the maintenance of that structure and for meeting the provisions of
the PMC. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; 14-02)
(a) No transfer of responsibility. A contract between owner and operator, or owner and
occupant, with regard to compliance with the PMC, does not relieve the owner, operator or occupant of
any duty imposed by the PMC. (Added, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. 14-02)
Subd. 2. Responsibilities of occupants and owners.
(a) An owner, agent or occupant of a building may not allow the accumulation of dirt or filth
on the premises occupied or controlled in a manner that could create a health hazard to
the dwelling occupants or the general public. (Amended, Ord. No. 14-02)
(b) An owner, agent or occupant of a building may not allow the accumulation of rubbish or
garbage on the premises occupied or controlled in a manner that could create a health
hazard to the dwelling occupants or the general public. (Amended, Ord. No. 14-02)
(c) Rodent harborages in occupied areas. An owner, occupant or agent may not allow
formation of rodent harborages in or about the premises occupied or controlled.
(Amended, Ord. No. 10-13)
(d) The occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit is responsible for the
extermination of rodents, insects or vermin on the premises. Every occupant of a
dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit is responsible for such
extermination whenever the dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding,
however, whenever infestation is caused by the failure of the owner to maintain a
dwelling in a reasonable rodent-proof condition, extermination is the responsibility of the
owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling,
or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units,
extermination thereof is the responsibility of the owner.
(e) An owner, agent or occupant of any building may not allow the formation or presence of
any nuisance in or about the premises. (Amended, Ord. No. 14-02)
(f) Leasing, subleasing or subletting a residential, or non-residential structure, building, or
premises or portion thereof, by an occupant to another occupant or third party is
prohibited. (Amended, Ord. No. 16-07)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.15
(Rev. 2016)
425.15. Minimum standards. Subdivision 1. Exterior standards. The foundation, exterior walls, and
exterior roof shall be water tight, rodent-proof, and kept in sound condition and repair. Every window,
exterior door, and hatchway shall be substantially tight and kept in sound condition and repair. The
foundation must adequately support the building at all points. Exterior walls shall be maintained and kept
free from decay, dilapidation by cracks, tears or breaks and from deteriorated plaster, stucco, brick, wood
or other material that is extensive and gives evidence of long neglect. The protective surface on exterior
walls of a building above ground level must be maintained in good repair so as to provide a sufficient
covering and protection of the structural surface underneath against its deterioration. Without limiting the
generality of this section, a protective surface of a building shall also be deemed to be out of repair if:
(Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
(a) The protective surface is paint which is blistered, cracked, flaked, scaled or chalked away
including window trim, cornice members, porch railings and other such areas. (Amended,
Ord. No. 16-07)
(b) The pointing of any chimney or the pointing of any brick or stone wall is loose or has
fallen out. (Amended, Ord. No. 16-07)
(c) The finish coat of a stucco wall is worn through or chipped away or broken or damaged
stucco revealing metal lath must be repaired; or (Amended, Ord. Nos. 03-06; 16-07)
(d) Any boarding of openings that do not comply with the requirements of subsection
425.33, subdivision 6(e). (Amended, Ord. Nos. 03-06; 16-07)
An exterior surface or plane required to be repaired under the provisions of this section must be repaired
in its entirety, or such repair must be consistent and uniform with surrounding surfaces. If a weather
resistant surface such as brick, plaster or metal is covered with paint that is blistered, cracked, flaked,
scaled or chalked away, it must be repainted unless the defective paint covering is removed in its entirety.
(Amended, Ord. No. 16-07)
Subd. 2. Accessory structure maintenance. Accessory structures supplied by the owner, agent, or
tenant on the building premises must be structurally sound, securable and maintained in good repair.
Exterior walls of accessory structures must be maintained in accordance with the standards set forth for
principal structures in subdivision 1. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 07-18; Ord. No. 14-02)
Subd. 3. Fence maintenance. Fences must be maintained in good condition structurally, and be
kept free of significant decay. Wood material, other than decay resistant varieties, shall be protected
against decay by use of paint or other preservatives. If of the painted surface of a fence is determined by
the enforcement officer to be paint blistered, cracked, flaked, scaled or chalked away, the surface must be
properly scraped and repainted. (Amended, Ord. Nos. 07-18, 16-07)
Subd. 4. Retaining walls. Retaining walls must be kept in good condition, repair, and
appearance. A retaining wall is deemed out of repair when it has substantially shifted or slumped out of
its intended position.
Robbinsdale City Code 425.15, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2017)
Subd. 5. Yard cover. Exposed areas surrounding (or within) a principal or accessory use,
including street boulevards which are not devoted to parking, drives, sidewalks, patios or other such uses,
must be landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees, or other ornamented landscape material. Such landscaping
shall be maintained in good condition and free of noxious weeds. Weeds, including tall grass, may not
exceed eight inches in height. Perennial native prairie vegetation including grasses and/or wildflowers as
identified by the city Forester, installed as a primary component of an approved raingarden or a restored
prairie, is excluded from this rule on a case-by-case basis. The enforcement policy for this subdivision,
and at section 820.15, shall be set and amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
(Amended, Ord. No. 91-05, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 17-15, Sec. 1)
Subd. 6. Gutters and downspouts. Existing gutters, leaders and downspouts must be maintained
in good working condition as to provide proper drainage of storm water. In no case may storm water be
channeled into the sanitary sewer system. Storm water, ice, or snow may not be directed onto, or
channeled across walkways or streets where it is likely to be a hazard to life or health.
Subd. 7. Exterior lighting. For multiple family dwellings, all exterior parking areas and
walkways must be provided with an average, maintained, horizontal illumination of six-tenths (0.6) footcandles.
Parking lot illumination must not cause excess amounts of light to be cast on a public street or
adjoining property. (See Zoning Code, subsection 510.25, subdivision 5.)
Subd. 8. Snow and ice removal. Snow must be removed from abutting public sidewalks within
12 hours after cessation of snowfall.
Subd. 9. Walks, drives, lawn steps, decks and stoops. Walks, drives, lawn steps, decks and
stoops must be maintained in good repair. (Added, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 14-02)
425.17. Minimum standards for basic services and utilities. Subdivision 1. Minimum plumbing
standards. Plumbing in dwelling units and shared or public areas must be properly installed and
maintained in a sanitary, safe, and functioning condition, and must be connected to an approved utility
system.
(a) A fixture, facility, or piece of equipment requiring a sewer connection must have a
functioning and vented connection, be free from cracks, defects, leaks, or obstructions,
and shall possess sufficient capacity to drain all other fixtures, facilities, or pieces of
equipment which feed into it. The sewer system, whether municipal or private, must be
capable of conveying and disposing of the sewage in a legal, safe, sanitary, and adequate
manner. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
(b) A fixture, facility, or piece of equipment requiring a water connection shall have a
functioning connection, free from defects, leaks, or obstructions. Each water connection
must possess sufficient capacity to adequately supply all fixtures, facilities, or pieces of
equipment to which connected with an uncontaminated, controllable flow of water.
(c) Fixtures that cannot be made clean or sanitary due to cracks, delamination, or
deterioration shall be repaired or replaced. (Added, Ord. No. 07-18)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.17, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2010)
Subd. 2. Minimum heating standards.
(a) Equipment provided. All dwelling units must have a furnace or other heating facilities
which are properly installed, and which are maintained in safe and good working
condition, and which are capable of safely and adequately providing heating to all
habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit
located therein to a temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit at a distance of three feet above
floor level and three feet from exterior walls at an outside temperature of minus 20
degrees Fahrenheit. Heating facilities shall be turned on and maintained in an operable
condition from October 1st to May 1st. Gas or electric appliances designed primarily for
cooking or water heating purposes and portable heating units shall not be considered as
heating facilities within the meaning of this section. Portable heating equipment
employing a flame that is not vented in an approved manner is prohibited. Heating
facilities over 20 years of age, or those of an age that cannot be determined by permit
record or by manufacturers label, must be posted with a dated indication of a service or
maintenance check by a licensed mechanical or heating contractor during the previous
three years. Heating facilities that have not been so serviced and posted may be required
to undergo such service within a specified period of time. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
(b) Minimum temperature standards for rental properties.
(1) For all senior housing (defined in section 505.09, subdivision 40), it is the
responsibility of the owner that a minimum temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit
(measured as described in this subsection) be maintained year round. (Amended,
Ord. No. 08-01)
(2) In all other units whenever the occupant lacks direct control over the supplied
heat to a dwelling unit or rooming unit, it is the responsibility of the owner that a
minimum temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit be maintained at all times
between October 1st to May 1st. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-07)
Subd. 3. Water heating facilities. A dwelling unit must have supplied water heating facilities
which are installed in an approved manner, properly maintained, and which are capable of heating water
to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen
sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower, and laundry facilities or other similar units at a temperature of not
less than 115 degrees Fahrenheit, 46 degrees Celsius, at any time needed.
Robbinsdale City Code 425.17, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2010)
Subd. 4. Minimum electrical standards. A dwelling unit and all public and common areas must
be supplied with electric service, functioning overcurrent protection devices, electric outlets, and electric
fixtures which are properly installed, which must be maintained in good and safe working condition. The
minimum capacity of such electric service and the minimum number of electric outlets and fixtures is as
follows:
(a) Dwellings containing one or two dwelling units must have at least the equivalent of
60 ampere, electric service per dwelling unit.
(b) Dwelling units must have at least one 15 ampere branch electric circuit for each
600 square feet of dwelling unit floor area.
(c) Every habitable room must have at least one floor or wall-type electric convenience
outlet for each 60 square feet or fraction thereof of total floor area, and in no case less
than two such electric outlets. Temporary wiring, extension cords or drop cords may not
be used as permanent wiring. In cases where more than two outlets are required, one
ceiling or wall-type light fixture may be substituted for one required outlet. Required
outlets must, insofar as possible, be spaced equal distances apart.
(d) Every water closet compartment, bathroom, kitchen, laundry room, and furnace room
must contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture and every
bathroom and laundry room must contain at least one electric convenience outlet.
(e) Public halls and stairways in multiple family dwellings must be adequately lighted by
natural or electric light so as to provide illumination having an intensity of not less than
one foot candle at floor level to all parts thereof. Hallways and stairwells in one and two
family rental dwellings shall have electric lighting, which shall be operated by switch.
(Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
(f) A convenient switch for turning on a light in each dwelling unit must be located near the
principal points of entrance to such unit. A patio door entrance may be exempt if it is not
a principal entrance.
(g) Electrical wiring installed at accessory use structures, which are accessible to the
occupants of rental dwellings, shall be properly installed in accordance with the
applicable code in effect at the time of construction of that structure, and shall be
maintained in good and safe working condition. (Added, Ord. No. 03-06)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.17, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2014)
Subd. 5. Minimum natural light and ventilation. Every habitable room shall have window area
of no less than 8% of the floor area and at least one window facing directly outdoors which can be opened
easily. At minimum, the total openable window area of every habitable room shall be 4% of the floor
area of the room, and in no case less than four square feet. In lieu of natural ventilation, a mechanical
ventilating system may be provided which is capable of providing two air changes per hour, with 20% of
the air supply taken from the outside. Every non-habitable room (bathroom, water closet compartment,
laundry room, and utility room) shall have at least 50% of the openable window requirement otherwise
appropriate for the floor area, except that no windows shall be required if such rooms are equipped with a
functioning exhaust fan connected directly to the outside, capable of providing five air changes per hour.
For the purpose of determining light and ventilation requirements, any room may be considered as a
portion of an adjoining room when one-half of the area of the common wall is open and unobstructed and
provides an opening of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of the interior room or 25 square feet
whichever is greater. Windows are not required in kitchens of dwelling units when such kitchen has an
opening of at least 20 square feet into an adjoining habitable room and when such kitchen is provided
with an approved mechanical ventilation system. In addition, the window area of the adjoining habitable
room referred to above must be of sufficient size so as to provide for the light and ventilation
requirements of the kitchen area as well as for the adjoining habitable room. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
Subd. 6. Discontinuance of basic services or utilities. An owner, operator, or occupant may not
permit any service or utility which is required under the PMC to be shut off from or discontinued for any
occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied, except for such temporary interruptions as may be
necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies. (Amended,
Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 14-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.19
(Rev. 2016)
425.19. Minimum structural standards. Subdivision 1. Floors, interior walls, and ceilings. Floors,
interior walls, and ceilings must be adequately protected against the passage and harborage of vermin,
rodents and insects. Floors must be free of loose, warped, protruding or rotted flooring materials and all
floor covering shall be maintained in good condition. Interior walls and ceilings must be free of holes and
large cracks, loose plaster, and blistered paint, and shall be maintained in good condition. Toxic paint and
materials may not be used where readily accessible to children. Every toilet room, bathroom and kitchen
floor surface must be easily cleanable and maintained in good condition.
Subd. 2. Stairways, porches, decks, stoops and balconies. Stairways, inside or outside of a
dwelling and porches, decks and balconies must be kept in safe condition and sound repair. Every flight
of stairs and every porch, deck, entry stoop and balcony floor and supports shall be free of deterioration.
Every stairwell and every flight of stairs which is more than four risers high shall have at least one
handrail approximately 30 to 38 inches high, measured vertically from the nose of the stair tread to the
top of the handrail. All unenclosed floor and roof openings, open and glazed sides of landings and ramps,
balconies or porches which are more than 30 inches above grade or floor below, and roofs used for other
than service of the building shall be protected by a guardrail; guardrails shall be not less than 36 inches in
height. Open guardrails and open stair railings on unenclosed stairways shall have intermediate rails such
that a sphere nine inches in diameter cannot pass through. Every handrail and balustrade shall be firmly
fastened and maintained in good condition. No flight of stairs or entry stoop shall have settled out of its
intended position or have pulled away from the supporting or adjacent structures enough to cause a
hazard. No flight of stairs or deck may have rotting, loose, or deteriorating supports. Excepting spiral
and winding stairways, the treads and risers of every flight of stairs shall be uniform in width and height.
Stairways shall be capable of supporting loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Existing
stairways shall not have a rise exceed eight inches or a run of treads less than nine inches. A stairway
which does not meet these rise and run requirements will be considered a built-in deficiency under the
provisions of subsection 425.33, subdivision 8. Exterior landings for entry stoops and stairs shall have no
dimensions less than three feet. (Amended, Ord. Nos. 03-06, 16-07)
Subd. 3. Windows, doors, and screens. Windows, exterior doors, and hatchways must be
substantially tight and kept in sound condition and repair. Every window, other than a fixed window or
storm window, shall be capable of being easily opened. Every window or other device with openings to
outdoor space which is used or intended to be used for ventilation to meet the minimum ventilation
requirements of subsection 425.17, subdivision 4 must be supplied with 16 mesh screens. All doors,
thresholds, door and window frames shall be free of blistered paint, missing putty and shall be maintained
in good condition. All door and window hardware and locks shall be functional and be maintained in
good condition. Operable windows shall be supplied with mechanical sash locks manufactured for that
use. No door at the top of a stairway may swing open over the stairs. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
Subd. 4. Safe building elements. Every roof, floor, every porch, deck and balcony, and every
appurtenance thereto, must be safe to use and capable of supporting loads that normal use may cause to be
placed thereon. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.19, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2014)
Subd. 5. Access to dwellings. Access to and egress from each dwelling shall be provided by at
least one doorway that is a minimum of 36 inches wide and 80 inches high.
Subd. 6. Minimum ceiling height. The ceiling height of any habitable room shall be at least
seven feet; except that in any habitable room under a sloping ceiling at least one-half of the floor area
shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet, and the floor area of that part of such a room where the
ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the room for the purpose of
determining the maximum permissible occupancy.
Subd. 7. Rooms below grade. A room located partly or wholly below grade may be used as a
habitable room of a dwelling unit provided all of the requirements of the PMC are met. (Amended, Ord.
No. 03-06; Ord. No. 14-02)
Subd. 8. Sleeping rooms. A sleeping room must have at least one window or exterior door
approved for emergency exit or rescue. Required emergency exit or rescue openings shall be maintained
in accordance with the code and the following: Required emergency exit and rescue openings shall be
operational from the inside of the sleeping room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or
similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency exit and rescue openings provided the
minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and
such devices shall be releaseable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force
greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. (Amended,
Ord. No. 14-02)
425.21. Minimum interior standards. Subdivision 1. Kitchen facilities. A kitchen in a dwelling unit
must include the following:
(a) A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water
supply system. It shall provide at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated
running water under pressure, and be connected to an approved sewer system.
(b) Cabinets and shelves for the storage of eating, drinking, and cooking equipment and
utensils and of food that does not require refrigeration for safekeeping; and counters or
tables for food preparation. Said cabinets and shelves and counters or tables shall be
adequate for the permissible occupancy of the dwelling unit and shall be of sound
construction furnished with surfaces that are easily cleanable and that will not impart any
toxic or deleterious effect to food. They shall be maintained in good condition.
(Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
(c) A stove and a refrigerator which are properly installed with all necessary connections for
safe, sanitary and efficient operation; provided that such stove, refrigerator or similar
devices need not be installed when a dwelling unit is not occupied and when the occupant
is expected to provide same on occupancy, in which case sufficient space and adequate
connections for the installation and operation of said stove, refrigerator or similar device
must be provided.
Robbinsdale City Code 425.21, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2016)
Subd. 2. Toilet facilities. Within every dwelling unit there must be a nonhabitable room with an
entrance door which affords privacy to a person within said room and which room is equipped with a
flush water closet in good working condition, and solidly mounted. The flush water closet shall be
equipped with easily cleanable surfaces, shall be connected to an approved water system that at all times
provides an adequate amount of running water under pressure to cause the water closet to be operated
properly, and shall be connected to an approved sewer system. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
Subd. 3. Lavatory sink. Within every dwelling unit there must be a lavatory sink. The lavatory
sink may be in the same room as the flush water closet, or if located in another room, the lavatory sink
shall be located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which said water closet is
located. The lavatory sink and any cabinet or device supporting it must be in good working condition and
shall be properly connected to an approved water supply system and shall provide at all times an adequate
amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure, and shall be connected to an approved
sewer system. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
Subd. 4. Bathtub or shower. Within every dwelling unit there must be a room which affords
privacy to a person within the room and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower in good working
condition. Walls, windows and partitions adjacent to the tub or shower and their finishes must be kept
watertight, free from damage and maintained in readily cleanable condition. The bathtub or shower may
be in the same room as the flush water closet, or in another room, and shall be properly connected to an
approved water supply system and shall provide at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated
water under pressure, and shall be connected to an approved sewer system. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
Subd. 5. Door locks. A door that is designed to provide ingress or egress for any rental dwelling
unit must be equipped with a lock that has a deadlocking bolt that cannot be retracted by end pressure and
provided, however, that such be openable from the inside without the use of a key or any special
knowledge or effort except in existing single-family homes, town houses, and first floor duplexes.
Sliding entry doors must be provided with a mechanical locking device, hook and eye lock, wood or
metal bar or an approved equivalent locking system. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit from an
attached garage may be exempt from the dead bolt requirement if all garage doors and windows are
provided with acceptable locking devices. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 07-18)
Subd. 6. Removal of basic equipment or facilities. An owner, operator, or occupant may not
cause any facility or equipment which is required under the PMC to be removed from or shut off from
any occupied dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied by them, except for such temporary interruptions
as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies.
(Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 14-02)
Subd. 7. Appliance installation. The owner is responsible for the proper installation of gas fired
and electrical appliances such as cook stoves and clothes dryers. The owner is responsible for proper
venting of gas fired appliances and clothes dryers. Clothes dryer exhaust ducts shall have a smooth
interior finish and shall be constructed of metal a minimum of 0.016 inch (0.4 mm) thick. The exhaust
duct size shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) in diameter. Transition ducts used to connect the
dryer to the exhaust duct system shall be a single length that is listed and labeled in accordance with UL
2158A. Transition ducts shall be a minimum of 8 feet (2438 mm) in length, and shall not be concealed
within construction. (Added, Ord. No. 03-06, Amended, Ord. No. 16-07)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.23
(Rev. 2014)
425.23. Minimum standards for rodent control. Subdivision 1. General rule. Every building must be
maintained in a rodent-proof condition. (Amended, Ord. No. 14-02)
Subd. 2. Openings in the exterior walls, foundations, basements, ground or first floors, and roofs
must be rodent-proofed in a manner approved by the enforcement officer.
Subd. 3. Windows used or intended to be used for ventilation, all other openings, and all exterior
doorways which might provide an entry for rodents and insects, must be supplied with adequate screens
or such other devices as will effectively prevent the entrance of rodents and insects into the structure.
Subd. 4. Sewers, pipes, drains, or conduits and openings around such pipes and conduits must be
constructed to prevent the ingress or egress of rodents and insects to or from a building.
Subd. 5. Interior floors of basements, cellars, and other areas in contact with the soil shall be
rodent-proofed in a manner approved by the enforcement officer.
425.25. Minimum fire protection standards. No person may let to another for occupancy any building or
dwelling unit which does not comply with the applicable provisions of the fire prevention code. Rental
dwelling units must be provided with a smoke detector on each level of the dwelling unit. A smoke
detector must be located within 15 feet of each bedroom. Smoke detectors improperly located or
mounted may be required to be relocated or remounted. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 14-02)
425.27. Occupancy standards. Subdivision 1. One family per dwelling unit. Not more than one family
may occupy a dwelling unit.
Subd. 2. Permissible occupancy of a dwelling unit. The maximum permissible occupancy of a
rental dwelling unit is determined as follows:
(a) Minimum space. For the first two occupants, 220 square feet of habitable room floor
space and for every additional occupant thereof, at least 100 square feet of habitable
room floor space.
(b) Maximum occupancy. The total number of occupants may not exceed two times the
number of habitable rooms, less kitchen, in the dwelling unit.
(c) Occupancy of sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes shall have the following minimum habitable room floor
space: 70 square feet for one person; 90 square feet for two persons; and the required
habitable room floor space will be increased at the rate of 50 square feet for each
occupant in excess of two. The maximum occupant load of a sleeping room may be
increased by one person if all occupants are under the age of two years.
Robbinsdale City Code 425.29
(Rev. 2014)
425.29. Energy standards. Subdivision 1. Weatherization requirements. Dwellings which are renter
occupied during all or a portion of the months of November through April must comply with the
weatherization requirements of this subsection.
Subd. 2. Install and maintain weather-stripping between exterior operable window sash and
frames and between exterior doors and frames. Weather-stripping is not required on storm doors or storm
windows. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
Subd. 3. Caulk, gasket or otherwise seal accessible exterior joints between foundation and rim
joist; around window and door frames; between wall and roof; between wall panels; at penetrations for
utility services through walls, floors and roofs and all other openings in the exterior envelope.
Subd. 4. Install and maintain storm windows on all single glazed exterior window units enclosing
conditioned space. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
Subd. 5. Install and maintain storm doors on all exterior door openings into conditioned spaces
unless a single door, enclosed porch, vestibule or other appurtenance provides a double door effect or
provides an "R" value of two or more. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
Subd. 6. Install positive shut-offs for all fireplaces or fireplace stoves, unless an existing damper
provides a positive shut-off.
Subd. 7. Install insulation in accessible attics to achieve a minimum total "R" value of the
insulation of R-19. If there is insufficient space for the installation of the recommended "R" value, then
the available space shall be insulated to capacity.
Subd. 8. Install insulation in accessible walls and floors enclosing conditioned spaces to achieve
a minimum total "R" value of the insulation of R-11 when there is no insulation in a substantial portion of
the exterior walls or floors over an unconditioned space. Accessible walls shall not include above grade
foundation walls of basements. If there is insufficient space for the installation of the recommended "R"
value, then the available space must be insulated to capacity.
425.31. Inspection and licensing of rental dwellings. Subdivision 1. Rental dwelling license. No person
may operate, let, or cause to be let, a rental dwelling without first having obtained a license to do so from
the City as hereinafter provided. Upon receipt of a properly executed application for licensing, the
enforcement officer shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises to determine whether the
structure is in compliance with the PMC, other City ordinances, and the laws of the state. No operating
license may be issued or renewed unless the rental dwelling and its premises conform to the ordinances
and law. In addition, no license shall be issued or renewed until such time as all real estate taxes and City
utility bills for the premises which are due have been paid. Real estate taxes will not be considered to be
due and unpaid for purposes of this section while a proper and timely appeal of such taxes is pending and
is diligently pursued to completion by the landowner. Each such operating license shall be issued
biennially and shall expire at the end of the second year. A license renewal application shall be filed at
least 60 days prior to license expiration date. Every rental dwelling will be reinspected after a renewal
application. If a structure or dwelling unit is not in compliance, a reinspection may be ordered to verify
that conditions and any corrections conform to the provisions of this section or any other applicable
ordinance. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 08-10; Ord. No. 10-13; Ord. 14-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.31, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2010)
Subd. 2. Initial/conversion rental housing owner training required. All property owners
converting any single unit to rental use must attend a training session within six months of obtaining a
rental license. This training shall review rental property regulations and owner obligations including, but
not limited to, utility billing which can be assessed to the property and repeat nuisance call fees. Where
the owner designates a local manager representative to attend the meeting, written materials will be sent
to the owner who must certify that the material has been read and understood. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Subd. 3. Crime free housing training/certification required. The owner of a rental dwelling may
not operate, let, or cause to be let, a rental dwelling without first having scheduled the required crime free
housing owner/manager training program offered by the City. A shorter training session will be available
to those who have completed a comparable program containing all of the components in subdivision 3(b)
of this section in another municipality but not Robbinsdale-specific training. Any owner who has
completed a comparable program containing all of the components in subdivision 3(b) of this section in
another municipality and who has completed the initial/conversion rental housing owner training
(subdivision 2 of this section) may be excused from this training. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(a) Training schedule. The police department shall provide quarterly training session
opportunities. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(b) Training curriculum. The training will be a course, not to exceed four hours, which is
approved by the Chief of Police. Components of the program shall include, but not be
limited to, the following subject matter: (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(1) Introduction to crime free multi-housing;
(2) Phases I-III of CFMH;
(3) Rental applications and housing discrimination;
(4) Screening and background checks;
(5) Lease and lease addendums;
(6) Unlawful detainer and eviction;
(7) Manager/owner policies and roles;
(8) Data privacy;
(9) Narcotics and gangs;
(10) Section 8 housing;
(11) Rental licensing; and
(12) Repeat nuisance service fees.
(Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(c) Mandatory training certification. Upon successful completion of training, the police
department shall make note of this fact and satisfactory completion of the training shall
remain valid until such time a new owner and/or operator becomes responsible for
managing the property. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.31, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2010)
Subd. 4. Failure to complete training. Failure to complete the required initial/conversion rental
housing owner training or crime free housing training/certification training within six months shall
subject the owner to a service fee (set forth in Appendix B) for each month that training is not completed
for a maximum of three months. If after three months (9 months total) the training has not been
completed the rental license(s) may be subject to suspension or revocation by the City Council. (Added,
Ord. No. 10-13)
Subd. 5. Lease addendum required. All rental housing leases, except for state licensed
residential facilities and subject to all preemptory state and federal laws, shall contain crime free/drug free
language for all new lease agreements beginning January 1, 2011 or upon lease renewal as set forth in
paragraph (a) of this subdivision below. In situations where there is no written lease, the owner shall have
the tenant execute a written agreement containing all of the regulations contained in paragraph (a) of this
subdivision and acknowledging that violation of those regulations will result in termination of the
tenancy. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(a) Crime free/drug free housing lease addendum language. The following text meets the
requirement for the lease addendum. Similar or equivalent language may be substituted,
subject to review and prior approval by the City Manager.
Crime free/drug free addendum:
(1) Tenant, any members of the tenant's household or a guest or other person
affiliated with tenant shall not engage in criminal activity, including drug-related
criminal activity, on or near the premises; (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(2) Tenant, any members of the tenant's household or a guest or other person
affiliated with tenant shall not engage in any act intended to facilitate criminal
activity, including drug related criminal activity, on or near the premises;
(Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(3) Tenant or members of the household will not permit the dwelling unit to be used
for, or to facilitate criminal activity, including drug-related criminal activity,
regardless of whether the individual engaging in such activity is a member of the
household, or a guest; (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(4) Tenant, any members of the tenant's household or a guest, or other person
affiliated with the tenant shall not engage in the unlawful manufacturing, selling,
using, storing, keeping, or giving of a controlled substance at any locations,
whether on or near the premises or otherwise. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Violation of crime free/drug free addendum. Violation of the above provision shall be a
material and irreparable violation of the lease and good cause for immediate termination
of tenancy. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.31, Subd. 5(b)
(Rev. 2010)
(b) Review of lease addendums. The owner and/or operator of a rental dwelling shall make
available to the police department upon request copies of rental housing lease
addendums. The police department shall make the request via U.S. Mail to the owner
and/or operator. Said person is deemed to have received the request three days after the
request is mailed. Upon receiving the written request from the police department, the
owner and/or operator shall provide the requested lease addendums within ten business
days of the written request. Failure to provide the required documents within the allotted
time shall subject the owner and/or operator to an administrative service fee (set forth in
Appendix B). If after one month, the lease addendums are not received, or do not exist,
the rental license is subject to suspension or revocation by the City Council. (Added,
Ord. No. 10-13)
Subd. 6. License fees. The license fees are due 60 days prior to the license expiration date; in the
cases of new unlicensed dwellings, license fees are due upon issuance of the certificate of occupancy; in
the cases of licensing periods of less than two years, license fees will be pro-rated monthly. A license fee
paid later than ten working days after the prescribed date is subject to an additional administrative service
charge set by Appendix B. Once issued, a license is nontransferable and the licensee is not entitled to a
refund of any license fee upon revocation or suspension; however, within 72 hours after having legally
transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of any licensed rental dwelling, and submission of
the transfer and the name and address of the person or entity succeeding to the ownership or control of
such rental dwelling or dwellings on a form supplied by the City, the licensee shall be entitled to a license
fee refund, prorated monthly, less a $50.00 administrative fee. The license fee is set by appendix B.
(Amended, Ord. No. 06-02; Ord. No. 07-18; Ord. No. 08-10; Ord. No. 10-13)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.31, Subd. 7
(Rev. 2014)
Subd. 7. Owner or agent to apply. License application or renewal must be made by the owner of
rental units. A new owner must register a building within ten days after acquiring it. The enforcement
officer must be notified of any address change or other contact information changes including primary
phone number(s), within ten days. Application forms may be acquired from and subsequently filed with
the enforcement officer. The applicant must supply: (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 07-18; Ord.
No. 10-13)
(a) Name, address, and telephone number of dwelling owner, owning partners if a
partnership, corporate officers if a corporation;
(b) Name, address, and telephone number of designated resident agent, if any;
(c) Name, address, and telephone number of vendor, if the dwelling is being sold through a
contract for deed;
(d) Legal address of the dwelling;
(e) Number of dwelling units within the dwelling;
(f) At least one emergency telephone number.
(g) Copy of Mandatory Crime Free Training Certification; and (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(h) Copy of crime-free/drug free lease addendum. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Subd. 8. Resident agent required. An operating license may not be issued or renewed for a
nonresident owner of rental dwelling units (one who does not reside in any of the following Minnesota
counties: Hennepin, Ramsey, Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Scott, Washington or Wright) unless such owner
designates in writing to the enforcement officer the name of owner’s resident agent (one who does reside
in any of the following Minnesota counties: Hennepin, Ramsey, Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Scott,
Washington or Wright) who is responsible for maintenance and upkeep and who is legally constituted and
empowered to receive service of notice of violation of the provisions of the City code and to receive
orders or process pursuant to law. The enforcement officer must be notified in writing within ten days of
the following changes: resident agent, agent address, and/or agent phone number(s). This requirement
may be waived if, in the enforcement officer's determination, the owner not living in one of the above
specified counties, is nonetheless sufficiently accessible for the purposes of the PMC. (Amended, Ord.
No. 03-06; Ord. No. 07-18; Ord. No. 10-13; Ord. No. 14-02)
Subd. 9. Conformance to laws. An operating license will not be issued or renewed unless the
rental dwelling and its premises conform to City ordinances and state law. (Amended, Ord. No. 10-13)
Subd. 10. Inspection condition. An operating license may not be issued or renewed unless the
owner of rental units agrees in the application to permit inspections pursuant to subsection 425.33. The
owner or agent is required to accompany the enforcement officer at either the inspection or a reinspection
of the property at least once during the license period. It is the responsibility of the owner or agent to
schedule the required rental inspection with the City of Robbinsdale and to notify the renter of the
inspection in a reasonable period of time at least 24 hours prior to all inspections or reinspections.
(Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 10-13)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.31, Subd. 11
(Rev. 2010)
Subd. 11. Posting of license. The licensee of a multiple dwelling must cause to be conspicuously
posted in the main entry way or other conspicuous location therein, the current license for the respective
multiple dwelling. In the case of one and two family dwellings, a copy of the license shall be given to the
renter also. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 10-13)
Subd. 12. Provision of information to tenants. The licensee shall provide each new tenant a copy
of the City of Robbinsdale's solid waste program information (for those in 1 to 4 unit dwelling units) and
a copy of the repeat nuisance call for service fee (City code section 927). (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Subd. 13. License not transferable. An operating license is not transferable to another person or
to another rental dwelling. Every person holding an operating license must give notice in writing to the
enforcement officer within 72 hours after having legally transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal
control of any licensed rental dwelling. The notice must include the name and address of the person
succeeding to the ownership or control of such rental dwelling or dwellings. (Amended, Ord. No. 10-13)
Subd. 14. License suspension or revocation. An operating license is subject to suspension or
revocation, for the entire rental dwelling or for individual rental dwelling units, by the City Council if the
licensed owner or duly authorized resident agent fails to permit any rental inspection required under this
code, or fails to operate or maintain the licensed rental dwellings and units therein consistent with the
provisions of the City code and the laws of the state of Minnesota.
(a) Suspension or revocation with continued occupancy by current tenants. In the event that
an operating license is suspended or revoked by the City Council, other than as further
specified in subdivision 14(b) it is unlawful for the owner or owner’s duly authorized
agent, with respect to the rental dwellings subject to such revocation or suspension, to
thereafter permit any new occupancies of vacant or thereafter vacated rental units until
such time as a valid operating license may be restored by the City Council. An accurate,
current list of such vacant dwelling units shall be provided to the City and maintained
onsite by the owner of the property, suitable for the purposes of identification and
inspection under section 425.33 by the enforcement officer until such time as a valid
operating license may be restored by the City Council. Whenever any multiple-dwelling
or dwelling unit has been denied a license, has had its operating license suspended or
revoked, it shall be posted with a placard by the City Manager to prevent further
occupancy. No person, other than the City Manager, shall remove or tamper with any
placard used for posting. The City Manager will post on the placard the date that the
vacancy shall become effective. On or after the placard vacancy date, no person shall
reside in, occupy, or cause to be occupied any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been
posted to prevent occupancy. Any person violating this provision is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction is subject to a fine and imprisonment as prescribed by
state law. Each day of each violation constitutes a separate offense. (Amended, Ord. No.
07-18; Ord. No. 10-13)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.31, Subd. 14(b)
(Rev. 2010)
(b) Suspension or revocation due to property being unfit for human habitation. In the event
that an operating license is suspended or revoked by the City Council due to being unfit
for human habitation, it is unlawful for the owner or owner's duly authorized agent, with
respect to the rental dwellings subject to such revocation or suspension, to thereafter
permit any new or continued occupancies of said rental units until such time as a valid
operating license may be restored by the City Council. Whenever any multiple-dwelling
or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, it shall be posted with a placard by the City
Manager to prevent further occupancy. No person, other than the City Manager, shall
remove or tamper with any placard used for posting. The City Manager will post on the
placard the date that the vacancy shall become effective. On or after the placard vacancy
date, no person shall reside in, occupy, or cause to be occupied any dwelling or dwelling
unit which has been posted to prevent occupancy. Any person violating this provision is
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is subject to a fine and imprisonment as
prescribed by state law. Each day of each violation constitutes a separate offense.
(Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Subd. 15. License suspension or revocation for excessive calls. An operating license for
individual rental dwelling units is subject to suspension or revocation by the City Council; (i) if there
have been four substantiated repeat nuisance service calls (as outlined in City code section 927) involving
the same tenancy within a continuous 12 month period, and (ii) the owner does not terminate the
tenancies of the responsible tenants as provided in subdivision 2(c) of section 425.32. (Added, Ord. No.
10-13)
425.32. Crime-free housing/excessive call violation notice and procedures. Subdivision 1. Notice.
Upon determination by the police department that a licensed rental dwelling was used in violation of the
crime free/drug free lease addendum provisions and/or excessive call provisions listed in sections 425.31,
subdivision 15, the police department shall cause written notice to be made to the owner of the
violation(s). The written notice must: (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(a) Identify the lease addendum violation(s) or the excessive calls that occurred at the
property, and the dates of any previous violation(s); (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(b) Inform the owner that owner shall notify the responsible tenant(s) within ten days of the
lease addendum violation(s) and/or the repeat nuisance service calls; (Added, Ord. No.
10-13)
(c) Direct the owner to proceed with the termination of the tenancy of all responsible tenants
occupying the units; and (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(d) Be served personally in the manner required by the Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure
or be served by U.S. Mail upon the owner and/or operator at the last known address.
(Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(e) Notify the owner of the right to appeal the lease addendum violation and/or the excessive
calls as further specified in subdivision 3 below. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.32, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2010)
Subd. 2. Crime-free housing violation and/or repeat nuisance service call license
suspension/revocation – termination of tenancy. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(a) Upon a violation of the crime free/drug free lease addendum, and/or excessive calls,
owners shall terminate tenancy of all responsible tenants occupying the unit in a
reasonable amount of time to account for applicable court proceedings and for other
considerations not to exceed 60 days. The owner shall not offer any unit within the City
for rent to any tenant removed under this paragraph for at least one year after the date of
removal. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(b) Owners shall notify the police in writing of tenant termination proceedings and provide
copies of any applicable documents within ten days of receiving initial notice of the
violation(s) from the police department. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(c) Any owner who fails to proceed with an action to terminate the tenancy after police
department notification in accordance with a crime free/drug free violation and/or
excessive calls shall be assessed an administrative fee (set forth in Appendix B) for each
calendar month that the owner fails to proceed. If after three months the responsible
tenant has not been evicted, the rental license(s) may be subject to suspension or
revocation by City Council. Owner's action to take appropriate measures, including a
failed eviction process, may be presented as a defense during the hearing. If the evidence
establishes that the owner initiated and pursued the eviction process in good faith, but
failed neither the fee nor a rental license sanction shall apply. If the City Manager is
satisfied that the owner proceeded in good faith to secure termination of the tenancy, but
was unsuccessful for reasons beyond the owners reasonable control, then the owner will
not be subject to the penalties contained in this paragraph as to such violation and/or
excessive calls. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Additional nuisance service fees as outlined in section 927 (repeat nuisance service calls) may
also be assessed to the property, if applicable. Any outstanding fees must be paid prior to the City
renewing a rental license for the licensed property. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.32, Subd. 3
(Rev. 2010)
Subd. 3. Crime-free housing/excessive call violation right to appeal lease addendum violation(s)
and/or right to appeal imposed service fees. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(a) The owner who received notice of the violation or imposed service fee must request a
hearing within ten business days of the mailing of the police department notice, excluding
the day the notice is mailed. The request for a hearing must be in writing and delivered
to the City Clerk. The hearing will occur within 14 days of the date of request. If the
owner fails to request a hearing within the time and in the manner required under this
section, the right to a hearing is waived. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(b) The hearing will be conducted by the City Manager in an informal manner. The
Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure and Rules of Evidence will not be strictly applied.
After considering all evidence submitted, the City Manager will make written Findings of
Fact and Conclusions regarding the excessive calls, lease addendum violation(s) and/or
imposed service fees. The City Manager will serve the Findings of Fact and Conclusions
upon the owner and/or operator by U.S. Mail within five business days of the hearing.
Upon a finding that a crime free housing violation and/or excessive calls have occurred,
the City Manager shall refer the matter to the City Council for consideration of
suspension or revocation of the license. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(c) If the appeal involves a request by the owner that it be excused from its obligation to
proceed with termination of the tenancy, and if the City Manager determines: (i) that it is
unlikely that an action to terminate the tenancy would be successful; and (ii) that the
expense of such action is not justified given the probable outcome, the owner will be
relieved from any further obligation under subdivision 2 as to the violation notice.
(Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(d) If the appeal involves a request by the owner that it be allowed to seek termination of the
tenancies of less than all of the responsible tenants, and the City Manager determines: (i)
that the responsible tenant(s) sought to be released from termination were not directly
involved in the conduct, (ii) that any non-tenant occupants of the same rental dwelling
involved in the conduct are no longer occupying the unit; and (iii) that the objective
sought to be served by termination would be achieved by granting owner's request, the
owner will be relieved from any obligation to terminate the tenancy of the responsible
tenants so released. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
(e) If the owner fails to appear at the scheduled hearing the right to a hearing is waived.
(Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Subd. 4. Crime-free housing recovery of fees. Any unpaid fees resulting from violations of
crime free housing requirements in sections 425.31, subdivision 4; 425.31, subdivision 5(b); or 425.32,
subdivision 2(c), may be collected by appropriate legal means. (Added, Ord. No. 10-13)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.33
(Rev. 2014)
425.33. Inspection and enforcement. Subdivision 1. Administration and enforcement. The enforcement
officer administers and enforces the provisions of the PMC and may cause inspections on rental dwelling
units on all classes of property within the City on a scheduled basis, whether on rental dwelling units or
owner-occupied residential units on all classes of property when reason exists to believe that a violation
of the code exists, has been or is being committed. The enforcement officer may cause inspections on
non-residential buildings and structures when reason exists to believe that a violation of the code exists,
has been or is being committed. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 14-02)
Subd. 2. Authority. In the absence of a timely appeal under the PMC or any other applicable
provision of law, the enforcement officer is the final authority in the determination of a violation under
the PMC. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 14-02)
Subd. 3. Inspection access. The occupant of any property must give the owner or operator
thereof, or agent or employee, access to any part of such building, or its premises, at reasonable times for
the purpose of effecting inspection, maintenance, repairs, or alterations as are necessary to comply with
the provisions of this section. If any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a building or related
premises fails or refuses to permit free access and entry to the structure or premises under control of that
person for an inspection pursuant to the PMC, the enforcement officer take appropriate legal action
including but not limited to the issuance of a citation and a court order authorizing such inspection.
(Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 14-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.33, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2014)
Subd. 4. Compliance order. Whenever the enforcement officer determines that any building,
dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, or the premises surrounding any of these, fails to meet the
provisions of the PMC, the officer may issue a compliance order setting forth the violations of the code
and ordering the owner, occupant, operator, and/or agent to correct such violations. The compliance
order must: (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 14-02)
(a) Be in writing;
(b) Describe the location and nature of the violations of the PMC; (Amended, Ord. No. 03-
06; Ord. No. 14-02)
(c) Establish a time for the correction of such violations;
(d) Include information regarding the owner's right to appeal the order and the procedure to
be followed in filing such an appeal pursuant to subsection 425.35;
(e) Be served upon the owner or owner’s agent or the occupant, as the case may require.
Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon any
such occupant, if a copy thereof is:
(1) Served personally, or
(2) Deposited in the U.S. Post Office addressed to the owner at owner’s last known
address with postage prepaid, or
(3) Upon failure to effect notice by personal service or by mail, posted at a
conspicuous place in or about the building or dwelling which is affected by the
notice. (Amended, Ord. No. 14-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.33, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2014)
Subd. 5. Emergency cases. When a violation of the PMC constitutes an imminent peril to life, health, or
property, the enforcement officer may specify an immediate and exact time for the correction of the
violation. When this is the case, no stay of proceedings in furtherance of action will be granted on appeal.
Situations which constitute an imminent peril to life, health, or property include, but are not limited to the
following: (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 14-02)
(a) Heating systems that are unsafe due to: burned out or rusted out heat exchanges (fire
box); burned out, or plugged flues; not being vented; being connected with unsafe gas
supplies; or being incapable of adequately heating the living space.
(b) Water heaters that are unsafe due to: burned out or rusted out heat exchanges (fire box);
burned out, rusted out, or plugged flues; lack of proper venting; being connected with
unsafe gas supplies; or lack of temperature and pressure relief valves.
(c) Electrical systems that are unsafe due to: dangerous overloading; damaged or
deteriorated equipment; improperly tapped or spliced wiring; improper or overloaded
fuses; expose uninsulated wires; distribution systems of extension cords or other
temporary methods; ungrounded appliances in a hazardous condition. If overloading is
suspected, the enforcement officer may require inspection and certification of all or part
of the electrical system by a state licensed electrician.
(d) Plumbing systems that are unsanitary due to: leaking waste systems fixtures and traps;
lack of a water closet; lack of washing and bathing facilities; or cross connection of pure
water supply with fixtures or sewage lines.
(e) Structural systems, walls, chimneys, ceilings, roofs, foundations, and floor systems, that
will not safely carry imposed loads.
(f) Refuse, garbage, human waste, decaying vermin or other dead animals, animal waste,
other materials rendering it unsanitary for human occupancy, including lack of light and
air.
(g) Infestation of rodents, insects, and other vermin.
(h) Lack of operational smoke detectors. (Added, Ord. No. 07-18)
Subd. 6. (Deleted, Ord. No. 07-18)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.33, Subd. 7
(Rev. 2003)
Subd. 7. Execution of compliance orders by public authority. Upon failure to comply with a
compliance order within the time set therein and no appeal having been taken, the criminal penalty
established hereunder notwithstanding, the City Council may by resolution direct the enforcement officer
to remedy the deficiency (deficiencies) cited in the compliance order. The cost of such remedy shall be a
lien against the subject real estate and may be levied and collected as a special assessment in the manner
provided by Minnesota Statutes, chapter 429. Such action will not be taken, however, without a good
faith effort on the part of the City to provide the property owner with advance notice of its intention to
proceed with repairs and assessment of the costs of repairs to taxes.
Subd. 8. Built-in deficiencies. Certain specific deficiencies may be deemed to be beyond
reasonable correction by the enforcement officer and therefore waived from meeting the requirements of
this section. Deficiencies which will be waived will be those that the enforcement officer finds to have
been in conformance with all existing applicable codes at the time that the work was done and that are not
causing adverse affects on the health or safety of the occupants of the unit. Other deficiencies which will
be waived from meeting the requirements of this section shall be limited to the following:
(a) Ceiling heights. Any existing habitable room with a ceiling height of between six feet six
inches to seven feet shall be considered a built-in deficiency which is beyond reasonable
correction.
(b) Superficial floor area. Any existing habitable room of less than 70 square feet shall be
considered a built-in deficiency and beyond reasonable correction.
(c) Natural light and ventilation. Any existing habitable room with window area less than
8% of the floor area shall be considered a built-in deficiency beyond reasonable
correction but in no case shall the required window area be less than 5% of the floor area,
or less than required for sleeping rooms by subsection 425.27.
(d) Entry doors. Any existing dwelling which does not have at least one doorway that is at
least 36 inches wide and at least 80 inches high, providing access to and egress from said
dwelling, shall be considered a built-in deficiency, provided there is at minimum, one
access/egress doorway is at least 32 inches wide and at least 80 inches high.
(e) Stairways. An existing stairway that does not meet the standards for maximum rise and
minimum run may be considered a built-in deficiency if it is not considered hazardous by
the enforcement officer.
(f) Landings. An existing stair landing that does not meet the minimum required length and
width of three feet may be considered a built in deficiency if it is not considered
hazardous by the enforcement officer. (Added, Ord. No. 03-06)
Robbinsdale City Code 425.33, Subd. 9
(Rev. 2018)
Subd. 9. Reinspection. At the end of the period allowed for the correction of a violation
specified in the compliance order, the enforcement officer may reinspect the premises to determine
whether those corrective actions have been sufficient to bring the violations into compliance. If the
premises are in substantial compliance with requirements of this section as of the time of the inspection or
reinspection, the enforcement officer may issue the license in accordance with the requirements of section
425.31. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06)
Subd. 10. Reinspection-non-compliance. If after the period allowed for compliance has elapsed,
the enforcement officer determines on the basis of a reinspection that the violation has not been corrected,
the enforcement officer may issue a citation or may file a formal complaint summoning the responsible
party into court. The citation shall reiterate the charge and the section(s) violated. The City may also
take action to correct violations under the provisions of subdivision 7. Fees for reinspection may apply as
outlined in appendix B. (Amended, Ord. 99-13)
Subd. 11. No warranty by City. By enacting and undertaking to enforce the PMC neither the
City nor its council, agents or employers warrant or guarantee the safety, fitness or suitability of any
building in the City, and any representation to the contrary by any person is a misdemeanor. Owners or
occupants should take whatever steps they deem appropriate to protect their interests, health, safety and
welfare. A warning in substantially the foregoing language shall be printed on the face of the rental
dwelling license. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 14-02)
Subd. 12. Administrative Fee. An administrative fee shall be due and payable by the property
owner for when a required rental inspection when more than 30 days has elapsed without a required rental
inspection during the inspections assigned month. This fee is in addition to any other fee or fine that may
result from uncorrected PMC violations. Fees shall be as established by Appendix B. (Added, Ord. No.
07-18; Ord. No. 14-02)
425.35. Appeals. Subdivision 1. Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by a compliance order may
appeal the compliance order to the City Council. Such appeals must be in writing, must specify the
grounds for the appeal, must be accompanied by a filing fee in cash or cashier's check, and must be filed
with the City Clerk within ten business days after service of the compliance order. The filing fee is set
forth in Appendix B. The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless such a stay would cause imminent peril to life, health, property or public safety.
(Amended, Ord. No. 2018-02)
Subd. 2. Board of appeals decision. Upon at least five business days notice to the appellant of
the time and place for hearing the appeal, and within 30 days after said appeal is filed, the City Council
must hold a hearing thereon, at which the applicant may appear and present evidence as to why the
compliance order, or any portion thereof, should not be issued. The City Council may reverse, modify or
affirm, in whole or in part, the compliance order and shall order return of all or part of the filing fee if the
appeal is upheld. The City Council may postpone a meeting and hold hearing at a later date, not to
exceed 60 days after the appeal is filed, when it is necessary to do so.
Robbinsdale City Code 425.37
(Rev. 2014)
425.37. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with a compliance order within the time limits
specified therein and any person who violates any of the provisions of the PMC by doing any act or
omitting to do any act which constitutes a breach of any section of the PMC shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine or imprisonment, and may be subject to
administrative penalties and civil action as prescribed by state law and city code. Each day of such failure
to comply constitutes a separate offense. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-06; Ord. No. 14-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 430.01 (Rev. 2008)
Section 430 – Graffiti
(Added, Ord. No. 08-11)
430.01. Findings and purpose. Subdivision 1. The Robbinsdale city council is enacting this section to help
prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for the removal of graffiti from public
and private property.
Subd. 2. The city council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and destructive of the rights and
values of property owners as well as the entire community. Graffiti perpetrators are often associated with
other criminal activities, including violent crimes. Unless the city acts to remove graffiti from public and
private property, the graffiti tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti and entire
neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the
city.
Subd. 3. The city council intends, through the adoption of this section, to provide additional
enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement of
public and private property. The council does not intend for this chapter to conflict with any existing
anti-graffiti state laws or “criminal damage to property” laws.
430.03. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the terms defined in this subsection have the
meanings given them.
“Aerosol paint container” means any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the purpose of applying
spray paint or other substances capable of defacing property.
“Broad-tipped marker” means any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement with a flat or angled
writing surface that, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth of an inch, containing ink or other
pigmented liquid that is not water soluble.
“Etching equipment” means any tool, device, or substance that can be used to make permanent marks on
any natural or man-made surface.
“Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting, symbol, or other defacement that is
written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any
surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not
authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property, or despite advance authorizations
otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the city council.
“Graffiti implement” means an aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick or
graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark
on any natural or man-made surface.
“Paint stick or graffiti stick” means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or
other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least
one-fourth of an inch in width.
“Person” means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal
representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.
430.05. Prohibited acts. Subdivision 1. Defacement. It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to
any natural or human-made surface on any publicly owned property or, without the permission of the
owner or occupant, on any privately owned property.
Robbinsdale City Code 430.05, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2008)
Subd. 2. Possession of graffiti implements. Unless otherwise authorized by the owner or
occupant, it is unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement while:
(a) Within 200 feet of any graffiti located in or on a public facility, park, playground,
swimming pool, recreational facility, bridge, or other public building or structure owned
or operated by a governmental agency; or
(b) Within 200 feet of any graffiti located in any public place or on private property, between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
Subd. 3. Minors at or near school facilities. It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years
to possess any graffiti implement while on or in any school property, grounds, facilities, buildings, or
structures, or in areas immediately adjacent to those specific locations upon public property, or upon private
property without the prior written consent of the owner or occupant of such private property. The provision
of this subsection does not apply to the possession of broad-tipped markers by a minor attending or traveling
to or from a school at which the minor is enrolled if the minor is participating in a class at the school that
formally requires the possession of broad-tipped markers. The burden of proof in any prosecution for
violation of this subsection is upon the minor student to establish the need to possess a broad-tipped marker.
430.07. Graffiti as nuisance. Subdivision 1. Declaration. The existence of graffiti on public or private
property in violation of this chapter is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and, therefore, is subject to
the removal and abatement provisions specified in this chapter.
Subd. 2. Duty of property owner. It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the
graffiti has been applied and any person who may be in possession or who has the right to possess such
property to at all times keep the property clear of graffiti.
Subd. 3. Repeat violations. If a property is subject to three or more occurrences of graffiti within
a year, application of anti-graffiti material of a type and nature that is acceptable to the city may be
required for each of the publicly viewable surfaces after notification by the city, or imposed during
improvements or construction activities to the site as determined by the city.
430.09. Removal of graffiti. Subdivision 1. By perpetrator. The city may require any person applying
graffiti on public or private property to either remove or pay for all costs for removal of the graffiti within
24 hours after notice by the city or property owner. The removal must be performed in a manner
prescribed by the city, with materials and colors compatible with existing surfaces, and to a comparable or
improved condition before the graffiti application as determined by the city. Where graffiti is applied by
a person under 18 years old, the parents or legal guardian will also be responsible for such removal or for
payment for the costs of removal. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal will
constitute an additional violation of this chapter.
Subd. 2. By property owner or city. In lieu of the procedure set forth in subdivision 1, the city
may order that the graffiti be removed by the property owner or any person who may be in possession or
who has the right to possess such property, pursuant to the nuisance abatement procedure herein. Graffiti
removal and corrections must be performed with materials and colors compatible with existing surfaces as
determined by the city. If the property owner or responsible party fails to remove offending graffiti
within the time specified by the city, the city may commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings
for the graffiti removal in accordance with this section.
Robbinsdale City Code 430.09, Subd. 3
(Rev. 2008)
Subd. 3. Right of entry on private property. Prior to entering upon private property or property
owned by a public entity other than the city for the purpose of graffiti removal, the city must attempt to
secure the consent of the property owner or responsible party and a release of the city from liability for
property damage or personal injury. If the responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within
the time specified by this section, or if the city has requested consent to remove or paint over the
offending graffiti and the property owner or responsible party has refused consent for entry on terms
acceptable to the city and consistent with the terms of this section, the city will commence abatement and
cost recovery proceedings for the graffiti removal according to the provisions specified below.
430.11. Abatement procedure. Subdivision 1. Abatement by city. If the owner, occupant, or other
responsible party does not comply with the notice within the time specified, the city may abate the public
nuisance.
Subd. 2. Notice and hearing. The following notification must be conducted prior to city
abatement of the public nuisance. Whenever it is determined that a public nuisance is being maintained
or exists on a property, the city manager or authorized designee must give ten days’ written notice
through service by mail, by posting a notice on the property, or by personal delivery to the owner of or
person in control of the property on which the public nuisance is located. When the property is occupied,
service upon the occupant is deemed service upon the owner. Where the property is unoccupied or
abandoned, service may be by mail to the last known owner of record of the property or by posting on the
property and upon all lienholders of record if so required by state law. The notice must state:
(a) A description of the public nuisance;
(b) That the public nuisance must be corrected within ten days of the service of the notice;
(c) That if the public nuisance is not properly removed or corrected as ordered, the public
nuisance will be abated by the city and the costs of abatement will be specially assessed to
the property taxes; and
(d) That the owner of or person in control of the property on which the public nuisance is
located may in writing request a hearing before the city manager or authorized designee.
Subd. 3. Hearing, action. If a hearing is requested during the ten-day period, the city manager or
authorized designee must promptly schedule the hearing, and no further action on the abatement of the
public nuisance may be taken until the city manager’s decision is rendered. The property owner or
responsible party may present evidence and argue the property does not constitute a public nuisance. At the
conclusion of the scheduled hearing, the city manager or authorized designee may cancel the notice to
remove or correct the public nuisance, modify the notice, or affirm the notice to remove or correct the public
nuisance. If the notice is modified or affirmed, the public nuisance must be disposed of in accordance with
the city’s written order. Any written order shall be served upon the property owner or responsible party in
the same manner as set forth in subsection 430.11, subdivision 2.
Subd. 4. Use of public funds. Whenever the city becomes aware or is notified and determines that
graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned property viewable from a public or quasi-public place, the
city is authorized to use public funds for the removal of the graffiti, or for the painting or repairing of the
graffiti, but will not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive an
area than that where the graffiti is located, unless the city manager or the designee of the city manager
determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an
aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the property owner or responsible
party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area.
Robbinsdale City Code 430.13 (Rev. 2008)
430.13. Summary abatement. Subdivision 1. The enforcing officer may provide for abating a public
nuisance without following the procedure required in subsection 431.11, subdivisions 2 and 3 when:
(a) There is an immediate threat to the public health or safety;
(b) There is an immediate threat of serious property damage;
(c) A public nuisance has been caused by private parties on public property; or
(d) Any other condition exists that violates state or local law and that is a public health or
safety hazard.
Subd. 2. A reasonable attempt must be made to notify the owner, occupant, or other responsible
party of the intended action and the right to appeal the abatement and cost recovery at the next regularly
scheduled city council meeting.
Subd. 3. Right of entry on private property. For summary abatement proceedings, the city may
enter upon private property or property owned by a public entity other than the city and commence
abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the graffiti removal.
430.15. Cost recovery. Subdivision 1. The owner of property on which a nuisance has been abated by
the city, or a person who has caused a public nuisance on property not owned by that person, is personally
liable to the city for the cost of the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has
been completed and the cost determined, city staff will prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner
or other responsible party. The amount is immediately due and payable to the city.
Subd. 2. Assessment. If the cost, or any portion of it, has not been paid within 30 days after the
date of the bill, the council may certify the unpaid cost against the property to which the cost is
attributable in accordance with the process set forth in subsection 2021.01, subdivision 3 of this code.
430.17. Penalties. Subdivision 1. Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable in
accordance with state law.
Subd. 2. Any violation of this section may be subject to civil penalties in accordance with section
306 of this code.
Subd. 3. Minors. In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian is jointly and severely
liable with the minor for payment of all fines. Failure of the parents or legal guardian to make payment
will result in the filing of a lien on the parents’ or legal guardian’s property that includes the fine and
administrative costs.
Subd. 4. This chapter is not intended to prohibit a private property owner from seeking additional
penalties or remedies.
Robbinsdale City Code 435.01 (Rev. 2008)
Section 435 – Point of Sale Housing Disclosure
(Added, Ord. No. 08-15)
435.01. Purpose. The City of Robbinsdale has determined that it is in the interest of protecting the public
health, safety and welfare to maintain, preserve and improve residential housing by requiring the disclosure
of housing information and defects as a condition of the sale of housing. The City Building Official may
use this information to require the correction of code violations.
435.02. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
below:
Subd. 1. “Building Official” is the building official of the city of Robbinsdale.
Subd. 2. “Buyer” is a person who acquires real estate by means other than descent or inheritance
and usually for money or the equivalent.
Subd. 3. “Certified evaluator” is an individual who holds a current certified evaluator license as
issued by the city of Robbinsdale.
Subd. 4. “Owner” is a person who owns, occupies or operates by deed or other instrument of
conveyance any premises; the term includes a person employed for the purpose of selling or otherwise
conveying or managing such premises, including a guardian, administrator, executor, trustee or other
agency acting on behalf of the owner; the term includes a person or committee supervising, policing or
maintaining any cooperative or other common building area, dwelling units, or any condominium unit
owners association.
Subd. 5. “Purchase agreement” is an agreement, deed, contract for deed or any other instrument
of transfer or conveyance of residential premises; the term does not include the transfer of a document
made solely for perfecting title.
Subd. 6. “Point of sale” is the time when a written agreement is executed by the buyer, or, in the
absence of a purchase agreement, prior to the execution of any document providing for the conveyance of
any condominium or townhouse or any building containing one, two or three dwelling units.
Subd. 7. “Point of sale disclosure report” consists of forms provided by the city of Robbinsdale
that provide information concerning code requirements applicable to existing condominiums or
townhouses or any building containing one, two or three dwelling units and the disclosures referenced in
this section.
435.03. Applicability. This section shall not apply to any newly constructed housing or residential
building when the title is conveyed to:
(a) The first owner, except that no owner shall convey or contract to convey a newly
constructed housing unit or residential building without first providing to the buyer:
(1) A list of names, addresses and telephone numbers of all contractors and
subcontractors who constructed the building.
(2) The items referred to in section 430.07, subdivision 2D of the disclosure report.
(b) A federal, state or local governmental unit when the title is transferred to the first owner
following construction.
Robbinsdale City Code 435.04 (Rev. 2018)
(c) For one year from the date of the final inspection or certificate of occupancy of a newly
constructed condominium, townhouse or any building or structure containing one, two or
three dwelling units.
(d) From an owner to a relative. For purposes of this exception, relatives shall be defined as a
husband, wife, father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, grandson, granddaughter,
grandfather or grandmother.
435.04. License. Subdivision 1. No person shall fill out a point of sale disclosure report in the city without
having a valid license. The city will only approve people as certified evaluators who are licensed as point of
sale evaluators in Bloomington, Minneapolis or St. Paul. The evaluators must submit a copy of their point
of sale license and any certification papers to the city from the City of Bloomington, the City of Minneapolis
or the city of St. Paul. Every certified evaluator who works in the city must have a city license. The city
will automatically revoke or cancel a certified evaluator’s license if it is revoked or cancelled for violation of
law or violation of the certified evaluator’s code of ethics in either Minneapolis or St. Paul. The city may
require the passing of a test that shows the evaluator’s knowledge of the housing code. The city may then
issue a license which is valid for one year. The city may issue renewals of all such licenses. If a license
lapses for one year or more, the person who held such license shall reapply to the city for renewal. No
holder of a license or license from the city for a certified evaluator shall allow another person to use such
license.
Subd. 2. The City Council may revoke the license of a certified evaluator for cause. At least ten
days before the hearing, the city shall send written notification to the mailing address used in the
evaluator’s application. The notice shall list the date, time and place of the hearing and of the specific
reasons for the suspension. The city manager may, at the manager’s discretion, suspend the license of a
housing evaluator pending a suspension hearing.
435.05. Insurance. Subdivision 1. No license shall be issued or renewed without satisfactory proof of
insurance insuring the evaluator.
(a) The city shall be included as a named insured on the required insurance, and any
additional cost for including the city shall be at the expense of the evaluator.
(b) The evaluator’s insurance shall remain in force continuously thereafter, and no license shall
be deemed to be in effect during any period of time when such insurance and proof thereof
are not also in effect.
(c) Each evaluator shall have an individually named insurance policy.
(d) The insurance policy shall provide coverage of not less than $250,000.00 per claim and
$500,000.00 per year, aggregate, against any and all liability imposed by law resulting from
the performance of the duties as a certified point of sale evaluator.
435.06. Housing evaluation fees. The fee for the filing of point of sale disclosure reports shall be set
forth in Appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No. 2018-02)
435.07. Disclosure report. Subdivision 1. An owner shall not show a housing unit or residential building
to a prospective buyer without publicly displaying and making available a point of sale disclosure report.
This report shall be at the housing unit or residential building at the time of showing and within three days
of listing. A copy of the disclosure report must be filed within 15 days with the city to be valid. A double
filing fee shall be collected by the city if the report is not filed within 15 days.
Subd. 2. A point of sale disclosure report shall be on forms provided by the City. It shall include
the following:
Robbinsdale City Code 435.07, Subd. 2 (a)
(Rev. 2008)
(a) An evaluation by the certified evaluator providing information concerning code
requirements applicable to existing condominiums or townhouses or any building
containing one, two or three dwelling units and the disclosures referenced in this section.
This evaluation shall include, but not be limited to, items addressed in the Point of Sale
Uniform Guidelines which are periodically updated and adopted by the City Council by
resolution.
(b) For each area of the dwelling evaluated, the certified evaluator shall categorize the
condition of the area and provide additional explanation in the comment section for all of
the following:
(1) Meets city requirements.
(2) Below city requirements.
(3) Repair/replace items shall be deemed to pose an immediate danger to the health
and safety of the occupant.
(4) Suggested correction shall mean an optional repair that should be disclosed to the
buyer.
(5) Not applicable.
(6) Comments providing additional information as to the item of concern, location and
source cause, if known.
(7) Not visible/not able to view.
(c) The form shall include a signed disclosure by the certified evaluator indicating whether or
not there are housing orders pending on the property issued by the building department.
(d) The form shall include the following signed disclosures by the owner acknowledging:
(1) Any damage to the building or its contents by flooding or sewer backup and any
evidence of chronic water seepage of which the owner has knowledge.
(2) The nature, extent and cause of any water seepage or flooding of any portion of the
property.
(3) Any abandoned, unused or uncapped wells.
(4) Any discharge of storm water, ground water, roof runoff, yard drainage, foundation
drains, or sump pumps into the sanitary sewer.
(5) Whether or not there are any pending housing or rental inspection orders from the
city about the property.
(6) Any other known defects or problems that are not visible.
435.08. Limitations. Subdivision 1. In making an evaluation pursuant to this section, the certified
evaluator shall consider any concealed facilities to be adequate. The evaluator shall base the evaluation on
the functional operation of the facility and the condition of the equipment that is viewed. No other warrant
is expressed or implied.
Robbinsdale City Code 435.08, Subd. 2 (Rev. 2014)
Subd. 2. No one shall consider anything in a point of sale disclosure report to imply that a
residential building or housing unit meets all minimum building standards. In addition, no one shall
consider anything in the report to imply a warrant of the condition of the housing evaluated. The certified
evaluator warrants that they have used reasonable care and diligence in inspecting and evaluating the
building.
435.09. Mandatory correction of repair/replacement items. Items shall be identified by the certified
evaluator as repair/replace and be marked as such in the point of sale disclosure report as referred to in the
Point of Sale Uniform Guidelines.
435.10. Correction of repair/replace items. Subdivision 1. The owner shall promptly correct all items
marked as repair/replace by the certified evaluator. The owner shall obtain all necessary permits from the
city and the premises shall be subject to inspection by the building official prior to sale and occupancy of
the dwelling. If there are no items marked as repair/replace or when all items marked repair/replace have
been corrected, and inspected by the building official, the city will issue a certificate that will serve as
proof of compliance with the section.
Subd. 2. The buyer, designated in a purchase agreement, may elect to correct the items marked as
repair/replace in the point of sale disclosure report. Such corrections may be undertaken by a buyer only
upon the written consent of the building official and subject to such terms and conditions, including, but
not limited to, conditions related to occupancy, as may be required by the building official.
Such terms shall include but are not limited to a signed agreement on behalf of the city from the
buyer accepting the responsibility of correction of the repair/replace items, reasonable completion dates
acceptable to the city and financial evidence of ability to perform the corrections.
Subd. 3. Appeals of the point of sale disclosure reports. An owner or buyer aggrieved by a point of
sale disclosure report may appeal from the action of the certified evaluator to the city manager who shall
make a ruling on the appeal.
435.11. Violations. Any person failing to meet and follow the requirements of this section shall be subject
to an administrative penalty in accordance with section 117 of the Robbinsdale City Code. (Amended, Ord.
No. 14-16)
Robbinsdale City Code 440.01
Section 440 – Erosion, Sedimentation, and Waste Control Regulations
for Land-Disturbing Activities
(Added, Ord. No. 16-02)
440.01. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote, preserve and enhance the natural resources
within the city and provide protection from adverse impacts caused by erosion and poor sediment control by
regulating land disturbances or development activities that would have an adverse and potentially
irreversible impact on water quality and unique and fragile environmentally sensitive land; by minimizing
conflicts and encouraging compatibility between land disturbances, development activities, water quality
and environmentally sensitive lands; and by requiring review standards and procedures.
440.03. Applicability. Every applicant seeking a permit to allow land disturbing activities of one acre or
greater shall submit a stormwater pollution prevention plan to the city engineer. No building permit,
subdivision approval or development permit to allow land disturbing activities may be issued until approval
of the stormwater pollution prevention plan or a waiver of the approval requirement has been obtained in
strict conformance with the provisions of this section.
440.05. Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to:
(a) Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved by the city on or before
the effective date of this section;
(b) A lot for which a building permit has been approved on or before the effective date of this
section;
(c) Installation of fence, sign, telephone, cable television, electric poles and other kinds of posts or
poles, utility lines or service connections to these utilities which result in creating under one acre of exposed
soil;
(d) Any activity that disturbs less than one acre of land; however, projects less than one acre that are
part of a larger common plan of development or sale are not exempt;
(e) Emergency work to protect life, limb or property; or
(f) Routine agricultural or silvicultural activity.
440.07. Definitions. Subdivision 1. The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this section, are
defined as follows:
Subd. 2. “Best management practices” (BMPs) means erosion and sediment control and water
quality management practices that are the most effective and practicable means of controlling, preventing,
and minimizing degradation of surface water, including avoidance of impacts, construction-phasing,
minimizing the length of time soil areas are exposed, prohibitions, and other management practices
published by state or city.
Subd 3. “CGP” means the MPCA’s current NPDES Construction General Permit.
Subd. 4. “Erosion prevention” means measures employed to prevent erosion including but not
limited to: soil stabilization practices, limited grading, mulch, temporary or permanent cover, and
construction phasing.
Subd. 5. “Impervious surface” means a constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards the
entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increased
rate of flow than prior to development.
Robbinsdale City Code 440.07, Subd. 6
Subd. 6. “Land disturbing activity” means any land change that may result in soil erosion from
water or wind and the movement of sediments into or upon waters or lands within this government’s
jurisdiction, including clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land.
Subd. 7. “MPCA” means the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
Subd. 8. “National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES)” is defined in Minn. R.
7077.0105.
Subd. 9. “Owner” means the person or party possessing the title of the land on which the
construction activities will occur; or if the construction activity is for a lease holder, the party or individual
identified as the lease holder; or the contracting government agency responsible for the construction activity.
Subd. 10. “Permanent cover” means final stabilization.
Subd. 11. “Saturated soil” means the highest seasonal elevation in the soil that is in a reduced
chemical state because of soil voids being filled with water. Saturated soil is evidenced by the presence of
redoximorphic features or other information.
Subd. 12. “Sediment control” means methods employed to prevent sediment from leaving the site.
Sediment control practices include silt fences, sediment traps, earth dikes, drainage swales, check dams,
subsurface drains, pipe slope drains, storm drain inlet protection, and temporary or permanent sedimentation
basins.
Subd. 13. “Stabilized” means the exposed ground surface has been covered by appropriate materials
such as mulch, staked sod, riprap, wood fiber blanket, or other material that prevents erosion from
occurring. Grass seeding is not considered stabilization.
Subd. 14. “Stormwater” is defined in Minn. R. 7077.0105.
Subd. 15. “Stormwater pollution prevention plan” means a plan for stormwater discharge that
includes erosion prevention measures and sediment controls that, when implemented, will minimize soil
erosion on a parcel of land and minimize off-site nonpoint pollution to the maximum extent practicable.
Subd. 16. “Surface water or waters” means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, wetlands, reservoirs,
springs, rivers, drainage systems, waterways, watercourses, and irrigation systems whether natural or
artificial, public or private.
Subd. 17. “Waters of the state” is defined in Minn. Stat. § 115.01.
Subd. 18. “Wetland” or “wetlands” is defined in Minn. R. 7050.0186.
440.09. Stormwater pollution prevention plan submittal procedures. In accordance with subsection 440.03,
a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan must be submitted with any permit application to the zoning
administrator in accordance with the requirements and approval standards outlined in subsections 440.11
and 440.13. Prior to applying for approval of a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, an applicant may
have the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan reviewed by the appropriate departments of the city. Prior to
receiving the necessary permit, the applicant may waive the right to a hearing for any assessments added to
the property if failure to conduct the necessary work outlined in the approved Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan or minimum requirements of this section, or both, are not conducted by the applicant during
the project as outlined in subsection 440.19, subd. 4.
440.11 Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements. At a minimum, the Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan shall contain the following information:
Robbinsdale City Code 440.11, Subd. 1
Subdivision 1. Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions showing the site and
immediately adjacent areas, including:
(a) The name and address of the applicant, the section, township and range, north point, date and
scale of drawing and number of sheets.
(b) Location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to clearly identify the location of the
property and giving such information as the names and numbers of adjoining roads, railroads, utilities,
subdivision, towns and districts or other landmarks;
(c) Existing topography with a contour interval no greater than two feet;
(d) A delineation of all streams, rivers, public waters and wetlands located on, immediately
adjacent, and within one-half mile downstream of the site or as requested by the city. The delineation should
include depth of water, a description of vegetation which may be found in the water, a statement of general
water quality and any classification given to the water body or wetland by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources, or the MPCA, or the United States Army Corps of Engineers, or all;
(e) Location and dimensions of existing stormwater drainage systems and natural drainage patterns
on and immediately adjacent to the site delineating in which direction and at what rate stormwater is
conveyed from the site, identifying the receiving stream, river, public water, or wetland, and setting forth
those areas of the unaltered site where stormwater collects;
(f) A description of the soils of the site, including a map indicating soil types of areas to be
disturbed as well as a soil report containing information on the suitability of the soils for the type of
development proposed and for the type of sewage disposal proposed and describing any remedial steps to be
taken by the developer to render the soils suitable;
(g) Vegetative cover and clearly delineating any vegetation proposed for removal; and
(h) 100 year floodplain, flood fringes and floodways.
Subd. 2. Site construction plan.
(a) Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing activities;
(b) Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt stockpiles;
(c) Locations and dimensions of all construction site erosion control measures and BMPs necessary
to meet the requirements of this section;
(d) A detailed schedule indicating dates and sequence of land alteration activities; implementation,
maintenance and removal of erosion and sedimentation control measures; and permanent site stabilization
measures; and
(e) A detailed description of how erosion control, sediment control and soil stabilization measures
implemented pursuant to the plan will be monitored, maintained and removed.
Subd. 3. Plan of final site conditions.
(a) Finished grading shown at two foot contour intervals or as required to clearly indicate the
relationship of proposed changes to existing topography and remaining features;
Robbinsdale City Code 440.11, Subd. 3 (b)
(b) A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, including dimensions and distances and the
location, type, size and description of all proposed landscape materials which will be added to the site as
part of the development;
(c) A drainage plan of the developed site delineating in which direction and at what rate stormwater
will be conveyed from the site and setting forth the areas of the site where stormwater will be allowed to
collect;
(d) The proposed size, alignments and intended use of any structures to be erected on the site;
(e) A clear delineation and tabulation of the change in impervious surface areas, including a
description of the surfacing material to be used;
(f) Proof of permit coverage under the MPCA’s general permit to discharge stormwater with
construction activity (No. MN R100001); and
(g) Any other information pertinent to the particular project which in the opinion of the applicant is
necessary for the review of the project.
440.13. Stormwater pollution prevention plan approval standards. In order to be approved by the city, a
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan must be at least as stringent as the MPCA’s general permit to
Discharge Stormwater Associated with Construction Activity No. MN R100001 for erosion, sediment, and
waste controls as follows:
(a) BMPs to minimize erosion (Part IV.B and provisions of Appendix A (when applicable) of the
CGP)
(b) BMPs to minimize the discharge of sediment and other pollutants (Part IV.C of the CGP)
(c) BMPs for dewatering activities (Part IV.D of the CGP)
(d) Site inspections and records of rainfall events (Part IV.E of the CGP)
(e) BMPs maintenance (Part IV.E of the CGP)
(f) Management of solid and hazardous wastes on each project site (Part IV.F of the CGP)
(g) Final stabilization upon the completion of construction activity, including the use of perennial
vegetative cover on all exposed soils or other equivalent means (Part IV.G of the CGP)
(h) Criteria for the use of temporary sediment basins (Part III.C and provisions of Appendix A
(when applicable) of the CGP)
440.15. Stormwater pollution prevention plan review procedures. Subdivision 1. Process. Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plans meeting the requirements of subsections 440.11 and 440.13 must be approved by
the city engineer or designated representative in accordance with the standards of this section.
Subd. 2. Duration. Plan approval will expire one year after the date of approval unless construction
has commenced in accordance with the plan. However, if prior to the expiration of the approval, the
applicant makes a written request to the city engineer for an extension of time to commence construction
setting forth the reasons for the requested extension, the city may grant one extension of not greater than one
year. Receipt of any request for extension shall be acknowledged by the city engineer within 15 days. The
city engineer shall make a decision on the extension within 45 days of receipt. Any plan may be revised in
the same manner as originally approved.
Robbinsdale City Code 440.15, Subd. 3
Subd. 3. Condition. A Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan may be approved subject to
compliance with conditions reasonable and necessary to insure that the requirements of this section are met.
Conditions may limit the size, kind or character of the proposed development, require the construction of
structures, drainage facilities, storage basins and other facilities, require replacement of vegetation, establish
required monitoring procedures, stage the work over time, require alteration of the site design to insure
buffering and require the conveyance to the city or other public entity of necessary lands or easements.
440.17. Notification and inspection. The applicant or its authorized agent shall notify the city at the
following points during the project:
(a) On completing installation of perimeter erosion and sedimentation controls;
(b) On completing land-disturbing activities and putting into place measures for final soil
stabilization and revegetation;
(c) When the site has been permanently stabilized and revegetated; and
(d) When all temporary erosion and sedimentation controls have been removed from the site.
440.19. Right of entry and inspection; noncompliance procedures. Subdivision 1. Right of entry and
inspection. The applicant shall allow the city and its authorized representatives, upon presentation of
credentials to:
(a) Enter upon the permitted site for the purpose of obtaining information, examination of records,
conducting investigations or surveys;
(b) Bring such equipment on to the permitted development as is necessary to conduct such surveys
and investigations;
(c) Examine and copy any books, papers, records, or memoranda pertaining to activities or records
required to be kept under the terms and conditions of the permitted site;
(d) Inspect the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan measures required by the city; and
(e) Sample and monitor any items or activities pertaining to any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions.
Subd. 2. Notice of noncompliance. In the event work does not conform to the approved Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan or requirements listed in this section, the city engineer or authorized
representative shall issue a written notice of noncompliance to the applicant detailing the corrective actions
necessary for compliance. The applicant shall conduct the corrective actions within the time period
determined by the city. If an imminent hazard exists, the city may require that the corrective work begin
immediately.
Subd. 3. Stop inspection. If corrective actions identified in the notice of noncompliance are not
completed by the time period determined by the city, the city engineer or authorized representative shall
stop all inspections required for land use or building permit approvals until all corrective actions identified
in the notice of noncompliance are completed. The applicant shall notify the city engineer or authorized
representative upon completion of the corrective action and the city shall resume inspections on the
permitted property no later than the following business day.
Robbinsdale City Code 440.19, Subd. 3
Subd. 4. Special assessment. If corrective action is not taken within 14 working days after the city
stops all inspections required for land use or building permit approvals, the city may conduct the necessary
work to bring the site into compliance with this section and the approved Stormwater Pollution Prevention
Plan. The city may assess the cost of completing the necessary work against the affected property.
440.21. Enforcement. Subdivision 1. Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation failing to comply with or
violating any term of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. The city may also suspend any land use or building permits until the land
owner has corrected the violation.
Subd. 2. Where this section imposes greater restrictions than other ordinances of the city or
provisions of this code, this section shall prevail. All other ordinances of the city inconsistent with this
section are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
440.23. Prevailing. This section shall be interpreted to comply with the requirements of MPCA’s current
NPDES Construction General Permit. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to be less stringent than
MPCA’s current NPDES Construction General Permit.
(Added Ord. No. 16-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 500.01
CHAPTER V
PLANNING AND LAND USE REGULATION
Section 500 - Subdivision Regulations
500.01. Title
500.03. Policy
500.05. Restrictions
500.07. Conflicts
500.09. Definitions
500.11. Procedures
500.13. Procedural exceptions
500.15. Sketch plats
500.17. Preliminary plats
500.19. Final plats
500.21. Required improvements
500.23. Improvements; bond
500.25. Improvements; completion
500.27. Land dedication, easements, and covenants
500.29. Dedication; park and recreation areas
500.31. Dedication; payments in lieu
500.33. Dedication; waiver
500.35. Plats; restrictive covenants
500.37. Plats; design standards
500.39. Variances; appeals; procedures
500.41. Variances; review and approval
500.43. Variances; findings
500.45. Actions; recommendations
500.47. Amendments
500.49. Fees required
500.51. Fees; payment
500.53. Fees; refunds
500.55. Enforcement and penalties
Robbinsdale City Code 500.01
500.01. Title. This section may be cited and referred to as the Robbinsdale Subdivision Regulations.
500.03. Policy. Subdivision 1. Purpose. The city finds that regulation of the subdivision of real property
in the city is necessary for the following purposes:
(a) to insure the orderly, economic, and safe development of land in the city;
(b) to insure the adequate and timely provision of urban services and facilities; and
(c) to protect and promote the public health, safety, and welfare.
Subd. 2. Scope. This section is adopted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, chapter 462. A proposed
subdivision of property in the city must be submitted to the city for review and approval before being filed
for record with the appropriate county officer as defined in this section. The provisions of this section apply
to property or a project to which the Minnesota Condominium Law, Minnesota Statutes, chapter 515
applies.
500.05. Restrictions. Subdivision 1. General rule. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly convey land
or to attempt to file for record a conveyance of land with the appropriate county officer which is described
by metes and bounds, or by reference to an unapproved subdivision plat or by reference to an unapproved
registered land survey made after April 21, 1961 unless otherwise authorized by this section or approved by
the council. This provision does not apply to a conveyance of land that:
(a) was a separate parcel of record August 28, 1972;
(b) was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered into prior to that date;
(c) was a separate parcel of land not less than two and one-half acres in area and 150 feet in
width on January 1, 1966;
(d) was a separate parcel of not less than five acres in area and 300 feet in width on July 1,
1980;
(e) is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of not less than five acres and having a
width of not less than 300 feet and its conveyance does not result in the division of the
parcel into two or more parcels, any one of which is less than five acres in area or 300 feet
in width; or
Robbinsdale City Code 500.05, Subd. 2
(f) is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land of not less than 20 acres and having a
width of not less than 500 feet and its conveyance does not result in the division of the
parcel into two or more lots or parcels, any one of which is less than 20 acres in area or 500
feet in width.
Subd. 2. Building permits. A building permit or other permit will not be issued by the city for
construction of a building, structure, or other improvement to land located in the city unless the
requirements of this section have been complied with.
Subd. 3. Taxes. A proposed subdivision of land will not be considered by the city unless past due
taxes and special assessments thereon shall have been paid in full.
Subd. 4. Flood hazard. Land will not be subdivided where it is determined by the council that the
land is unsuitable for development because of flood hazard unless corrective measures consistent with the
zoning code can be accomplished.
Subd. 5. Additional conditions. The city council may impose additional conditions on subdivisions
where deemed necessary for the protection and promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare.
500.07. Conflicts. Where requirements imposed by this section are either more or less restrictive than
comparable requirements imposed by other pertinent laws, ordinances, statutes, or regulations, the
regulations that are more restrictive or impose higher standards govern.
500.09. Definitions. Subdivision 1. For the purposes of this section the terms defined in this subsection
have the meanings given them.
Subd. 2. "Alley" means public or private right-of-way designed to serve primarily as a means of
secondary access to the side or rear of adjacent properties whose principal frontage is on a street.
Subd. 3. "Applicant" means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or the owner's designated
representative. Where the applicant is not the owner of the land the written consent of the owner is required,
accompanied by a statement of the representative's legal interest, if any, in the land.
Subd. 4. "Appropriate county officer" means the county recorder of Hennepin County or the
registrar of titles of Hennepin County as the case may be.
Subd. 5. "Block" means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets,
railroads, waterways, other natural barriers, the exterior boundary of the subdivision or any combination of
the preceding.
Subd. 6. "Building" means any structure which is built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, or chattels.
Robbinsdale City Code 500.09, Subd. 7
Subd. 7. "Comprehensive plan" means the formally adopted comprehensive development plan of
the city, composed of maps, charts, diagrams, and text describing and explaining the recommended policies
and programs to guide the city's future development and redevelopment.
Subd. 8. "Director" means the person designated by the city manager to administer this section.
Subd. 9. "Easement" means a grant by a property owner to either the public or another individual
for the use of a portion of the owner's property for certain specified purposes (e.g., drives, utilities, etc.).
Subd. 10. "Lot" means the smallest unit of land created by a subdivision that meets minimal
requirements of both this section and the zoning code: each lot is individually depicted and numbered on
the subdivision plat.
Subd. 11. "Lot split" means the subdivision of an existing lot of record: this may include creating
new lots for building purposes or dividing a lot for combination with existing, adjacent, lots of record.
Subd. 12. "Parcel" means a unit of land of whatever legal description or size.
Subd. 13. "Parcel of record" means a unit of land of whatever legal description or size that is
recorded with the appropriate county officer.
Subd. 14. "Plat, final" means the final, formally approved layout of the proposed subdivision
showing the same information as the preliminary plat, complying with the requirements of this section and
any additional requirements imposed by the council, and prepared in such form as required by the
appropriate county officer for the purpose of recording and by Minnesota Statutes, section 505.
Subd. 15. "Plat, preliminary" means a tentative layout of the proposed subdivision prepared for the
purpose of formal review by the city; the preliminary plat commonly shows lots, blocks, streets, and other
features relevant to the development of the property, but not in the detail or final form of the final plat.
Subd. 16. "Plat, sketch" means a rough drawing of a proposed subdivision intended for informal
review by the city; the sketch plat is not typically drawn as accurately as the preliminary plat and usually
does not contain all the information normally required of a preliminary plat.
Subd. 17. "Restrictive covenant" means a contract or agreement entered into between private
parties establishing restrictions on the development or use of property other than those established by either
this section or the zoning ordinance.
Subd. 18. "Street" means a public or private right-of-way designed to serve as a means of principal
access to adjacent properties and includes a public or private right-of-way that is not an alley.
Robbinsdale City Code 500.09, Subd. 19
(Rev. 2016)
Subd. 19. "Subdivision" means, as a verb, the process of separating a parcel of land into two or
more parcels for the purpose of building or conveyance including the division of previously subdivided
property; as a noun, the term means the product resulting from the separation of a parcel into two or more
parcels; the term includes activity regulated by the Minnesota Condominium Law and a registered land
survey.
Subd. 20. "Survey, certified" means a scaled drawing prepared by a registered land surveyor of a
parcel indicating the location and dimension of property lines and, if appropriate, the location and
dimensions of existing or proposed buildings; a survey visually depicts a parcel's legal description and may
also show additional information such as topographic data and the location of recorded easements.
Subd. 21. "Zoning code" means section 505 of this code contained in Appendix A (Zoning).
Subd. 22. When the term "findings of fact" is used in this section the term means written findings
embodied in a resolution of the body making the findings.
500.11. Procedures. Subdivision 1. General. Except as provided in subsection 500.13 when land in the
city is proposed to be subdivided, the subdividing owner or the owner's authorized representative must apply
for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedure:
(a) sketch plat (optional).
(b) preliminary plat.
(c) final plat.
It is intended that subdivision review be carried out simultaneously and coordinated with applicable flexible
zoning regulations and flood plain regulations contained in the zoning code.
500.13. Procedural exceptions. Subdivision 1. Parcel combinations. Combinations of adjacent complete
parcels of record may be approved administratively by the director. When a combination is requested for
the purpose of obtaining a building permit, as provided for by the zoning code, or for the purpose of meeting
minimum development standards imposed by this section or any other provision of this code, the city must
be provided with (i) satisfactory evidence that the combination has been recorded with the appropriate
county officer, (ii) a signed, notarized affidavit stating the purpose for which the combination is requested,
and (iii) a certified survey of the lots to be combined as deemed necessary by the director. When a
combination is requested solely for the purpose of receiving a single tax statement for adjacent parcels, the
applicant must present satisfactory evidence that the parcels involved are complete parcels of record. There
is no fee for a parcel combination.
Subd. 2. Division: tax parcels. The division of a parcel of record that was combined for the sole
purpose of receiving a single tax statement may be approved administratively by the director. The applicant
must submit (i) satisfactory evidence that the previous combination was made solely for the purpose of
receiving a single tax statement, (ii) satisfactory evidence that the proposed manner of division corresponds
to the legal descriptions of the parcels which existed prior to the combination, and (iii) a certified survey of
the parcels being divided as deemed necessary by the director. The director may require that a proposed
division of tax combined real estate follow the procedures for either a lot split or a normal subdivision plat.
There is no fee for a parcel division.
Subd. 3. Lot splits. Lot splits may be approved by submission of a certified survey and legal
description indicating the proposed manner of division, provided that the division can be described in
fractional or proportional parts by reference to the legal descriptions existing of record on the date of the
Robbinsdale City Code 500.13, Subd. 3
(Rev. 2016)
request. A lot split will not be approved for a parcel described by metes and bounds. Lot splits require
council approval, following review and recommendation by the planning commission. Pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes, section 462.358, approval of a lot split by the council is deemed to include waiver of the
prohibitions against conveyance of property as contained in subsection 500.05 of this section. Lot splits are
approved by the city council following the same hearing procedures required for a normal subdivision. The
director may waive the technical information requirements of a normal subdivision determined to be
unnecessary. The normal preliminary plat and final plat procedures will be waived. The director may
require that a proposed lot split be processed by means of the normal subdivision plat procedure.
Submission of a lot split for approval must be accompanied by a fee as established by subsection 500.51.
Subd. 4. Common boundary line relocation. A subdivision done for the purpose of adjusting a lot
line between two existing lots may be approved by the city manager if the following conditions are met:
(Added, Ord. No. 16-09)
(a) the new legal descriptions for the properties are metes and bounds; (Added, Ord. No. 16-
09)
(b) the adjustment does not result in the creation of a new lot, does not make one of the lots
large enough to be eligible for further subdivision, and does not make an unbuildable lot
buildable; and (Added, Ord. No. 16-09)
(c) the resulting parcels meet all applicable ordinance requirements, except that if one of the
parcels was previously non-conforming, it must become more conforming as a result of the
subdivision. (Added, Ord. No. 16-09)
500.15. Sketch plats. Subdivision 1. Submission. When a subdivision of real estate is proposed, a sketch
plat may in the director's judgment, be prepared and submitted for review. Submission of a sketch plat is
not normally required, but is encouraged. The director may require a sketch plat if the proposed subdivision
presents substantial problems or difficulties on its face.
Subd. 2. Fee. Submission of a sketch plat for review must be accompanied by a fee as established
by subsection 500.49.
Subd. 3. Content. The sketch plat must be a conceptual plan of the proposed subdivision.
Subd. 4. Review and approval. Sketch plats are reviewed by the director and, upon the request or
approval of the applicant, by the planning commission. Sketch plat review is for the purpose of identifying
potential problems, suggesting design considerations and otherwise discussing the requirements of this
section, other ordinances and the comprehensive plan and their objectives as they apply to the parcel of land
contained in the applicant. The applicant must understand that the review of a submitted sketch plat is
forpurposes of discussion and comment only. The applicant may not infer any future approval of a
preliminary or final plat based upon the sketch plan review. Vested rights to a particular subdivision plan do
not accrue because of favorable comments made by either the director or the commission.
Robbinsdale City Code 500.17
500.17. Preliminary plats. Subdivision 1. Submission. Except as provided in subsection 500.13, when a
subdivision of real estate is proposed, a preliminary plat must be prepared and submitted for approval.
Requests for review and approval of preliminary plats are filed with the director on an approved application
form, accompanied by three copies of the plat and other required information items. Application must be
made at least four weeks prior to the planning commission meeting at which formal action is requested.
Subd. 2. Fee. The fee for preliminary plat for review and approval is set in Appendix B.
Subd. 3. Content. The application must include the following:
(a) a location map outlining the area to be subdivided and its relation to the remainder of the
city.
(b) a location map outlining the area to be subdivided and its relation to adjacent properties.
(c) the names and addresses of owners of property located within 350 feet of the exterior
boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
(d) an existing site schematic, drawn to the same scale as the preliminary plat, showing:
(1) north arrow, scale, and acreage of the subject property;
(2) existing topographic contours at intervals of five feet or less, as determined by the
director, for the property and adjacent properties;
(3) existing streets, utilities, and public facilities (e.g., schools, parks, etc.) on the
property and adjacent properties;
(4) unusual topographic or physiographic features, including, but not limited to,
waterways, steep slopes, wooded areas, etc.;
(5) existing easements, public and private, on the property and the purposes for which
they are provided.
(e) a preliminary plat drawn to a scale of not greater than one inch to 100 feet (1" = 100')
embodying the design standards provided for by subsection 500.37 showing:
(1) north arrow and scale;
(2) names and addresses of persons who prepared the plat;
(3) proposed topographic contours at the same interval as contained on the existing site
schematic;
Robbinsdale City Code 500.17, Subd. 4
(4) proposed streets, utilities, and public facilities on the property and, where
appropriate, the manner of coordination of these items with adjacent properties;
(5) proposed layout of lots and blocks including approximate dimensions of each and
manner of numbering;
(6) name of the proposed subdivision;
(7) proposed easements or existing easements to be maintained and the purpose for
which they are provided; and
(8) other information deemed necessary by the director.
Subd. 4. Preliminary plats; review. Preliminary plats must be reviewed by the planning
commission. The commission must hold a public hearing on the proposed subdivision. Ten days' notice of
the public hearing must be published as provided by law. Individual notices of the public hearing must be
mailed to each owner of record of property located within 350 feet of the exterior boundaries of the
proposed subdivision at least ten days prior to the public hearing. Failure of a property owner to receive the
notice does not invalidate the proceedings.
Subd. 5. Reports. The director, upon submission of a preliminary plat for review and approval,
must prepare a report on the proposal for the planning commission and council. Copies of the report and the
submissions of the applicant must be provided to the planning commission at least five days prior to the
public hearing. The report must be entered in and made a permanent part of the record of the public
hearing.
Subd. 6. Conduct of hearing. At the public hearing the planning commission will consider the
report and recommendation of the director along with the comments of members of the public. The
planning commission may question the applicant regarding the proposal, request additional information of
the applicant, or retain expert testimony at the expense of the applicant.
Subd. 7. Actions. The planning commission acts on the proposed subdivision in one of the
following ways:
(a) recommends approval of the preliminary plat as submitted to the council;
(b) recommends approval of the preliminary plat with modifications or conditions to the
council;
(c) recommends denial of the preliminary plat to the council;
(d) postpones action on the preliminary plat to the next regular meeting of the planning
commission or to such later date as agreed to by the applicant; or
(e) with the consent of the applicant, tables action on the preliminary plat.
Robbinsdale City Code 500.17, Subd. 8
Subd. 8. Procedure. Unless postponed or tabled the recommendation of the planning commission
will be forwarded to the council for its consideration. If the planning commission postpones consideration
of the proposed subdivision, the applicant must be provided with a written statement of the reasons for such
action. A preliminary plat may not be postponed more than once without the consent of the applicant, and
may only be postponed to the next regular meeting of the planning commission or to a later date agreed to
by the applicant. Following initial postponement or failure of the applicant and commission to agree to a
satisfactory later date, the applicant may request that the planning commission forward the preliminary plat
with or without recommendation to the council for consideration. A decision to forward the preliminary plat
without recommendation is at the discretion of the planning commission. The commission may table the
preliminary plat only with the consent of the applicant. Thereafter, the planning commission will consider
the proposed subdivision at a regular meeting requested by one of its members or by the applicant.
Subd. 9. Schedule. The preliminary plat must be forwarded to the council after consideration of the
plat by the planning commission. Consideration of the preliminary plat by the council must be scheduled
not more than 30 days following the date the plat was forwarded by the planning commission, unless
otherwise agreed to by the applicant. The council must be provided with copies of the director's report, the
submissions of the applicant, and minutes of the commission's public hearing. These items will be made a
permanent part of the record of the meeting of the council.
Subd. 10. Council consideration. The council will consider the proposed subdivision as scheduled.
The council may hold a public hearing as part of its deliberations on the proposed subdivision. If the
council determines to hold a public hearing, the procedures of subsection 500.17 must be complied with.
The council may question the applicant regarding the proposal, to request additional information of the
applicant, or to retain expert testimony at the expense of the applicant.
Subd. 11. Council action. The council acts on the proposed subdivision in one of the following
ways:
(a) approves the preliminary plat as submitted;
(b) approves the preliminary plat with modifications or conditions;
(c) disapproves the preliminary plat;
(d) postpones action on the preliminary plat to the next regular meeting of the council or to
such later date agreed to by the applicant; or
(e) with the consent of the applicant, tables action on the preliminary plat.
Subd. 12. Findings. Action by the council approving, approving with modifications, or
disapproving a preliminary plat must be accompanied by findings of fact. The applicant must be provided
with written documentation of the council's action stating the reasons for the council's decision. If the
Robbinsdale City Code 500.17, Subd. 13
council postpones consideration of the proposed subdivision, the applicant must be provided with a written
statement of the reasons for that action. A preliminary plat may not be postponed more than once without
the consent of the applicant, and must be postponed to the next regular meeting of the council, or a later date
agreed to by the applicant. Following initial postponement or failure of the applicant and council to agree
upon a later date, the applicant may request that the council act to approve, approve with modifications, or
disapprove the preliminary plat, unless the preliminary plat is postponed or tabled. Failure of the council to
act on the preliminary plat within 60 days of receipt of the preliminary plat is approval of the plat. The
council, with the consent of the applicant, may table the preliminary plat and thereafter the council will
consider the proposed subdivision at a regular council meeting as requested by a councilmember or by the
applicant.
Subd. 13. Time limit. Approval of a preliminary plat is valid for one year from the date of the
approval, unless prior to or within that one year period an extension is granted by the council. If after the
one year period or extension thereof a final plat has not been submitted for review and approval, the
approval of the preliminary plat is void.
500.19. Final plats. Subdivision 1. Submission. Upon approval or approval with modifications of the
preliminary plat by the council, the applicant may proceed to prepare the final plat for review and approval.
Except as provided in subsection 500.13, a final plat is required for all proposed subdivisions. Requests for
review and approval of final plats are filed with the director on an approved application form, accompanied
by three diazo reproduction copies of the final plat and any other required submissions. Application must be
made at least 15 days prior to the council meeting at which formal action is requested.
Subd. 2. Fee. The fee for final plat for review and approval is set by Appendix B.
Subd. 3. Final plat; form. Final plats must be prepared at a scale not less than one inch to 100 feet
(1" = 100'), and consistent with Minnesota Statutes, section 505 and rules of the appropriate county officer.
Three copies of the final plat, prepared in black on white mat surface photographic card stock with double
cloth back mounting, and one exact transparent reproducible copy of the final plat must be submitted for
official certification and execution by the city. One copy prepared on photographic card stock must be
labeled "official plat" and the other copies labeled "copy". Multiple sheets with match lines and master
index may be used. The final plat must be consistent with the approved preliminary plat and must comply
with all conditions or modifications imposed by the council. The final plat must also include the following:
(a) primary control points approved by the appropriate county officer, or descriptions to such
control points, by which all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on the plat
referenced;
(b) boundary lines; right-of-way lines for all streets and alleys; easements; and property lines
with accurate dimensions, bearings, deflection angles, radii, arcs, central angles or curves;
Robbinsdale City Code 500.19, Subd. 4
(c) names of rights-of-way and the width of each;
(d) location and description of monuments to be placed or maintained;
(e) certification as to accuracy of the plat by a certified surveyor;
(f) language dedicating for public use any streets or other rights-of-way, easements, parks, etc.
required by this section or imposed as a condition of approval by the council; and
(g) spaces for certification of approval to be signed by the mayor and clerk and official seal of
the city.
Subd. 4. Final plat; content. The final plat must be accompanied by the following items if required
by the director:
(a) an abstract of title or certificate of title for all land contained within the proposed
subdivision;
(b) an express written, irrevocable offer of dedication of all public streets, municipal uses,
utilities, parks, public easements, etc. as shown on the final plat;
(c) a warranty deed and title policy in the name of the city, for each parcel proposed for
dedication (the title policy will be in an amount determined necessary by the city);
(d) as may be required by subsection 500.23, a performance bond, cash escrow deposit, or
other security determined acceptable by the attorney in an amount equal to 1-1/2 times the
engineer's estimate of the costs for improvements required to be installed by the subdivider;
(e) as may be required by subsection 500.23, a contract establishing the subdivider's obligation
to complete the required improvements.
Subd. 5. Final plat; review; approval. The director will compare the final plat with the preliminary
plat and conditions or modifications imposed by the council. The attorney will examine the abstract of title
or certificate of title to ascertain that the land contained within the proposed subdivision is in the name of the
applicant and that it is free and clear of all encumbrances or liens. The attorney will also review the offers
of dedication and warranty deeds attached thereto. The engineer will review the final plat for accuracy in its
preparation and compliance with the design standards provided for by subsection 500.37. The engineer will
certify that the bond or cash escrow, if required, is of sufficient amount.
Subd. 6. Final plat; council consideration. Upon completion of the review of the final plat and
submissions by the director, city attorney, and engineer, the director must schedule the final plat for
consideration of the council. If the review of the final plat by the director, attorney, or engineer identifies
deficiencies in the final plat or the required submissions, the applicant must be notified. Noted deficiencies
must be corrected prior to consideration of the final plat by the council. Unless deficiencies in the final plat
or required submissions have been noted, the final plat must be scheduled for council consideration no later
than 60 days after its submission to the director.
Robbinsdale City Code 500.19, Subd. 7
Subd. 7. Final plat; council action. When considering the final plat the council must be provided
with certifications by the director, city attorney, and city engineer that the final plat and required
submissions conform to the requirements of this section. The council must then act to approve or
disapprove the final plat. The council's action must be based upon findings of fact, and the applicant will be
provided with written documentation of the council's action. The council may postpone or table
consideration of the final plat pursuant to procedures established by subsection 505.17. Unless the final plat
is postponed or tabled, failure of the council to act on the plat within 60 days of receipt of the final plat is
approval.
Subd. 8. Final plat; execution. The mayor and city clerk must affix their signatures and the official
seal of the city to the final plat. The applicant must register approved subdivisions and accompanying legal
documents with the appropriate county officer. If the final plat is not recorded within 90 days after its
approval by the council the plat is void.
500.21. Required improvements. Subdivision 1. Responsibility. The subdivider is responsible for
completing the improvements (i) required by this section, (ii) specified on the final plat, or (iii) stipulated by
the council in its approval of the final plat. The required improvements must be constructed in compliance
with the design standards of subsection 500.37 and completed to the satisfaction of the director.
Subd. 2. Required improvements. Unless waived pursuant to subdivision 3, the following
improvements must be completed and paid for by the subdivider:
(a) concrete curb and gutter;
(b) concrete sidewalks;
(c) sanitary sewers;
(d) street paving;
(e) concrete alley paving;
(f) storm sewers and culverts;
(g) bridges;
(h) pedestrian paths and walks;
(i) monuments certified by a registered professional engineer as being properly placed;
(j) ornamental street lights;
(k) necessary approved alterations to natural drainage ways;
Robbinsdale City Code 500.21, Subd. 3
(l) temporary street signs;
(m) reforestation and landscaping;
(n) miscellaneous items as agreed upon by the city council and the subdivider;
(o) watermains and hydrants;
(p) miscellaneous items as contained in the design standards provided for by subsection
500.37.
Subd. 3. Waiver. The council may waive required improvements deemed to be necessary or which
the city may itself undertake. The city may construct the improvements as public improvements and assess
all or part of the cost thereof against benefitted properties. A waiver must be requested by the subdivider
and must be considered by the council at the time of preliminary or final plat approval.
Subd. 4. Required plans. Prior to the commencement of construction of any required
improvements, the subdivider must submit sufficiently detailed plans, profiles, and specifications for the
required improvements for the review and approval of the director. The plans, profiles, and specifications
must comply with the design standards of subsection 500.37 and other ordinances of the city. The
subdivider is responsible for obtaining permits required for construction of the improvements.
500.23. Improvements; bond. Subdivision 1. Form. The subdivider must provide the city with a
performance bond, cash escrow, or other acceptable security in an amount equal to 1-1/2 times the
engineer's estimate of costs for the required improvements. The bond must be submitted simultaneously
with the request for approval of the final plat. The bond must (i) name the city as obligee, (ii) specify the
improvements that the bond secures, and (iii) stipulate that the bond secures the dedication of all the
specified improvements and land, as required by the council, free and clear of encumbrances and liens. The
subdivider may submit separate bonds for separate required improvements. Prior to approval of the final
plat by the council the city attorney must review the submitted bond, or other security, as to its conformance
with statutory provisions, form, sufficiency, and manner of execution. The required bond must remain in
effect for a period not less than one year following completion of the improvements which it secures.
Subd. 2. Waiver. The council may waive the requirement that the subdivider provide a bond or
other security. In such case the council must be provided with a signed, legally enforceable development
contract specifying the required improvements and the subdivider's responsibility to complete them. The
development contract must also specify that the city may undertake completion of the required
improvements and assess the cost of same against the land contained in the subdivision upon failure of the
applicant to satifactorily complete the improvements. The contract must stipulate an agreement upon date
for completion of the required improvements not later than two years from the date of approval of the
development contract. The contract must be submitted at the time of final plat consideration by the council.
The council may either waive the required bond submission and subsequently approve the development
contract or require that a bond be submitted prior to approval of the final plat. If the
Robbinsdale City Code 500.23, Subd. 3
development contract is accepted by the council, the approval of the final plat is conditional pending
satisfactory completion of the required improvements. If the security is waived and a development contract
is submitted the final plat may not be signed or recorded until the required improvements have been
completed to the satisfaction of the director.
Subd. 3. Governmental units. Governmental units to which these bond and contract requirements
apply may file in lieu of the bond or contract a certified resolution, from the officers or agencies empowered
to act on their behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this subsection.
500.25. Improvements; completion. Subdivision 1. Time. Required improvements must be completed
within a time period specified by the city council. Upon the request of the subdivider and on the
recommendation of the planning commission, the council may extend the completion deadline for a period
of one year provided the term of the required security are extended.
Subd. 2. Quality. The subdivider must provide for inspection of completed improvements by a
registered engineer. The city engineer will inspect improvements for compliance with the approved final
plat, the submitted plans, profiles, and specifications for the improvements and the quality of their
construction. Upon a finding that the improvements have been satisfactorily completed, the city engineer
must certify their completion by letter to the subdivider and the council. Upon a finding that improvements
have not been satisfactorily completed, the director must certify the deficiencies by letter to the subdivider
and the council.
Subd. 3. Remedies. If the required improvements have not been satisfactorily completed by the
completion deadline, the council may:
(a) extend the deadline for completion of the improvements for a period of not to exceed one
year;
(b) declare any submitted bonds or other securities in default and apply funds obtained from
such to complete the required improvements;
(c) declare the development contract, if such has been entered into, to be violated and
thereupon undertake to complete the required improvements, assessing the cost of same
against the land contained in the subdivision; or
(d) when no improvements have been commenced, void previous approval of the final plat
and, if the plat has been recorded, undertake necessary action to vacate the plat or the
public rights-of-way contained therein.
Subd. 4. Bond waiver. If the bond requirement has been waived and a development contract
entered into, the director must certify satisfactory completion of the required improvements prior to the
execution of the final plat by the mayor and manager.
Robbinsdale City Code 500.25, Subd. 5
Subd. 5. Building permits. A building permit for private construction may not be issued for land in
a subdivision for which the final plat has not been recorded with the appropriate county officer. A building
permit for private construction may not be issued for more than 60% of the lots or dwelling units contained
in a subdivision for which all required improvements have not been completed. When the subdivision is to
be accomplished in stages this requirement applies to each phase.
Subd. 6. Release. Bonds or other security held by the city to secure required improvements will be
released one year following the date of certification of satisfactory completion of the improvements by the
director.
500.27. Land dedication, easements, and covenants. Subdivision 1. Dedications. The council may require
dedication of public improvements and lands designated on the plat or intended for public use. The city
may require reservations and dedications for improvements that are not to be undertaken or completed
immediately or as part of an approved subdivision. These requirements include, but are not limited to, lands
for public utilities, streets, and park and recreation facilities. The city may approve or disapprove the
location and configuration of lands proposed for dedication pursuant to this subsection.
Subd. 2. Streets. The final plat must indicate the location and reservation of rights-of-way, public
and private, in the proposed subdivision.
Subd. 3. Utilities. The city requires that easements be provided for the location of public utilities
and that proper legal instruments accomplishing that be provided prior to the approval of final plat. The
final plat must show the location of the easements to be located in conformance to the design standards
provided for by subsection 500.37. The city may require the dedication of certain lands in fee simple for
public utility use where deemed necessary or desirable in the public interest. In such case the dedication
will be accomplished by submission of a warranty deed and a written irrevocable offer of dedication prior to
approval of the final plat. Unless specifically authorized by the city council, private water, sanitary, or
storm sewer facilities may not be constructed within a proposed subdivision to meet the requirements of this
subsection.
500.29. Dedication; park and recreation areas. Subdivision 1. General rule. The city requires that land be
reserved and dedicated for park and recreational purposes in proposed subdivisions exceeding two acres or
in which more than 14 dwelling units may be constructed. The dedications are accomplished in fee simple
by submission of a warranty deed and a written irrevocable offer of dedication prior to approval of the final
plat. The final plat must indicate the location and reservation of lands intended to be dedicated for public
park and recreational purposes. The council may authorize payment in lieu of land dedication for park and
recreational purposes as provided in subsection 500.31.
Robbinsdale City Code 500.29, Subd. 2
Subd. 2. Forms. Land to be dedicated for park and recreational purposes must be provided
consistent with the following schedule: a minimum of two acres of land for each 100 lots or possible
dwelling units, whichever number results in the greater dedication requirement. For subdivisions of less
than 100 lots or dwelling units the required dedication is that proportion of two acres as the size of the
proposed subdivision bears to 100 lots or units.
Subd. 3. Private dedication. The council may give credit on an equal basis for privately maintained
and dedicated park and recreation areas. The council must be provided with proper legal instruments
accomplishing the private dedication prior to the approval of a final plat.
500.31. Dedication; payments in lieu. Subdivision 1. Findings. The council may authorize payment in lieu
of land dedication for park and recreational purposes when the council finds (i) that the amount of land
proposed to be dedicated is insufficient for park and recreation purposes, (ii) the locations of proposed
dedications are not consistent with identified park and recreation needs of the city, (iii) there are physical
problems with the proposed areas of dedication that render the sites unsuitable for park development, or (iv)
there is sufficient park area reserved or existing in the immediate area of the proposed subdivision.
Subd. 2. Use of payments. Payments in lieu of land dedication made pursuant to this section will
be utilized by the city for park and recreational purposes. There is no time restriction on the expenditure of
dedicated monies, nor is there any restriction on the expenditure of the monies for land as opposed to facility
construction or equipment acquisition.
Subd. 3. Method of payment. Payments in lieu of land must be by certified check or escrow
deposit prior to final approval of a final plat.
Subd. 4. Calculation. The amount of payment in lieu of dedication is based upon fair market value
of the amount of land that would otherwise be required for dedication. Fair market value is determined by
the average of two independent appraisal reports, one report undertaken by an appraiser of the applicant's
choice and the other by an appraiser of the city's choice. The applicant must pay the costs of both appraisal
reports.
500.33. Dedication; waiver. The council may waive a required dedication that it deems not necessary for
the protection or promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare.
500.35. Plats; restrictive covenants. Restrictive covenants may not appear on the face of a plat. The
council may not impose a condition in the form of a restrictive covenant as part of its approval of a final
plat.
500.37. Plats; design standards. Subdivision 1. Adoption. The director, in cooperation with the engineer,
must prepare a set of comprehensive, detailed design standards and guidelines for platting. The design
standards must be submitted to the council for approval by resolution.
Robbinsdale City Code 500.37, Subd. 2
Subd. 2. Application of standards. The design standards apply to property, lands, structures, or
projects regulated by this section and are the minimum requirements for the design and development of
subdivisions or projects. The council may waive any design standards as part of its approval of final plat
when it finds that the public interest will not be adversely affected thereby. The council may impose
additional or more restrictive design standards as part of its approval of final plat where a finding is made
that the public interest will be better served thereby.
Subd. 3. Amendment. The design standards may be amended as necessary in the same manner as
adopted. Proposed subdivisions for which the final plat has not yet been approved are subject to any
adopted amendment to the design standards.
Subd. 4. Copies. Copies of the design standards will be provided to all interested parties on request
at a reasonable charge.
500.39. Variances; appeals; procedures. Subdivision 1. Authority. The council may consider and grant
variances to the provisions of this section to the extent not otherwise authorized herein, where it finds that
unusual hardship on the land or practical difficulties relevant to the land would result from the strict
application of the provisions of this section. The council may review and rule upon appeals by an affected
property owner where it is alleged that there has been an error in the interpretation or application of the
provisions of this section.
Subd. 2. Application. Requests for review and approval of variances must be submitted by the
subdivider simultaneously with the request for review and approval of the preliminary plat. Requests for
review of appeals must be submitted by the subdivider, if such is the case, prior to or simultaneously with
the request for approval of the preliminary plat. Requests for review of appeals on the part of a property
owner who is not a subdivider may be submitted at any time it is alleged an error in interpretation or
application of the provisions of this section has taken place. If the alleged error refers to a subdivision that
has been submitted for approval, the appeal must be submitted prior to approval of the final plat.
Application for a variance or appeal are submitted to the director upon an approved application form.
Subd. 3. Fee. Submission of a request for a variance or an appeal must be accompanied by a fee set
by Appendix B.
500.41. Variances; review and approval. Subdivision 1. Planning commission. Requests for consideration
of variances and appeals must be reviewed by the planning commission after public hearing.
Subd. 2. Hearing. Notice of the public hearing will be published in conformance with state law.
Notices of the public hearing must be mailed to each record owner of property located within 350 feet of the
exterior boundaries of the affected property or subdivision at least ten days prior to the public hearing.
Failure of a property owner to receive the notice does not invalidate the proceedings.
Robbinsdale City Code 500.41, Subd. 3
Subd. 3. Consideration. It is the intent that, to the extent reasonable, consideration of requests for
variances and appeals will be scheduled simultaneously with the consideration of affected preliminary or
final plats.
Subd. 4. Report. The director, upon submission of a request for a variance or appeal, must prepare
a report on the request for the use of the planning commission and council. Copies of the report and the
submissions of the applicant must be provided to the planning commission at least five days prior to the
scheduled public hearing. The report is a part of the record of the public hearing.
Subd. 5. Information. The planning commission must hold the public hearing as scheduled on the
proposed subdivision. The planning commission will consider the report and recommendation of the
director along with the comments of members of the public in attendance. The planning commission may
request additional information of the applicant or retain expert testimony at the expense of the applicant.
500.43. Variances; findings. Subdivision 1. Physical variances. In considering a request for physical
variances the planning commission must make specific findings of fact, based upon the evidence and
testimony presented, that:
(a) the granting of the variance will or will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or
welfare or injurious to other property;
(b) the conditions upon which the request for the variance is made are or are not unique to the
property for which the variance is sought and are or are not generally applicable to other
property in the immediate vicinity; and
(c) the specific and literal application of the provisions of this section do or do not create a
hardship in the reasonable use and enjoyment of the property for which the variance is
sought.
Subd. 2. Findings; procedural variances. In considering a request for a procedural variance the
planning commission must make findings of fact, based upon the evidence and testimony presented, that:
(a) the granting of the variance will or will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or
welfare;
(b) the granting of the variance will or will not unduly affect the due process rights of other
affected parties; and
(c) the specific and literal application of the provisions of this section do or do not create a
hardship for the applicant in securing approval for a particular project.
Robbinsdale City Code 500.43, Subd. 3
Subd. 3. Findings; appeals. In considering requests for appeals the planning commission must
make findings of fact, based upon the evidence and testimony presented, that:
(a) the interpretation or application of the provisions of this section, in the specific instance
cited, was or was not consistent with its intent; and
(b) the interpretation or application of the provisions of this section, in the specific instance
cited, was or was not consistent with the manner of interpretation or application of the same
provisions in other specific, demonstrable situations.
500.45. Actions; recommendations. Subdivision 1. Actions. The planning commission acts on the
variance or appeal in one of the following ways:
(a) recommends approval of the variance request or appeal as submitted to the council;
(b) recommends approval of the variance request or appeal with modifications or conditions to
the council;
(c) recommends denial of the variance request or appeal to the council;
(d) postpones action on the variance request or appeal to the next regular meeting of the
planning commission or a later date agreed to by the applicant; or
(e) with the consent of the applicant, tables action on the variance request or appeal.
Except when the action is to postpone or table, the recommendation of the planning commission must be
forwarded to the council for its consideration. If the planning commission acts to postpone consideration of
the variance request or appeal, the applicant must be provided with a written statement of the reasons for
that action. A variance request may not be postponed more than once without the consent of the applicant,
and must always be postponed to the next regular meeting of the planning commission or a later date agreed
to by the applicant. Following initial postponement or failure of the applicant to agree to a later date, the
applicant may request that the planning commission forward the variance or appeal with or without
recommendation to the city council for consideration. The decision to forward the variance or appeal with
or without recommendation is at the discretion of the planning commission. The planning commission may
table consideration of a variance or appeal only with the consent of the applicant. Thereafter the planning
commission must take up consideration of the variance or appeal at any regular meeting requested by one of
its members or by the applicant.
Robbinsdale City Code 500.45, Subd. 2
Subd. 2. Recommendations; procedure. The recommendation of the planning commission is
forwarded to the city council for consideration. Consideration of the variance or appeal by the council must
be scheduled not more than 30 days following nor less than 20 days prior to the date the planning
commission's recommendation unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant or unless the affected plat has not
been forwarded for council consideration. The council must be provided with copies of the director's report,
the submissions of the applicant, and minutes of the planning commission's public hearing. These items are
a part of the record of the meeting of the city council.
Subd. 3. Council; consideration; hearing. The council may hold a public hearing as part of its
deliberations on the proposed subdivision. If the council holds a public hearing, the procedures of
subsection 500.41 must be complied with. The council may question the applicant regarding the proposal,
request additional information of the applicant, or retain expert testimony.
Subd. 4. Council action. The city council acts on the variance or appeal in one of the following
ways:
(a) approves the variance request or appeal as submitted;
(b) approves the variance request or appeal with modifications or conditions;
(c) disapproves the variance request or appeal;
(d) postpones action on the variance request or appeal to the next regular meeting of the
council or such later date as may be agreed to by the applicant; or
(e) with the consent of the applicant, tables action on the preliminary plat.
Subd. 5. Subsequent procedures. Action by the council approving, approving with modifications,
or disapproving a variance request or appeal requires a majority vote of the full council. The applicant must
be provided with written documentation of the council action, stating the reasons for the council's decision.
If the council postpones consideration of the variance or appeal, the applicant must be provided with a
written statement of the reasons for that action. A variance or appeal may not be postponed more than once
without the consent of the applicant, and will always be postponed to the next regular meeting of the
council, or a later date agreed to by the applicant. Following initial postponement or failure of the applicant
and city council to agree upon a satisfactory later date, the applicant may request that the city council act to
approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the variance or appeal. Failure of the city council to do
so is deemed disapproval by the council. The council, with the consent of the applicant, may table
consideration of a variance or appeal. Thereafter the council must consider the variance or appeal at any
regular meeting requested by one of its members or by the applicant. Action by the council postponing or
tabling a variance or appeal requires a majority vote of the full city council.
Robbinsdale City Code 500.47
500.47. Amendments. Subdivision 1. Initiation. Amendments of this section may be initiated by the city
council, the planning commission, city staff, or a person owning real property in the city. Initiation of
requests for amendment by the council or planning commission may be upon simple motion. Initiation of
amendments by city staff or owners of real estate is accomplished by submission of a request, upon an
approved application form, to the director.
Subd. 2. Fee. Initiation of amendments on the part of owners of real estate must be accompanied
by a fee set by Appendix B.
Subd. 3. Review and approval. Proposed amendments to this section must be submitted to the
planning commission for review and comment prior to consideration by the city council. Proposed
subdivisions for which final plat approval has not been granted by the city council are subject to any
amendments to this section.
500.49. Fees required. Subdivision 1. Basic fee. In order to defray the administrative costs of processing
requests for review and approval of sketch plats, preliminary plats, final plats, variances, appeals, or
amendments a base fee set by Appendix B per application is required.
Subd. 2. Additional cost. In order to defray the additional costs of processing requests for
applications submitted pursuant to the provisions of this section, applicants must pay the cost of staff and
consulting time and materials expended by the city in the processing of the applicant's requests.
(a) Staff and consulting time includes but is not limited to, time spent in advising the applicant,
researching information necessary for the review and analysis of the request, and in the
preparation of written or graphic materials necessary for the processing of the request.
Staff and consulting time does not include time spent in making presentations on the
request before the planning commission or city council, but does include time spent in
conference with appropriate governmental agencies.
(b) Materials include, but are not limited to, maps, graphs, charts, drawings, official
notifications, written reports, and the printing or reproduction of same.
(c) The charge for staff and consulting time is based upon an hourly rate established and made
available to the applicant when an application is submitted. The charge for materials is
based upon their actual cost to the city.
(d) The application cost includes fees, taxes, or charges to be incurred by the city in recording a
subdivision with the appropriate county officer.
Robbinsdale City Code 500.51
500.51. Fees; payment. Subdivision 1. The base fee is payable at the time an application is filed with and
accepted by the city clerk. The fee is not refundable except as provided for in subsection 500.53.
Subd. 2. Estimates. At the time of application, the applicant must be provided with an estimate of
costs to process the application. The applicant must then deposit with the city clerk a sum sufficient to
cover the estimate of costs.
Subd. 3. Payment. Unless the applicant has paid the required base fee and placed on deposit with
the city clerk the application will not be scheduled for processing.
Subd. 4. Excess; refunds. If the costs for processing an application exceed the combined sum of an
applicant's base fee and deposit by an amount greater than 10%, the applicant will be so informed and
provided with a revised estimate of costs. The applicant must then place on deposit an additional sum
sufficient to cover the amount of the revised estimate before any additional work on the application
proceeds. An applicant may withdraw an application when provided the revised estimate of costs. In such
case the applicant is liable for the costs incurred for processing the application to the date of the withdrawal,
provided the costs do not exceed the combined amount of the applicant's base fee and deposit of record on
that date by more than 10%.
Subd. 5. Statement of charges. Upon completion of staff review and analysis of an accepted
application and prior to any review or public hearing of the application by either the planning commission or
city council, the applicant must be provided with a final, written statement of charges for processing the
application. If the applicant's base fee and deposits are not sufficient to cover the total charges contained in
the final statement, the applicant must pay the balance due, provided that in no case may the balance exceed
by 10% the combined amount of the applicant's base fee and deposits of record on that date.
500.53. Fees; refunds. Subdivision 1. General rule. The base fee is refundable only upon written
withdrawal of the application before any work shall have commenced upon its processing or as provided for
in subdivision 4.
Subd. 2. Excess. The deposit is refundable to the extent that it exceeds the amount which remains
after the base fee has been subtracted from the charges shown on the final statement.
Subd. 3. Notice. The deposit is refundable upon written notice of the applicant withdrawing an
application, but then only after all costs of processing the application to the date of the withdrawal have
been deducted.
Subd. 4. Excess charges. The base fee and deposit, or portions thereof, are refundable if upon
petition by an applicant the council makes a finding of fact that the applicant was charged excessive or
unwarranted costs. The council will only consider such petitions prior to review or public hearing on the
application by either the planning commission or the council.
Robbinsdale City Code 500.55
500.55. Enforcement and penalties. Subdivision 1. Director. The director must enforce the provisions of
this section and bring to the attention of the city attorney any violations or lack of compliance with this
section.
Subd. 2. Permits. A building permit may not be issued for any property which is determined to be
in violation of this section until the violation has been corrected.
Robbinsdale City Code 600.01
CHAPTER VI
PUBLIC HEALTH
Section 600 - Private Sanitary Facilities
600.01. Outdoor toilets prohibited. The construction or maintenance of a privy, privy vault, out-house or
outdoor toilet in the city not connected with the municipal sewage system or with a properly constructed and
maintained cesspool or septic tank, is declared to be a public nuisance, dangerous to the public health and
safety, and unlawful.
600.03. Adequate sewage facilities required. No person may occupy a premises in the city for dwelling
purposes upon which there exists or is maintained a privy, privy vault, out-house or outdoor toilet, or any
other type of toilet facilities other than as provided in this section.
600.05. Facilities. Subdivision 1. General rule. Dwelling units in the city must be equipped with toilet and
sanitary facilities and drains as required by this code. Toilet and sanitary facilities and drains must be
connected to the municipal sewer system unless the council finds that unusual hardship will result.
Subd. 2. Petition. A petition for a hearing and finding of unusual hardship may be filed with the
clerk by the owner or occupant of the premises involved. The petition must be accompanied by a detailed
plan of the proposed cesspool or septic tank connection approved by the building inspector for compliance
with this code. After hearing, the council may make a finding of unusual hardship if it finds that because of
the location or capacity of municipal sewer lines, connection thereto would result in an exceptional burden
of expenses or difficult engineering design for the petitioner. Upon making a finding of unusual hardship,
the council may grant a temporary stay authorizing the making of the proposed cesspool or septic tank
connection and its continuance until there is an extension or a change in the location or capacity of the
municipal sewer lines.
600.07. Assessment of cost. When the owner or occupant of any property fails, refuses, or neglects to make
the connection with the municipal sewer system adjacent to the property after due notice thereof has been
given, the council may by resolution direct that a connection be made and the cost thereof assessed against
the property. The assessment will be levied and collected as provided by Minnesota Statutes, section
429.101.
600.09. Septic tank and cesspool regulations. Subdivision 1. General rule. Septic tanks, cesspools and
other means of sewage disposal depending upon absorption of the liquids into the soil for their operation,
must be located and maintained in accordance with the rules set out in this subsection.
Subd. 2. Proximity to wells. Tanks, cesspools, or overflow pipes extending therefrom may not be
located within 50 feet of a well or spring from which water is obtained for drinking or culinary purposes. A
cesspool, septic tank or outlet therefrom may not be so located or constructed in a manner that the liquid
therefrom will be discharged into a limestone formation except with the written consent of the building
inspector.
Robbinsdale City Code 600.09, Subd. 3
Subd. 3. Sludge. If sludge accumulates in the tank in sufficient quantity to interfere with its
efficient operation, it must be removed under the direction of the building inspector and buried so as to be
inaccessible to human beings or animals and so as not to endanger domestic or public water supplies.
Subd. 4. Soils. If the soil around any cesspool or drain tile absorption system becomes so clogged
that it will no longer absorb the liquids placed therein, additional soil absorption facilities must be provided.
Abandoned cesspools will be condemned by the health officer and filled with earth to the level of the
surrounding ground in accordance with department of health regulations.
Subd. 5. Construction. Cesspool and septic tanks must be so constructed as to be easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection from the top through suitable manhole openings. Covers for such manhole
openings must be rigid, durable and securely fastened. Ventilation must be provided through the main
house drain and house stack. The main drain to the tank or cesspool must be laid without a trap.
Construction must be in accord with department of health regulations.
600.11. Disposal of sludge. It is unlawful to place human excreta or sludge from septic tanks or cesspools
or any other source in a stream, lake or body of water or an abandoned or deep well in the city or dispose of
the same by placing it on the surface of the ground or in a manner not approved by the department of health.
Robbinsdale City Code 603.01
(Rev. 1991)
Section 603 - Environmentally Acceptable Packaging
603.01. Purpose and findings. Subdivision 1. The city council finds that discarded packaging from foods
and beverages constitutes a significant and growing portion of the waste in the Robbinsdale waste stream.
Regulation of food and beverage packaging, therefore, is a necessary part of any effort to encourage a
recyclable and compostable waste stream, thereby reducing the disposal of solid waste and the economic
and environmental costs of waste management for the citizens of Robbinsdale and others working or doing
business in Robbinsdale.
Subd. 2. The council further finds that plastic packaging is rapidly replacing other packaging
material, and that most plastic packaging used for foods and beverages is nondegradable, nonreturnable and
nonrecyclable.
Subd. 3. The council also finds that the two main processes used to dispose of discarded
nondegradable, nonreturnable and nonrecyclable plastic foods and beverage packaging, are land filling and
incineration, both of which should be minimized for environmental reasons.
Subd. 4. Chemicals hazardous to human health and to the safety of the environment are present in
the composition of plastic packaging, are believed to leach into the groundwater when this packaging is
placed in landfills, have been found to escape into the air when this packaging is burned in incinerators, and
contribute to environmental problems associated with ash residue resulting from the incineration process.
Subd. 5. The council therefore finds that the minimization of nondegradable, nonreturnable and
nonrecyclable food and beverage packaging originating at retail food establishments within the city of
Robbinsdale is necessary and desirable in order to reduce the city's waste stream, so as to reduce the volume
of landfilled waste, to minimize toxic by-products of incineration, to make the waste stream less damaging
to the environment, and to make our city and neighboring communities more environmentally sound places
to live.
603.03. Definitions. Subdivision 1. The following terms as used in this section have the meanings given
them.
Subd. 2. "Environmentally acceptable packaging". Environmentally acceptable packaging means
and include any of the following:
(a) "Returnable packaging" means food or beverage containers or packages, such as, but not
limited to, soft drink bottles and milk containers that are capable of being returned to the
distributor, such as, but not limited to, dairies and soft drink bottlers, for reuse as the same
food or beverage container use at least once;
(b) "Recyclable packaging" means packaging made of materials that are separable from solid
waste by the generator or during collection and which are currently designated for
collection for recycling in an organized manner as required by city code. Packaging made
of either polyethylene terepthalate (P.E.T.) or high density polvethylene (H.D.P.E.) shall be
considered to be recyclable if and when it is collected for recycling in the same manner as
here stated.
Robbinsdale City Code 603.03, Subd. 3
(Rev. 1991)
Subd. 3. "Food establishment" means any building, room, stand, enclosure, vehicle, space, area, or
other place wherein food is stored, prepared, manufactured, processed, wrapped, canned, packed, bottled,
transported, distributed, sold or offered for sale or served in any way with or without charge except private
homes.
Subd. 4. "Packaging" means and includes all food related wrappings, adhesives, cords, bindings,
strings, tapes, ribbons, bags, boxes, coverings and containers; and shall further include cups, glasses and
similar containers for drinking out of or for holding liquids, and plates and serving trays, but shall
specifically exclude plastic knives, forks and spoons sold or intended for use as utensils.
Subd. 5. "Sell", "sale" or "to sell" refers to a transaction of a mercantile character.
603.05. Prohibitions. No person owning, operating or conducting a food establishment within the city shall
do or allow to be done any of the following within the city: sell or convey at retail or possess with the intent
to sell or convey at retail any food or beverage that is placed, wrapped or packaged, at any time at or before
the time or point of sale, in or on packaging which is not environmentally acceptable packaging. The
presence on the premises of the food establishment of packaging which is not environmentally acceptable
packaging shall constitute a rebuttable presumption of intent to sell or convey at retail, or to provide to retail
customers packaging which is not environmentally acceptable packaging; provided, however, that this
subparagraph shall not apply to manufacturers, brokers or warehouse operators, who conduct or transact no
retail food or beverage business.
603.07. Enforcement. The city manager enforces the provisions of this section.
603.09. Rules and regulations. The rules and regulations (Rules) for the implementation of this section are
set forth in a separate document on file with the city manager. The city manager may, upon notice and
hearing, amend the Rules as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section and protect the health
of the public, including the development of exemptions under section 603.11 for packaging for which there
is no commercially available alternative and for flexible packaging.
603.11. Exemptions. Subdivision 1. This section does not apply to:
(a) flexible packaging of 10 mils or less in thickness; such rules shall provide that the city
manager will evaluate other reasonable alternatives and consider whether an alternative
packaging material meets the definition of recyclable packaging in disapproving a flexible
package hereunder. In any decision to disapprove flexible packaging, the city manager
shall make written findings to support the decision, including the environmental benefits.
(b) packaging used at hospitals or nursing homes;
Robbinsdale City Code 603.13, Subd. 2
(Rev. 1991)
(c) paper, cellophane or other cellulose-based packaging that is coated with plastic; or
(d) packaging which is not environmentally acceptable, but for which there is no commercially
available alternative as determined by the city council by amendment of this section.
(e) paper or other cellulose-based packaging capable of being decomposed by natural
biological or biochemical processes;
(f) the city manager shall issue temporary administrative exemptions to allow the phasing-in of
enforcement procedures in a reasonable and nondiscriminatory manner. The phasing-in of
enforcement shall exempt, on the effective date of this section, all product groups of the
kinds identified in the tiers shown in the Rules. These exemptions shall be as follows:
(1) Six months for Tier I Product Groups in both the Grocery Sector and the Food
Service/Deli Sector.
(2) Nine months for Tier II Group A Products in the Grocery Sector.
(3) Twelve Months for Tier II Group B and C Product Groups in the Grocery Sector
and in the Food Service/Deli Sector.
Subd. 2. Factors to consider. In determining whether there are commercially available alternatives
the city council shall consider the following: (1) the availability of environmentally acceptable packaging
for affected products; (2) the economic consequences to manufacturers, suppliers, retailers and other
vendors of requiring environmentally acceptable packaging when available; and (3) the competitive effects
on manufacturers, suppliers, retailers and other vendors involved in the sale of product brands or labels
available only in packaging that is not environmentally acceptable packaging.
603.13. Violation a petty misdemeanor. Each violation of any provision of this section shall be a petty
misdemeanor for which the maximum fine is $100.00. Each day on which a violation occurs constitutes a
separate violation.
603.15. Adverse licensing action. Any violation of this section shall be sufficient ground for the
revocation, suspension, denial, or non-renewal of any license for the food establishment at which the
violation occurs.
603.17. Severability. If any part or provision of this section or the application thereof to any person, entity,
or circumstances shall be adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by any court or competent jurisdiction, such
judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision or application which is directly involved in
the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered, and shall not affect or impair the validity
of the remainder of this section or the application thereof to other persons, entities, or circumstances.
City of Robbinsdale 603.19 (Rev. 1991)
603.19. Effective date. This section is effective on November 1, 1991. (Amended, Ord. No. 91-10)
Robbinsdale City Code 605.01 (Rev. 2017)
Section 605 - Garbage and Refuse
605.01. Definitions. Subdivision 1. Terms defined in this section have the meanings given them in this
subsection.
Subd. 2. "Aluminum recyclables" means and includes aluminum foil and disposable containers
fabricated primarily of aluminum and commonly used for soda, beer, or other beverages.
Subd. 3. "Collection" means the aggregation of waste from the place at which it is generated and
includes activities up to the time when the waste is delivered to a "waste facility".
Subd. 4. "Collector" means a person who owns, operates or leases vehicles for the purposes of
collection and transportation of any type of mixed municipal solid waste, recyclables or yard waste.
Subd. 5. “Compost container” means the city approved physical structure wherein the composting
process takes place. (Added, Ord. No. 98-10)
Subd. 6. “Composted yard waste” means compostible organic materials such as grass clippings,
leaves, weeds, straw or other forms of organic material derived from garden plants and plant material. It
does not include trees, brush and other similar materials; nor does it include kitchen scraps, feces, or any
other household wastes. (Added, Ord. No. 98-10)
Subd. 7. "Compostible material" means a humus (organic portion of soil) made from yard waste
and used as a soil conditioner.
Subd. 8. “Composting” means a microbial process that converts yard waste to a useable organic
soil amendment or mulch by providing adequate aeration, moisture, particle size, fertilizers and lime. Plant
material that is neither contained or maintained as provided in this section is not compost. (Added, Ord. No.
98-10)
Subd. 9. "Garbage" means animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food.
Subd. 10. "Generation" means the act or process of producing waste (as defined in Minnesota
Statutes, section 115A.03, subdivision 11).
Subd. 11. "Generator" means any person who generates waste (as defined in Minnesota Statutes,
section 115A.03, subdivision 12). (Amended, Ord. No. 17-04)
Subd. 12. "Glass recyclables" means and includes jars, bottles and glass containers which are
transparent or translucent and primarily used for packaging and bottling of various matter.
Subd. 13. "Hauler" means a collector or transporter of mixed municipal solid waste, recyclable
materials, or yard waste.

Robbinsdale City Code 605.03, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2017)
Subd. 2. Residential pre-collection and collection. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-04)
(a) Residential pre-collection and collection. For all persons who are owners, tenants, lessees,
occupants, or anyone else having possession of any residential building wherein there are
four or fewer housing units, yard waste must be separated from mixed municipal waste in
accordance with rules, regulations and procedures adopted by the city for the separation of
recyclable materials from mixed municipal waste. The owner, tenant, leasee, occupant, and
anyone else having possession of a residential building must maintain containers in a
sanitary condition. All refuse products must be kept, maintained or stored for pick-up in
city approved containers, unless an appropriate amount of city solid waste stickers have
been applied for collection. Unapproved containers include but are not limited to trailers,
recreational vehicles or any motor vehicle. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-04)
(b) Unless otherwise authorized by the city in writing, each residential dwelling unit is required
to have mixed municipal solid waste regardless of occupancy status. (Added, Ord. No.
17-04)
(c) Each dwelling unit in a residential building will be charged a service charge for solid waste
collection, regardless of whether they utilize the service. (Added, Ord. No. 17-04)
(d) Pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Stat. 443.015, unpaid refuse
charges under this chapter that are in arrears, as well as authorized and permitted penalties,
may be certified to the county auditor and shall be collected and remitted to the City in the
same manner as assessments for legal improvements. In addition, the City shall also have
the right to bring a civil action or take other legal action to collect the unpaid refuse
charges. (Added, Ord. No. 17-04)
Subd. 3. Recyclables.
(a) Paper recyclables must be bundled separately or secured in such a manner as to prevent
them from being blown or scattered, be maintained in as dry a condition as practicable free
of any other substance, and may not be placed in plastic bags.
(b) Aluminum recyclables must be clean of all contents and such recyclables shall not be
placed in plastic bags.
(c) Glass recyclables must be clean of all contents and may not be placed in plastic bags.
(d) Metal recyclables must be clean of all contents and may not be placed in plastic bags.
(e) Yard waste compostibles must be placed in separate containers.
Subd. 4. Recyclables, container requirements. Containers provided by owners, lessees, or
occupants of commercial or residential buildings must be:
(a) maintained in a clean and sanitary condition in accordance with all pertinent health statutes,
ordinances, rules and regulations;
Robbinsdale City Code 605.03, Subd. 4 (b)
(Rev. 2010)
(b) located in such a manner so as to prevent them from being overturned or obstructing
pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic or being in violation of any statute, ordinance, rule or
regulation; and
(c) adequate and substantial enough to contain the recyclables therein. (Amended, Ord. No.
02-13)
Containers for recyclable material must be kept at or near a building using the same except on the day of
collection. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-13)
Subd. 5. Non-recyclables.
(a) The householder or occupant of a dwelling house, boarding house, restaurant or place of
business, having garbage to dispose of, must provide containers with fly tight covers to
receive all non-recyclable material that may accumulate between the times of collection.
(b) Mixed municipal solid waste accumulated between the times of collection must be placed
in said containers which may not contain any substance other than garbage. Water shall be
drained off the garbage before it is placed in the containers.
(c) Containers for non-recyclable material must be kept at or near a building using the same
except on the day of collection. On the day of collection, containers used for collection of
mixed municipal solid waste must be placed in a location accessible to collectors.
(Amended, Ord. No. 02-13)
(d) The code enforcement officer may require owners of dwellings or commercial structures at
specific addresses to provide large dumpster-type rubbish containers. The dumpster-type
rubbish containers must be rodent proof, well maintained, bear identification of the rubbish
firm supplying the containers, including the phone number, and be provided with covers
which owners and lessees can operate with no unusual physical effort. The rubbish haulers
providing the dumpster service must provide collection service at least once every week
and the dumpster or dumpsters must be of sufficient size to handle the accumulation of
rubbish between collections. (Amended, Ord. No. 94-07)
(e) The code enforcement officer shall require owners of dwellings or commercial structures at
specified addresses to obtain a permit for temporary containers. No permit shall be granted
for the right-of-way under this section. The permit fee is set by Appendix B. (Added, Ord.
No. 06-02)
Subd. 6. Collection. The collection, removal and disposal of recyclables, yard waste and mixed
municipal solid waste will be supervised by the city, the city may establish the time, method and routes of
service. Special times for large item pick-up may also be established. Collection provisions include but not
limited to the following:
(a) Notice of dates and times of collection will be published or otherwise made available to
persons affected herein.
(b) The city may establish drop-off or collection sites where any person may deposit
Robbinsdale City Code 605.03, Subd. 6 (b)
(Rev. 2017)
Recyclables or yard waste at such times and locations as determined.
(c) It is unlawful for any person other than employees of the city, or authorized persons,
collectors or haulers to distribute, collect, remove or dispose of recyclable or nonrecyclable
materials after said materials or yard waste have been placed or deposited for
collection. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-13)
(d) Nothing in this section abridges the right of any person to give or sell their recyclable
materials or yard waste to any recycling and composting program lawfully operated.
(e) Nothing in this section abridges the right of any authorized recycling or composting
program to lawfully operate within the city, subject to such other licenses or other
regulations as may be required by law.
(f) It is unlawful for a person to collect, remove, dispose or incinerate recyclables or yard
waste in this city in a manner inconsistent with rules, regulations or procedures adopted by
the city.
(g) No explosive, highly inflammable or hazardous material, such as batteries, shall be
deposited or placed for collection. Such material shall be disposed of as directed by the fire
chief, the city, the county, or another agency with jurisdiction over the disposal of
hazardous materials, at the sole expense of the owner. (Added, Ord. No. 17-04)
(h) Refuse including, but not limited to bedding, clothing, or utensils, which are being disposed
from any property where highly infectious or contagious diseases are present is prohibited
from being deposited in any manner for regular refuse collection and shall be disposed of
by the occupant as directed by the County Health Department. (Added, Ord. No. 17-04)
Robbinsdale City Code 605.04 Rev. 2010)
605.04. Yard waste composting. Subdivision 1. Purpose. Properly managed yard waste composting
provides valuable nutrients for gardens. Improperly managed operations can cause objectionable odors,
rodent harborages, and unsightly waste piles. The purpose of this section is to describe acceptable
composting operations. Composting is a microbial process that converts plant materials to a usable organic
soil amendment or mulch. (Added, Ord. No. 98-10; Amended, Ord. No. 10-06)
Subd. 2. Requirements for properly managed compost operations. Location: Compost containers
shall be located in rear yards only and at least two feet from the hard surface of an alley. Compost
containers may be no closer than 30 feet from any residential dwelling located on an adjacent property.
Said 30 feet to be measured horizontally to the foundation of the nearest living space within the structure
from the nearest edge of the proposed compost pile location. (Amended, Ord. No. 10-06)
a) Compost containers: Composting shall be conducted within an enclosed container(s) not to
exceed five-feet by five-feet by three-feet (height) for lots less than 5,000 square feet, two
five-foot by five-foot by three-foot (height) containers for lots 5,000 to 10,000 square feet,
and three five-foot by five-foot by three-foot (height) containers for lots larger than 10,000
square feet. Containers shall be of a durable material including, but not limited to, sturdy
woven wire fencing, rot-resistant wood, or a commercially purchased composting unit
which will provide for adequate aeration. Containers shall be constructed and maintained
in a structurally sound manner. (Added, Ord. No. 98-10; Amended, Ord. No. 10-06)
b) Compost materials: Only grass clippings, leaves, weeds that have not gone to seed,
nondiseased plants, trimmings less than one-fourth inch in diameter, straw, sawdust, wood
ashes, fruit or vegetable scraps, coffee grounds, eggshells, and commercially available
compost ingredients may be placed in the compost container(s). Meat, bones, fat oils,
grease, dairy products, feces, plastics or synthetic fibers shall not be placed in the compost
container(s). (Added, Ord. No. 10-06)
c) Maintenance: Compost materials shall be layered, aerated, moistened, turned, managed
and covered during inclement weather to promote effective decomposition of the materials
in a safe, secure and sanitary manner. (Added, Ord. No. 10-06)
Subd. 3. Informational materials. (Added, Ord. No. 98-10; Deleted, Ord. No. 10-06)
Subd. 4. Violations. It is unlawful to carry out composting operations in violation of the
requirements of this section. In addition to the other remedies available, such violation may be abated as a
public nuisance under section 2020.01 of this code. (Added, Ord. No. 98-10)
605.05. Licensing of collection, hauling or conveying of mixed municipal waste. Subdivision 1. License
required. It is unlawful to engage in collecting, hauling or conveying rubbish, garbage or other refuse in the
city unless a license is secured therefor as provided in this section.
Subd. 2. Application for license. Application for a license to collect, haul or convey rubbish,
garbage or other refuse in the city is made in writing, filed with the city clerk, and state the name and
address of the applicant, the types and makes of equipment to be used, a schedule of charges for the
performance of services, and full information as to where and how such rubbish, garbage or other material
must be disposed of. The applicant must provide a certificate of insurance with the city with public liability
insurance of not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit issued by an insurance company authorized to
do business in the state of Minnesota. The insurance policy must provide for the giving of 30 days prior
notice to the city of the termination or cancellation of the policy. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-22)
Robbinsdale City Code 605.05, Subd. 3
(Rev. 2010)
Subd. 3. License fee. The annual license fee for a license is set by Appendix B.
Subd. 4. Term and issuance of license. Licenses expire annually on December 31. Applications
for licenses will be considered by the city council and, if approved by the city council, a license will be
issued by the city clerk. Licenses are not transferable. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-22)
Subd. 5. Equipment of collector. A licensed garbage collector must provide a covered tank or
wagon, so constructed that the contents will not leak or spill therefrom, in which garbage collected must be
conveyed to the place designated in the license application. The wagon or conveyance used shall be kept
clean and as free from offensive odors as possible, and may not be allowed to stand in a street, alley or
public place longer than is reasonably necessary to collect garbage.
Subd. 6. Garbage collections. Garbage collections must be made under such terms and at such
times and frequencies as may be designated from time-to-time by the council.
Subd. 7. Garbage and refuse dumping. The depositing of or dumping of garbage, refuse or rubbish
within the city is prohibited; provided, however, that dumping or depositing of garbage, refuse or rubbish
may be permitted by special permit issued by the council and upon such terms and conditions as it deems
necessary and specified in the permit in the interests of the general health, safety and welfare.
605.07. Violation and penalty. Subdivision 1. It is unlawful to fail to dispose of mixed municipal solid
waste which may be or may accumulate upon property owned or occupied, in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
Subd. 2. A person violating a provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
605.09. Enforcement. It is the duty of the code enforcement officer to enforce the provisions of this
section.
605.11. (Added, Ord. No. 91-06, Sec. 1) Legislative intent. Subdivision 1. Legislative findings.
(a) The council finds that the large volume of waste generated by the telephone directories
distributed within the city creates a significant solid waste disposal problem within the city.
Directories are distributed in the city by several companies including U.S. West Direct,
Inc., GTE and Sun Communications. U.S. West Direct, Inc. is the primary distributor of
directories, both residential or "white page" directories and business or "yellow page"
directories, used by the resident and businesses in the city. U.S. West Direct alone
distributes over 950,000 phone books throughout the metropolitan area every year.
Without recycling efforts, these phone books contribute over four million pounds of paper
into the metropolitan area's wastestream putting an added burden on a system that is
running out of landfill space.
(b) The council further finds that these directories are not currently being recycled and are
currently being disposed of by either being placed in landfills or by being incinerated. Both
of these disposal methods rank low on the state of Minnesota's list of disposal priorities,
below reduction, reuse, and recycling. Landfill space available to the city is quickly being
filled, and incineration raises questions of environmental safety including emission into the
air of pollutants such as dioxin and other pollutants which are both harmful and annoying.
Robbinsdale City Code 605.11, Subd. 2
(Rev. 1991)
(c) The council finds that the reason telephone directories are not being recycled by the public
is not because of a lack of public interest. Rather, it is because the hot-glue process used in
the bindings of the directories is incompatible with paper recycling programs.
(d) The council finds that it is the responsibility of the distributor of directories distributed
within the city to either insure the compatibility of the directories with the city's curbside
recycling program by using a recyclable animal based, water soluble glue in the bindings or
to provide for a method of collection and recycling of the directories.
(e) Lastly, the council finds that even though the annual distribution of directories consumes
large amounts of paper, directories currently contain very little, if any, recycled content
paper. The use of recycled content paper reduces environmental strain in that the use of
recycled paper and the recycling of used paper products saves 60% of the water required to
make virgin paper; reduces water pollution by 15% to 60%; reduces air pollution by 60% to
70%; saves 20% to 70% of the energy needed to produce virgin paper; and saves 17 trees
per ton of paper recycled.
Subd. 2. Legislative purpose.
(a) It is the purpose of the city of Robbinsdale to reduce the number of telephone directories,
distributed in the city that are being placed in the municipal waste stream and ultimately
incinerated or landfilled. The council finds that requiring the distributors of directories to
develop and fund collection mechanisms, including curb-side collection and drop-off sites,
is a reasonable means to achieve this purpose.
(b) Further, it is also the purpose of the council to reduce the amount of virgin material used to
manufacture directories and encourage recycled content in directories distributed in the
city. The council finds that requiring a set level of recycled content in directories
distributed in the city is a reasonable means to achieve this purpose.
Subd. 3. For purposes of this subsection the terms defined in this subdivision have the meanings
given them.
(a) "Post-consumer waste" means a finished material which would have been disposed of as a
solid waste, having completed its life cycle as a consumer item, and does not include
manufacturing wastes.
(b) "Telephone directory" means a soft-cover listing of telephone numbers and addresses by
telephone listing territories commonly listed alphabetically or by occupation and distributed
to households and businesses in behalf of telecommunications utilities or private
advertisers.
(c) "Telephone directory distributor" means a person who distributes telephone directories
within the city and includes the principal of such party if such party is an agent and the
principal is located or doing business in the city.
Robbinsdale City Code 605.11, Subd. 4
(Rev. 1991)
Subd. 4. Telephone directories.
(a) Collection and recycling. A telephone directory distributor must provide for at least two
forms of collection of used directories for the purpose of recycling including:
(i) collection of used directories directly from each recipient of a new telephone
directory at their residence or place of business, and
(ii) collection through a reasonable number of drop-off sites convenient to and easily
accessed by the general public.
Implementation of these collection programs must be done as a condition of distributing
directories within the city. Telephone directory collection and recycling programs operated
by the distributor must be approved by the city manager prior to distribution of new
directories.
(b) Vegetable based ink. After 1992 a telephone directory produced for distribution in the city
must be printed with vegetable based ink.
(c) Recycled content. After 1992 a telephone directory produced for distribution in the city
must be made of paper that contains a minimum of 25% post-consumer recycled paper.
Robbinsdale City Code 610.01
Section 610 - Commercial Adult-Oriented Services and Public Baths
(Deleted, Ord. No. 03-12)
Robbinsdale City Code 613.01 (Rev. 2017)
Section 613 – Therapeutic Massage
(Added, Ord. No. 03-09)
613.01. Findings. It is found and determined that:
(a) persons who have recognized and standardized training in therapeutic massage, health and
hygiene provide a legitimate and necessary service to the general public; and
(b) health and sanitation regulations governing therapeutic massage enterprises and massage
therapists will minimize the risk of the spread of communicable diseases and promote
health and sanitation.
613.03. Definitions. Subdivision 1. “Clean” means the absence of dirt, grease, rubbish, garbage and other
offensive, unsightly or extraneous matter.
Subd. 2. “Massage” means the rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or rolling of the body of
another person with the hands or with the aid of objects, including but not limited to needles or stones, for
only the following purposes: physical fitness, health-care referral, and/or relaxation. (Amended, Ord. No.
17-03)
Subd. 3. “Therapeutic massage enterprise” means a place of business providing massage services to
the public for consideration. The term does not include a hospital, sanitarium, rest home, nursing home,
boarding home, or other institution for the hospitalization or care of other human beings duly licensed under
the provisions of Minnesota Statutes. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-03)
Subd. 4. “Therapeutic massage therapist” means a person who practices or administers massage to
the public for consideration.
Subd. 5. “In the city” means physical presence as well as telephone referrals such as phone-amassage
operations in which the enterprise premises, although not physically located within the city, serves
as a point of assignment of employees who respond to requests for services from within the city boundaries.
Subd. 6. “Legal age” is anyone 18 years of age or older.
613.05. License required. Subdivision 1. Therapeutic massage enterprise. It is unlawful to operate, offer,
engage in or carry on massage services in the city without a therapeutic massage enterprise license.
Subd. 2. Therapeutic massage therapists license. It is unlawful to practice, administer or provide
massage services in the city without a therapeutic massage therapist license.
613.07. Exemptions. Subdivision 1. A therapeutic massage enterprise license or massage therapist license
is not required for the following persons and places:
(a) persons licensed by the state to practice medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic,
physical therapy or podiatry, provided that the massage is administered in the regular
course of the medical treatment, not provided as part of a separate and distinct massage
business; and
Robbinsdale City Code 613.07, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2003)
(b) persons licensed by the state as beauty culturists or barbers, provided the persons do not
hold themselves out as giving massage treatments and provided that massage by beauty
culturists is limited to the head, hand, neck and feet and the massage by barbers is limited to
the head and neck; and
(c) persons working solely under the direction and control of a person duly licensed by the
state to practice medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy or podiatry
and nurses who work solely under the direction of any such person; and
(d) places licensed or operating as a hospital, nursing home, hospice, sanitarium or group home
established for hospitalization or medical care; and
(e) athletic coaches, directors and trainers employed by public or private schools.
Subd. 2. This section does not apply to bona fide health and fitness establishments that meet the
following criteria:
(a) the establishment has conducted business in the city for one year and is in good repute; and
(b) the primary purpose of the establishment is health and fitness, massage service is
subsidiary; and
(c) no more than 20% of the establishment revenue is derived from massage; and
(d) the financial records of the establishment are at all times available to the city for inspection;
and
(e) the establishment has an ongoing membership list of which is available to city officials for
inspection at any time.
613.09. General rule. The owner or operator of a licensed therapeutic massage enterprise may employ only
licensed therapeutic massage therapists to provide massage services. The owner or operator of a licensed
therapeutic massage enterprise need not be licensed as a therapeutic massage therapist unless that owner or
operator personally provides massage services.
613.11. License application. Subdivision 1. Therapeutic massage enterprise. The application for a
therapeutic massage enterprise license must contain the following information:
(a) whether the applicant, manager or operator has ever been convicted of a crime or offense;
and
(b) if the application is made on behalf of a joint business venture, partnership or any legally
constituted business association other than a corporation, the applicant must submit, along
with the application, accurate and complete business records showing the names and
addresses of all partners, officers and owners; and
(c) if the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the names and addresses of all
officers, general managers and members of the board of directors; and
Robbinsdale City Code 613.11, Subd. 1(d)
(Rev. 2017)
(d) complete and accurate documentation establishing the interest of the applicant and any
other person having an interest in the premises upon which the enterprise is proposed to be
located or in the furnishings thereof; and
(e) diagrams, plans, layouts and the like, showing the construction, revision, remodeling,
alteration or additions of or to the premises and specifically showing the layout, design and
arrangement of the bathing and restroom facilities and the size and type of equipment and
facilities to be used; and
(f) if the application is for premises either planned or under construction or undergoing
substantial alteration, the application must be accompanied by preliminary plans showing
the design of the proposed premises, if the plans for design are on file with the building
inspector, no plans need be submitted; and
(g) whether the applicant is licensed in other communities, and if so, where; and
(h) whether any licenses for which the applicant has applied within the last ten years have been
denied, suspended or revoked; and
(i) an insurance certificate for the massage therapy enterprise demonstrating personal liability
insurance in the amount of $1,500,000 covering liability in the practice of massage therapy
and insuring the enterprise and its therapists and associates; and (Amended, Ord. No. 13-
01)
(j) any other information that the city clerk or city council may require to enforce the
requirements of this section of the city code.
(k) a therapeutic massage enterprise may have no more than the equivalent of 15 full-time
licensed therapeutic massage therapists employed at any one time. If needed, the enterprise
applicant should contact the City Clerk for approval process of more than 15 full-time.
(Amended, Ord. No. 17-03)
Subd. 2. Therapeutic massage therapist. An applicant for a therapeutic massage therapist license
must meet the following criteria:
(a) the applicant, manager or operator must be free of convictions of offenses which involve
moral turpitude or which directly relate to the persons ability, capacity or fitness to perform
the duties and discharge the responsibility of the occupation;
(b) all massage therapists must provide evidence of membership from the American Massage
Therapy Association (AMTA), the Associated Bodywork and Massage Professionals
(ABMP) or any other organization with a similarly written and enforceable code of ethics;
and (Amended, Ord. No. 17-03)
(c) all massage therapists must have certification with a minimum of 500 hours of class credits
from a massage therapy school acceptable to the city; and (Amended, Ord. No. 17-03)
(d) all applications must include an insurance certificate for the individual massage therapist
demonstrating professional liability insurance in the amount of $2,000,000 per claim and
$6,000,000 in the individual aggregate; and (Amended, Ord. No. 17-03)
Robbinsdale City Code 613.11, Subd. 2(e)
(Rev. 2017)
(e) applicants must provide any other information the city clerk or city council may require to
enforce the requirements of this section of the city code; and
(f) all applicants must obtain any necessary state approvals from the Minnesota Board of
Medical Practice or other appropriate body if any portion of their massage practice will
involve any regulated items or procedures. Applicants shall furnish the city with proof of
any required state approvals prior to the city issuing a therapeutic massage therapist license.
Failure by the applicant to provide such proof may result in automatic denial of such
license application. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-03)
613.13. License term, fees, renewals. Licenses expire annually on December 31. The license fee will be
prorated in 30-day increments for license applications received after June 30. An investigation shall be
conducted and a fee will be charged for therapeutic massage enterprise and applicant licenses. The license
and investigation fees for a massage enterprise and therapist license are set forth in Appendix B. An
application for either license must be accompanied by payment in full of the required license and
investigation fees. Initial licenses for therapeutic massage enterprises shall be issued upon the approval of
the city council only after a public hearing has been conducted.
613.15. Conditions governing issuance of a license. Subdivision 1. Prior denial or revocation. Licenses
will be issued only to applicants who have not, within one year prior to the date of application been denied
licensure or who have not within such period had their license revoked.
Subd. 2. Review. The police department, community development department, and such other
departments as the manager shall deem necessary must review applications for a massage therapy enterprise
license. The police department must review applications for therapist licenses. The review of enterprise
license applications shall include an inspection of the premises covered by the application to determine
whether the premises conform to applicable code requirements.
Subd. 3. Zoning compliance. Licenses may only be granted when the premises involved are in
complete conformity with the zoning code of the city. A licensed therapeutic massage enterprise is
considered similar to other professional office uses or service providers for zoning purposes. A licensed
therapeutic massage enterprise may be a home occupation if in compliance with section 515.01, subdivision
3(c) of the zoning code. (Amended, Ord. No. 16-08)
Subd. 4. Planning considerations. A license will not be granted if granting the license (i) would be
inconsistent with the comprehensive development plans of the city or (ii) would otherwise have a
detrimental effect upon other property or properties.
613.17. General license restrictions. Subdivision 1. Area. A therapeutic massage enterprise license is
effective only for the compact and contiguous space specified in the approved license application. If the
licensed premises is enlarged, altered or extended, the licensee must inform the city clerk. A licensed
therapeutic massage therapist may perform on-site massage as a demonstration at a public gathering.
Therapeutic massage may be conducted in a private home by a licensed massage therapist meeting the
conditions of section 613.11, subdivision 2, if all other requirements of section 515.01, subdivision 3(c) are
met. (Amended, Ord. No. 16-08)
Subd. 2. Coverings. The therapist must require that the person who is receiving the massage will at
all times have that person’s buttock, anus, genitals and female breast(s), below a point immediately above
the top of the areola, covered with non-transparent material or clothing. A therapist performing massage
must have the therapist’s buttocks, anus, genitals and female breast(s), below a point immediately above the
Robbinsdale City Code 613.17, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2003)
top of the areola, covered with a non-transparent materials or clothing.
Subd. 3. Hours of operation. A licensed therapeutic massage enterprise may not operate between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Robbinsdale City Code 615.01 (Rev. 2009)
Section 615 - Food Establishments
615.01. Restaurants, cafes and food sales. Subdivision 1. License required. No person may operate a
restaurant, cafe, dining room, eating house, boarding house having more than four boarders, place of
refreshment, lunch counter, fountain service or offer temporary food sales in the city without first obtaining
a license. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-25)
Subd. 2. Application. Application for a license is made to the City Clerk on forms provided and
accompanied by the required fee. (Amended, Ord. No. 09-05)
Subd. 3. Fee. The annual license fee is set by Appendix B.
Subd. 4. Term. Licenses expire annually on December 31. The City Clerk may issue the license as
herein provided upon payment of the license fee, receipt of the appropriate Hennepin County license, and
approval of the Building Official and Fire Marshal. Licenses are not transferable. License renewal is
subject to the license provisions described in section 1005 Licensing Procedures. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-
05; Ord. No. 09-05)
Subd. 5. Cleanliness. It is unlawful to operate a licensed activity in a filthy, unclean or unsanitary
condition.
Subd. 6. Procedure in abating uncleanliness. If, in the opinion of the health officer, licensed
activity operated in violation of subdivision 5, the health officer will notify in writing the owner or manager
of such establishment to place the same in a clean and sanitary condition within a reasonable time to be
stated in the notice. Failure to comply with such notice within the time so stated is a violation of this
subsection.
Subd. 7. Diseased employees. It is unlawful for a person to work in or about a licensed activity or
allow any person or persons to work in such place whose condition is such that disease may be spread
directly or through the medium of food or food products, whether such condition be due to a contagious,
infectious, or venereal disease, in its active or convalescent states, or to the presence of disease germs,
whether accompanied by, or without any symptoms of the disease itself.
615.03. Soft drink parlors. Subdivision 1. Definitions. The term "soft drink parlors" means any place
where soft drinks are mixed, sold, and dispensed for consumption on the premises whether such business is
carried on in connection with any other business or not.
Subd. 2. License required. It is unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a soft drink parlor
without a license.
Subd. 3. Application for license. Application for a license is made to the City Clerk on forms
provided and accompanied by the required fee. (Amended, Ord. No. 09-05)
Subd. 4. License fee. The license fee is set by Appendix B.
Subd. 5. Term. Licenses expire annually on December 31. A license shall be issued by the City
Clerk as herein provided upon payment of the license fee, receipt of the appropriate Hennepin County
license, and approval of the Building Official and Fire Marshall. Licenses are not transferable. License
renewal is subject to the license provisions described in Section 1005 Licensing Procedures. (Amended,
Ord. No. 02-05; Ord. No. 09-05)
Robbinsdale City Code 615.03, Subd. 6
(Rev. 2013)
Subd. 6. Forfeiture of license. The license must be displayed in the licensed place of business. A
licensee convicted of violating law or ordinance prohibiting the sale, use and illegal possession of
intoxicating liquor or the state statutes affecting the same subject forfeits the license.
615.05. Convenience food and drive-in establishments. Subdivision 1. Definitions. The terms defined in
this subsection have the meanings given them.
(a) "Convenience food establishment" means an establishment that serves food in or on
disposable or edible containers in individual servings for consumption on or off the
premises.
(b) "Drive-in establishment" means an establishment that accommodates the patron's
automobile from which the occupants may receive a service or in which products purchased
from the establishment may be consumed.
Subd. 2. License required. No person may operate a convenience food or drive-in establishment in
the city without a license. (Amended, Ord. No. 09-05)
Subd. 3. Application for license. Application for a license is made to the City Clerk on forms
provided. The application shall be accompanied by the license fee and by a certificate of insurance as
required by this subsection. (Amended, Ord. No. 09-05)
Subd. 4. Insurance. The applicant must provide a certificate of insurance with the city with public
liability insurance of not less than $1,500,000 combined single limit issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota. The policy must provide for the giving of 30 days prior
notice in writing to the city of the termination or cancellation of the policy. (Amended, Ord. No. 96-03,
Sec. 1; Ord. No. 03-22, Ord. No. 13-01)
Subd. 5. License fee. The annual license fee is set by Appendix B. The license expires annually on
December 31. The license is not transferable.
Subd. 6. Prohibited activities.
(a) The licensee must keep the premises of any convenience food or drive-in establishment free
from debris and waste materials. The licensee must cause all such debris and waste
materials to be removed during each 24-hour period and as often as may be necessary to
prevent any such debris or waste materials from being blown to nearby streets and
premises.
(b) No person may place or leave any debris or waste materials upon the premises of a
convenience food or drive-in establishment unless such debris or waste materials be placed
in a waste receptacle provided on the premises for such purpose.
(c) Loudspeakers may not be used upon the premises for communications with customers or
employees and no juke box, radio, or other musical device, may be used or permitted on the
premises, provided that this provision does not prohibit the use, on the premises, of radios
installed in motor vehicles of customer; however, no person may use such a vehicle radio
upon the licensed premises if the volume of sound from such radio is audible more than ten
feet from the vehicle in which the radio is installed.
Robbinsdale City Code 615.05, Subd. 6 (d)
(Rev. 2009)
(d) No person upon or nearby the premises of any convenience food or drive-in establishment
may race the engine of any motor vehicle, cause any horn to be blown except as a traffic
warning, or cause any disturbance or loud noise upon or nearby said premises.
(e) No person upon the premises of a convenience food or drive-in establishment may drink,
have in his possession or under his control, or offer or give to another person to drink any
alcoholic beverage.
(f) (Deleted, Ord. No. 03-20)
(g) The premises of a convenience food or drive-in establishment must be kept adequately
lighted at all times when open to the public.
(h) No person may loiter and the licensee may not permit persons to loiter upon the premises if
such persons are not actually engaged in consumption of the food or beverages served the
licensee.
(i) The licensee must maintain quiet and order upon the premises. When the license premises
are open to the public, the licensee must provide an adequate number of attendants on duty
at all times, who shall patrol the exits, entrances and parking spaces in connection with the
licensed premises to see that order is maintained, disorderly or immoral conduct is
prevented, that the entrances and exists are kept free from congestion and that this section
and other ordinances governing drive-in and convenience food establishments are observed.
Subd. 7. Term. The license expires annually on December 31. A license shall be issued by the
City Clerk as herein provided upon payment of the license fee, receipt of required insurance, receipt of the
appropriate Hennepin County license, and approval of the Building Official and Fire Marshall. Licenses are
not transferable. License renewal is subject to the license provisions described in Section 1005 Licensing
Procedures. (Added, Ord. No. 09-05)
Robbinsdale City Code 620.01 (Rev. 1995)
Section 620 - Premises Conducive to High-Risk Sexual Conduct
(Added, Ord. No. 95-09)
620.01. Purpose. The purpose of this section of the city code is to prescribe regulations governing
commercial premises, buildings, and structures that are conducive, by virtue of design and use, to high-risk
sexual conduct which can result in the spread of sexually transmitted diseases to persons frequenting such
premises, buildings, and structures.
620.03. Findings of the city council. The city council of the city of Robbinsdale makes the following
findings regarding the need to regulate commercial premises, buildings, and structures that are conducive to
the spread of communicable disease of danger to persons in order to further the substantial interest of public
health:
(a) The experience of other cities establishes that certain commercial premises, buildings, and
structures, or parts thereof, by reason of the design and use of such premises, buildings, or
structures are conducive to the spread of communicable disease of danger to persons
frequenting such premises, buildings, or structures, as well as to the general public, and that
the risk of spreading infectious and contagious diseases can be minimized by regulating
such commercial premises, buildings, and structures.
(b) The experience of other cities where such commercial premises, buildings, and structures
are present indicates that the risk of spreading the sexually transmittable disease of
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is increased by the presence of such
premises, buildings, and structures, because the design or use of such premises, buildings,
and structures, or parts thereof can facilitate high-risk sexual conduct.
(c) Medical publications of the Center for Disease Control of the United States Department of
Health and Human Services indicate that the sexually transmittable disease of AIDS is
currently irreversible and uniformly fatal. Medical research has further established that the
risk factors for obtaining or spreading AIDS are associated with high-risk sexual conduct.
620.05. Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this section shall have the following
meanings unless the context indicates otherwise:
(a) Booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room or individual room: (i) enclosures
specifically offered to persons for a fee or as an incident to performing high-risk sexual
conduct, or (ii) enclosures which are part of a business operated on the premises which
offers movies or other entertainment to be viewed within the enclosure, including
enclosures wherein movies or other entertainment is dispensed for a fee.
The phrase "booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room or individual room" does not
mean enclosures which are private offices used by the owners, managers or persons
employed by the premises for attending to the tasks of their employment, and which are not
held out to the public or members of the establishment for hire or for a fee or for the
purpose of viewing movies or other entertainment for a fee, and are not open to any persons
other than employees.
Robbinsdale City Code 620.07 (Rev. 1995)
(b) Doors, curtains or portal partitions: full, complete, non-transparent closure devices through
which one cannot see or view activity taking place within the enclosure.
(c) Hazardous site: any commercial premises, building or structure, or any part thereof, which
is a site of high-risk sexual conduct as defined herein.
(d) High-risk sexual conduct:
(i) fellatio;
(ii) anal intercourse; and/or
(iii) vaginal intercourse with persons who engage in sexual acts in exchange for money.
(e) Open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent
public room: either the absence of any entire "door, curtain or portal partition" or a door or
other device which is made of clear, transparent material such as glass, plexiglass or other
similar material meeting building code and safety standards, which permits the activity
inside the enclosure to be entirely viewed or seen by persons outside the enclosure.
(f) Public health official: an agent or employee of the city, county or state charged with the
enforcement of the state or local health laws.
620.07. Public health regulations. Subdivision 1. No commercial building, structure, premises or part
thereof, or facilities therein shall be so constructed, used, designed or operated in the city for the purpose of
engaging in, or permitting persons to engage in, sexual activities which include high-risk sexual conduct.
Subd. 2. No person shall own, operate, manage, rent, lease, or exercise control of any commercial
building, structure, premises, or portion or part thereof in the city, which contains:
(a) Partitions between subdivisions of a room, portion or part of a building, structure or
premises having an aperture which is designed or constructed to facilitate sexual activity,
including but not limited to vaginal intercourse, anal intercourse, or fellatio, between
persons on either side of the partition.
(b) "Booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room or individual room" as defined herein
which have "doors, curtains or portal partitions" as defined herein unless such booths, stalls,
partitioned portions of a room or individual room have at least one side open to an adjacent
public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent public room as
defined herein. Booths, stalls, and/or partitioned portions of a room or individual room that
are so open to an adjacent public room shall be lighted in a manner that the persons in the
area used for viewing motion pictures or other forms of entertainment are visible from the
adjacent public rooms, but such lighting shall not be of such intensity as to prevent the
viewing of the motion pictures or other offered entertainment.
620.09. Exceptions. The regulations set forth in this section shall not apply to premises, buildings, or
structures that are lawfully operating and licensed as hotels, motels, apartment complexes, condominiums,
townhomes, or boarding houses which are subject to other general health and sanitation requirements under
state and local law.
Robbinsdale City Code 620.11
(Rev. 1995)
620.11. Health enforcement powers. Subdivision 1. In exercising powers conferred by this or any other
section of this code relating to communicable diseases, the public health official shall be guided by the most
recent instructions, opinions and guidelines of the Center for Disease Control of the United States
Department of Health and Human Services which relate to the spread of infectious diseases.
Subd. 2. In order to ascertain the source of infection and reduce its spread, the public health
official, and persons under the public health official's direction and control, shall have full power and
authority to inspect or cause to be inspected, and to issue orders regarding any commercial building,
structure or premises, or any part thereof, which may be a site of high-risk sexual conduct. If the public
health official determines that a hazardous site as defined herein exists, the public health official shall
declare it to be a public health hazard and public health nuisance and shall then:
(a) Notify the manager, owner, or tenant of the hazardous site that the public health official has
reasonable belief that the premises, building or structure is a hazardous site as defined
herein,
(b) Issue two written warnings at least ten days apart to the manager, owner, or tenant of the
premises stating the specific reasons for the public health official's opinion that the
premises, building, or structure is a hazardous site as defined herein,
(c) Once such notices and warnings have been issued, the public health official or the public
health official's appointee shall proceed as follows:
(1) After the manager, owner or tenant of the premises has
been notified in writing as to the basis of the public health official's determination,
the manager, owner or tenant shall have ten days from the date of the last warning
to request a hearing before the public health official or the public health official's
appointee for the determination as to the existence of such hazardous site. If the
manager, owner or tenant of the premises does not request a hearing within ten
days of the date of the last warning notice, the public health official shall then
cause the premises to be posted with a warning advising the public that the
premises have been declared a hazardous site and the public health official shall
cause orders to be issued to the manager, owner or tenant of the premises
constituting the hazardous site to take specified corrective measures to prevent
high-risk sexual conduct from taking place within the premises.
(2) If the manager, owner, or tenant of the premises requests a hearing, the hearing
shall be held before the public health official or the public health official's
appointee at a date not more than 30 days after demand for a hearing. After
considering all evidence, the public health official or the public health official's
appointee shall make a determination as to whether the premises constitute a
hazardous site, as defined herein and issue a decision based upon all hearing
evidence presented. If the public health official or the public health official's
appointee makes a determination that the premises constitute a hazardous site, the
public health official shall then issue orders to the manager, owner, or tenant of the
premises to take corrective measures to prevent high-risk sexual conduct from
taking place within the premises and cause the premises to be posted with a
warning advising the public that the premises have been declared a hazardous site.
Robbinsdale City Code 620.13 (Rev. 1995)
(3) If, within 30 days from issuance of the orders to the manager, owner, or tenant of
the hazardous site, the public health official determines that such corrective
measures have not been undertaken, the public health official may order the
abatement of the hazardous site as a public nuisance, which shall be enforced by
mandatory or prohibitory injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction, or may
secure a court order for the closure of the premises constituting the hazardous site
until the premises, building, or structure is in compliance with the regulations set
forth in section 9.14 of this section.
620.13. Criminal penalties. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any person who removes,
destroys or defaces warnings posted on premises by the public health official pursuant to this chapter shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Robbinsdale City Code 625.01 (Rev. 2006)
Section 625 – Cleanup of Clandestine Drug Lab Sites and Chemical Dump Sites
(Added, Ord. No. 03-16)
(Repealed, Ord. No. 06-05)
Robbinsdale City Code 630.01 (Rev. 2003)
Section 630 – Regulating Body Art
(Added, Ord. No. 03-18)
630.01. Provisions of Hennepin County ordinance adopted. Except as modified in this section, the
provisions of Hennepin County Ordinance No. 23, Body Art Code, are adopted by reference and made a
part of this section.
630.03. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the business of body art in order to protect the
health and welfare of the general public.
630.05. Definition. “Body Art” means physical body adornment using, but not limited to, the following
techniques: body piercing, tattooing, and cosmetic tattooing. This definition does not include practices
considered part of a medical procedure performed by board certified medical or dental personnel, such as,
but not limited to, implants under the skin. Such medical procedures shall not be performed in a body art
establishment. This section definition shall not include piercing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear
using a pre-sterilized single use study and clasp ear piercing system.
630.07. License application. Subdivision 1. Application for a license is made to the city council, setting
out the name of the owner or owners of such business, the location at which the same is to be operated and
any other information that the city clerk or city council may require to enforce the requirements of this
section of the city code.
No license application shall be submitted to the city council for approval unless it has been approved by the
Planning Department as meeting the city’s zoning regulations, the Robbinsdale Police Department, and the
applicant has provided the city with a current copy of their Hennepin County Body Art Establishment
license.
Subd. 2. License fee. The annual license fee is set by appendix B. Licenses will not be prorated.
Subd. 3. Investigative fee. All applications shall be referred to the Robbinsdale police department
for verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the application, including any necessary criminal
background checks to assure compliance with this subsection. Upon applying for a new or renewal license,
the applicant shall pay an investigative fee set by appendix B.
630.09. Persons ineligible for license. Subdivision 1. No license shall be issued to an applicant who is a
natural person if such applicant:
(a) Is a minor at the time the application is filed;
(b) Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed by
Minnesota Statutes, section 364.03, subdivision 2, and has not shown competent evidence
of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the licensed
occupation as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes, section 364.03, subdivision 3;
(c) Does not have the legal authority to be employed in the United States; or
(d) Is not of good moral character or repute.
Robbinsdale City Code 630.09, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2003)
Subd. 2. No license shall be issued to a partnership if such partnership has any general partner or
managing partner:
(a) Is a minor at the time the application is filed;
(b) Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed by
Minnesota Statutes, section 364.03, subdivision 2, and has not shown competent evidence
of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the licensed
occupation as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes, section 364.03, subdivision 3;
(c) Does not have the legal authority to be employed in the United States; or
(d) Is not of good moral character or repute.
Subd. 3. No license shall be issued to a corporation or other organization if such applicant has any
manager, proprietor, or agent in charge of the business to be licensed:
(a) Is a minor at the time the application is filed;
(b) Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed by
Minnesota Statutes, section 364.03, subdivision 2, and has not shown competent evidence
of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the licensed
occupation as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes, section 364.03, subdivision 3;
(c) Does not have the legal authority to be employed in the United States; or
(d) Is not of good moral character or repute.
630.11. General license requirements. Subdivision 1. Parental consent. No person under the age of 18
may receive a tattoo or body art unless the person provides notarized written parental consent for the tattoo
or body art. The consent must include both the custodial and noncustodial parents.
Subd. 2. Prohibition on license transfer. A license is for the person and the premises named on the
approved license application. Transfer of a license is not permitted from place-to-place or from person-toperson.
Subd. 3. Hours of operation. A licensed establishment may not be open for business before 8:00
a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. No Sunday hours.
Subd. 4. Licensed premises. The license is only effective for the compact and contiguous space
specified in the approved license application.
Subd. 5. Effect of license suspension or revocation. It is unlawful to solicit business or offer to
perform tattooing or body art while under license suspension or revocation by the city.
Subd. 6. Signs removed. Whenever any establishment ceases to be licensed whether through the
suspension, cancellation, revocation, non-renewal or lapse of its license, its owners shall immediately
remove from public view any sign or display that identifies the establishment as being an enterprise as
defined in subsection 625.03.
Robbinsdale City Code 630.11, Subd. 7
(Rev. 2006)
Subd. 7. Temporary license. No temporary licenses will be issued.
630.13. Liability Insurance. Prior to the issuance of a license, the applicant shall file with the clerk a
liability insurance policy providing coverage of at least $1 million combined single limit issued by an
insurance company authorized in the state of Minnesota. The policy shall provide that no cancellation for
any cause may be made by either the insured or the insurer without first giving written notice of such
cancellation to the city at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the cancellation. The policy shall
further provide that no payment of any claim by the insurance company shall in any manner decrease the
coverage provided for in respect to any other claim or claims brought against the insured or the insuring
company. The policy shall be subject to approval by the city attorney as to form and execution and shall be
issued by companies who are duly licensed to do business in the state of Minnesota. The policy, when
approved, shall be deposited with the clerk.
630.15. Term. Licenses expire annually on December 31. Licenses are not transferable. License renewal
is subject to the license provisions described in section 1005 Licensing Procedures.
630.17. Zoning compliance. No license shall be granted if the property is not zoned B-3 or B-4.
630.19. Cleanliness. It is unlawful to operate a licensed activity in a filthy, unclean or unsanitary condition.
630.21. Forfeiture of license. The current Hennepin County license and the city of Robbinsdale license
must be displayed in the licensed place of business. A licensee convicted of violating law or ordinance,
including the Hennepin County Ordinance Number 23, forfeits the license.
630.23. Revocation. Subdivision 1. General. The city council may revoke the license or suspend the
license if the licensee submitted false information or omitted material information in the license process
required. The city council may suspend or revoke a license for the violation of any provision or condition of
this section or any other local law governing the same activity during the license period or any criminal law
during the license period which adversely affect on the ability to honestly, safely, or lawfully conduct a
tattooing, body piercing, or body art business.
Subd. 2. A revocation or suspension shall be preceded by written notice to the licensee and a
hearing before the city council. The notice shall state the charges against the licensee. The notice shall be
mailed to the licensee at the most recent address listed on the application.
Section 635 – Provisions of Hennepin County Ordinance Adopted
(Added, Ord. No. 06-05)
The provisions of the Hennepin County Ordinance No. 25, Public Health Nuisance Ordinance, and future
amendments, are adopted by reference and made a part of this section.
Robbinsdale City Code 700.01
CHAPTER VII
PUBLIC UTILITIES
Section 700 - Sewer and Water Connections
700.01. General provisions. Subdivision 1. Connections. Connections to the city water system must be
made in conformity with this section and under the supervision of the director of public works/engineer
(referred to in this chapter as "the director"). The resident or owner is responsible for the maintenance
and repair of the water service from the water main to the meter, including the corporation stop
connection at the main and the curb stop and curb box in the boulevard, and other valves and fixtures
inside the building. If any portion of the water service defined as the owner's responsibility develops a
leak or becomes defective, the city may repair the defect and assess the repair costs against the benefited
property.
Subd. 2. Meters. Except for extinguishing fires, no person except authorized city employees may
use water from the water system of the city or permit water to be drawn therefrom, unless the water is
metered by passing through a meter supplied or approved by the city unless the water is paid for on a flat
rate basis. No person may connect, disconnect, take apart, or in any manner change, or cause to be
changed, or interfere with a meter or the action thereof unless authorized by the engineer. A charge will
be made to customers for use of water meters and must be made in advance before delivery for
installation. The charge is the actual cost to the city of supplying the meter. The city will maintain and
repair or replace all meters under 5/8" when rendered unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear.
When replacement, repair or adjustment of a meter is rendered necessary by the act, neglect or
carelessness of the owner or occupant of a premises, the expense caused the city thereby will be charged
against and collected from the owner or occupant of the premises by a statement of charges itemizing the
repairs. Water service may be disconnected until the cause is corrected and the charge collected. Repair
and maintenance of meters over 5/8" will be the responsibility of the property owner. All 5/8" water
meters are the property of the city, and may be replaced or changed by the engineer when necessary.
700.03. Protecting trenches. Whenever from necessity a trench for pipe is left open during the night, the
trench must be properly secured with barricades equipped with flashing lights in a manner approved by
the city engineer.
700.05. Installation. The corporation stop inserted in the distributing pipe must be of the size specified in
the permit order. Service pipes must be laid with sufficient waving to allow not less than one foot of
extra length, and in such manner as to prevent rupture by settlement. The service pipe must be placed not
less than seven feet below the surface, from the main to the building line and arranged to prevent rupture
from freezing.
700.07. Stop boxes. A service pipe must extend from the main to the inside of the building; or, if not
taken into a building, then to the hydrant or other fixtures which it is intended to supply. A stop-cock
must be placed outside in a box, and a shut-off or other stop-cock with drain, of the size and strength
required, must be placed close to the inside wall of the building, well protected from freezing. Stop boxes
at the curb must be set between the curb and the building.
Robbinsdale City Code 700.09
(Rev. 2005)
700.09. Materials and weights. Service pipes from the main to the meter must be of copper, type K.
Copper pipe must conform in all respects to the standards published by the American Water Works
Association, copies of which will be kept available in the office of the director. The service pipes must be
a continuous piece from the main to the curbstop and from the curbstop to the structure if new
construction. No compression fittings may be installed on services.
700.11. Size of pipe. A one-inch pipe must be attached to a 3/4 inch corporation stop and 3/4 inch curb
stop. No deviation in size or weights or pipe is permitted unless a special written permit is obtained from
the engineer.
700.13. Opening in streets. Streets must be opened and paving stones deposited in the manner causing
the least inconvenience to the public. Provision must be made for the passage of water along the gutters.
One-half of the street must be at all times in good and safe condition for the passage of vehicles.
Excavation must be done only as provided by this code. An excavation in a street or public place may not
be left open overnight without being thoroughly barricaded or railed off and so lighted as to secure public
safety. If an opening is made whereby water mains or service pipes are exposed measures must be taken
to protect the main or pipes from frost.
700.15. Inspectors to have access. The director may examine plumbing work, materials and fixtures at
reasonable times. Every person owning improved real estate that discharges into the city's sanitary sewer
system shall allow an employee of the city or their designated representative to inspect the buildings
thereon to confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer
system. In lieu of having the city inspect their property, any person may furnish a certificate from a
licensed plumber certifying that their property is in compliance with this section.
Any person refusing to allow their property to be inspected or refusing to furnish a plumber's certificate
within 14 days of the date a city employee or their designated representative are denied admittance to the
property, shall immediately become subject to the surcharge hereinafter provided for. Any property
found to violate this section shall make the necessary changes to comply with this section and furnish
proof of the changes to the city. (Amended, Ord. No. 98-16, Sec. 1)
700.16. Future inspections. Any property may be inspected on a yearly basis to confirm that there are no
prohibited discharges or connections to the sanitary sewer system. (Added, Ord. No. 98-16, Sec. 2;
Amended, Ord. No. 05-01)
700.17. Refilling openings. In refilling openings the earth must be replaced in the trench, and thoroughly
tamped as directed by the engineer. The engineer may require new trench material hauled in and existing
material hauled away if existing material is unacceptable.
700.19. Flagging restored. If a flagging disturbed by a plumber is not restored to as good order as it was
at the time the plumber commenced the work, and if the plumber neglects or refuses to do such work
within 24 hours after notice thereof from the director, the proper repairs will be done by the city and the
costs thereof charged to the plumber.
700.21. Supply from one corporation stop. No more than one house may be supplied from one
corporation stop, which may not be larger than one inch, unless by special permit. No more than one
building may be supplied from one pipe, connecting with the distribution main. Each building must have
a separate stop box.
700.23. Interference with hydrants, gates. No person other than an authorized city employee may open
or interfere with a city hydrant or valves unless authorized by the director.
Robbinsdale City Code 700.27 (Rev. 1998)
700.25. Deficiency of water. The city is not liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to
customers, whether occasioned by shutting the water off for the purpose of making repairs or connections
for any other reason.
700.27. Old stops plugged. When new buildings are erected on the sites of old ones, and it is desired to
increase or change the old water service, no connections with the mains are permitted until the old
corporation stops have been removed and the main plugged or the old corporation stops have been shut
off if not leaking. When a building is demolished or being moved the existing water service must be shut
off at the main and a section of the water line must be cut off so that a physical break exists.
Robbinsdale City Code 700.29
700.29. Private water supplies. Water pipes of the city's public water system may not be connected to a
pump, well or tank that is connected to a private waterworks system.
700.31. Size of hose. Hoses larger than one inch in diameter may not be used for service pipes without
special permission from the director.
700.33. Permits required. No person may make a connection to a city water or sewer main without a
permit from the clerk. The application for the permit must state the location of the proposed connection,
the time when the connection is to be made, and by whom the work is to be done. The permit will not be
issued until the application is approved by the director and until the applicant has complied with the
provisions of this code and other applicable ordinances and laws.
700.35. Issuance of permits. The clerk may not grant a permit to tap or connect with a water main or
sewer of the city unless at the time of the granting of the permit special assessments for the water main or
sewer against the property which it is desired to connect with such water main or sewer have been paid in
full, if the assessments have not been made payable in installments; if the assessments have been made
payable in installments, no permit may be granted unless all installments due and payable have been paid.
This subsection does not restrict the power of the city, pursuant to statute or ordinance, to levy
assessments for any improvements not previously assessed against the property benefited.
700.37. Sewer supervision. The director supervises and controls public sewers, drains, and connections
thereto. No connection may be made with the sewer system without a permit. The resident or owner is
responsible for maintenance and repair of the sanitary sewer line from the main to the clean out in the
building including the sewer wye and stack and all connections attached to the sewer main. The director
is responsible for maintenance and repair of the sanitary sewer mains. If any portion of the sewer service
which is the owner's responsibility develops a leak or becomes defective, the city may repair such defect
and assess all repair costs against benefited property.
700.39. Sewer connections. Connection with a public sewer or drain may be made only by licensed
plumbers or authorized city employees.
700.41. Connections. Subdivision 1. How made. The provisions of this subsection must be observed in
work relating to sewer connections.
Subd. 2. Permits. Permits must be procured before breaking ground in a street or alley.
Subd. 3. Laying. A sewer connection may not be laid in the same trench with water, gas or other
pipe unless installed in accordance with the state planning code. Sewer connections must be laid far
enough from others to admit of the repair or removal or relaying of any one without disturbing the others.
Subd. 4. Connection to main. New connections made must be made within the middle third of
the interior height of the sewer to which connection is made. Only wye's or properly secured saddles with
machine cut holes may be used for sewer connections.
Robbinsdale City Code 700.41, Subd. 5
(Rev. 1998)
Subd. 5. Grading. Connection pipes must be laid in a true line and grade from the sewer to the
building line in an open trench and before any refilling is done and may be not less than six inches in
diameter and made of best quality virtrified clay pipe or standard cast iron soil pipe (bell and spigot
pattern). The sewer connection must extend from the city sewer up to and within two feet of the building
line, except where property owners have existing cesspools or tanks in which case the sewer connection
must extend from the sewer to the house side of the cesspool or tank.
Subd. 6. Materials. The only materials allowed for sewer service connections from the main to
the property line shall be PVC Schedule 40 pipe, or ductile iron pipe (bell and spigot pattern), which shall
not be less than 4" in diameter. Virtrified clay pipe may only be used for repair purposes in this area.
Materials used for sewer connections from the property line to the structure must be in conformance with
the State Plumbing Code. (Amended, Ord. No. 98-16, Sec. 3)
In addition, any structure which requires, because of infiltration of clear water into basements, crawl
spaces, and the like, a sump pump discharge system shall have a permanently installed discharge line
which shall not at any time discharge clear water into the sanitary sewer system. A permanent installation
shall be one which provides for year-round discharge capability to either the outside of the dwelling,
building, or structure, or is connected to the city storm sewer or discharges through the curb and gutter to
the street. It shall consist of a rigid pipe discharge line, without valving or quick connections for altering
the path of discharge, and if connected to the city storm sewer line, the discharge shall include a check
valve and an air gap located in a small diameter structure as shown in the city's standards. A flexible
section, less than two feet in length, is acceptable within three feet of the sump pump to reduce noise from
vibrations. Flexible hose is prohibited in any other location on the permanent discharge line. (Added,
Ord. No. 98-16, Sec. 3)
Subd. 7. Packing. Connection pipe must be enveloped in clean sand or approved material to a
thickness of not less than six inches.
Subd. 8. Pipe bedding. Connection pipe must be enveloped in clean sand or approved material to
a thickness of not less than one foot on all sides of the pipe. If service pipe is placed on soil not suitable
for supporting pipe and maintaining grade, other support methods, approved by the engineer, must be
used to insure pipe grade does not change.
Subd. 9. Drains. Drains from public garages, public or private greasing and automobile washing
stations, kitchen sinks of hotels and restaurants and from laundries, and other places where deemed
necessary by the engineer, must be provided with grease traps, or catch basins or both, of a type easily
cleanable and approved by the city. The outlet for such catch basins must be properly trapped to prevent
air from the sewer entering the building and provided with a back water trap to prevent water from the
sewer backing up into the catch basin.
Subd. 10. Trench backfilling. After the pipe is laid the refilling must proceed at once and it must
be thoroughly tamped or puddled, or both, and so done that there is no surplus earth remaining. If there is
a deficiency of earth to fill the excavation, the plumber doing the work must supply the deficiency with
clean sand or approved material. No rock larger than four inches across or thick may be placed within
two feet of the pipe. A sidewalk, street, alley or driveway removed in order to make such connection
must be repaved subject to the approval of the engineer.
Subd. 11. Supervision. Work must be done under the supervision of the director. Drain pipes for
public sewers or private drains must be inspected before being covered.
Subd. 12. Fires. No person may build a fire upon any pavement or within any sewer or drain.
Subd. 13. Connections. Connections at chimney stacks must be made with two one-eighth bends
of the required diameter, separated by one length of straight pipe.
Robbinsdale City Code 700.41, Subd. 14
(Rev. 1998)
Subd. 14. Filling. When a connection is made to the sanitary sewer system, cesspools, septic tanks,
or other sewage disposal facilities existing on the property that is connected must be filled to earth level with
suitable material.
Subd. 15. Check systems. Check systems must be installed on services connected to any main
directly servicing or connected to a sanitary sewer lift station force main, or otherwise connected to sanitary
sewer mains that have a history of backup problems. Check systems must also be installed on all sump pump
discharge lines. (Amended, Ord. No. 98-16, Sec. 3).
Subd. 16. Sewer depth. Sewers must be placed not less than seven feet below the surface. Sewers
placed less than seven feet from the surface must be protected from freezing in a manner approved by the
director.
700.43 - 700.49. (Repealed, Ord. No. 97-11)
700.43. Sanitary sewer connections prohibited. Subdivision 1. No person shall make connection of roof
downspouts, foundation drains, sump pumps, or cause to be discharged any storm water, ground water, cooling
water, roof runoff, yard drainage, yard fountain, swimming pool, or pond overflow to a building sewer, drain,
or sanitary sewer service, which, in turn, is connected, directly or indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer unless
such connection is approved by the city engineer and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. All such water
and unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to
a natural outlet approved by the city engineer and in accordance with the 1997 storm water managment plan or
subsequent amendments thereto.
Subd. 2. Right of entrance. Every person owning improved real estate that discharges into the
sanitary sewer system shall allow duly authorized employees of the city or a designated representative of the
city, bearing proper credentials and identification, to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing to confirm that there are no prohibited discharges or
connections to the sanitary sewer system.
Subd. 3. Refusal of entry. Any person refusing to allow their property to be inspected shall
immediately become subject to the following described surcharge of $50.00 per month which shall be added to
every utility bill mailed to the property owner or tenant who is not in compliance with this chapter. The
surcharge shall be added every month until the property is in compliance with this section. All properties
found during reinspection to have violated this section shall be subject to a $50.00 per month penalty for all
months between the two most recent inspections up to a maximum of $500.00. The imposition of such
surcharge shall in no way limit the right of the city to seek an injunction in district court ordering the property
owner to disconnect the non-conforming connection to the sanitary sewer system or from pursuing any other
legal remedies available. (Amended, Ord. No. 98-16, Sec. 4)
Subd. 4. Notice of violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of this section shall be
served by the city with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently correct all violations so that they are in compliance with this chapter. Such corrections shall be
verified by a city employee or a designated representative of the city. (Amended, Ord. No. 98-16, Sec. 4)
Any person having a roof, surface, or ground water sump pump, footing tile, or swimming pool now connected
and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer system shall disconnect and/or remove same. Any disconnects or
openings in the sanitary sewer shall be closed or repaired in an effective, workmanlike manner, as approved by
the city or their designated agent. Any property owner refusing to disconnect at these sources of
inflow/infiltration of clear water within the deadlines established by the city shall immediately become subject
to the surcharge provided for above. (Added, Ord. No. 98-16, Sec. 4)
Subd. 5. Incurred costs. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be liable to
the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city. (Added, Ord. No. 97-11)
Robbinsdale City Code 700.45 (Rev. 1997)
700.45. Correct sump pump installations. All sump pumps shall have a discharge pipe installed to the
outside wall of the building with a one inch inside minimum diameter. The pipe attachment must be a
permanent fitting such as PVC pipe with glued fittings. The discharge shall extend at least three feet
outside of the foundation wall and must be directed toward the front yard or rear yard area of the property.
(Added, Ord. No. 97-11)
700.47. New residential construction installations. All new residential construction, having a sump
basket, shall have the sump pump installed in the sump basket with permanent fittings and discharged to
the outside of the foundation wall as described in the preceding paragraph. Such work shall be completed
prior to the final building inspection and issuance of a certificate of occupancy. (Added, Ord. No. 97-11)
700.49. Prohibited discharges. Subdivision 1. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
of the following described water or waste to any public sanitary or storm sewer:
(a) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or
gas.
(b) Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity,
either single or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of a wastewater treatment plant.
(c) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel entering the
sanitary sewer system.
(d) Solid or fiscous substances in such quantities or of such size capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud,
metal, glass, tar, plastic, wood, grease, rags, disposable diapers, feminine hygiene
products, etc.
Subd. 2. Information requests. The city engineer or other duly authorized employees are
authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may withhold information
considered confidential. The industry must establish that the revelation to the public, of the information
in question, might result in an advantage to competitors. (Added, Ord. No. 97-11)
700.51. Frozen services. It is unlawful to connect electric welders to any portion of the water system or
water service for the purpose of thawing out a service. Any other method used for this purpose must be
approved by the director.
700.53. Air conditioning systems regulated. Subdivision 1. General rule. Air conditioning units of a
capacity larger than two tons that use water as a coolant must be connected to the storm sewer system of
the city for the purpose of discharging the waste water from the air conditioning units.
Robbinsdale City Code 700.53, Subd. 2
(Rev. 1998)
Subd. 2. Permits required. No person may install or allow the installation of any air conditioning
unit without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk. The application for the permit must include the
location of and plans for the proposed installation, and by whom the work is to be done. The permit may
not be issued until the application is approved by the director and until the applicant has complied with
the provisions of this code and the law.
Subd. 3. Access to premises. The director may, at reasonable times, enter premises equipped
with air conditioning units of a capacity larger than two tons to determine compliance with this code.
700.55. New home inspections. All new homes shall be required to have their sump pump system
inspected at or prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy and a certificate of compliance
completed. (Added, Ord. No. 98-16, Sec. 5)
Robbinsdale City Code 703
(Rev. 2012)
Section 703 – Illicit Discharge and Connection
703.01. Purpose and intent. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the City of Robbinsdale through the regulation of non-Storm Water discharges
to the Storm Drainage System to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law.
This ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of Pollutants into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this ordinance are:
(1) To regulate the contribution of Pollutants to the MS4 by Storm Water discharges by any
user;
(2) To prohibit Illicit Connections and discharges to the MS4; and
(3) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and
enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
703.03. Definitions. Subdivision 1. The terms defined in this section have the meanings given them.
Subd. 2. Authorized Enforcement Agency. Employees or designees of the City Manager of the
City of Robbinsdale designated to enforce this ordinance.
Subd. 3. Best Management Practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance
procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of Pollutants directly or
indirectly to Storm Water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also include
treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
Subd. 4. City. The City of Robbinsdale.
Subd. 5. Clean Water Act. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and
any subsequent amendments thereto.
Subd. 6. Construction Activity. Activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits pursuant to 40
CFR Section 122.26 including construction projects resulting in extraction of more than 25 cubic yards of
material or land disturbance of 100 square feet or more. Such activities include but are not limited to
clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
Subd. 7. Hazardous Material. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination
thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics
may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise
managed.
Robbinsdale City Code 703.03, Subd. 8
(Rev. 2012)
Subd. 8. Illicit Connection. An Illicit Connection is defined as either of the following:
(a) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that allows an Illicit
Discharge to enter the Storm Drainage System including but not limited to any
conveyances that allow any non-Storm Water discharge including Sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the Storm Drainage System and any connections to
the Storm Drainage System from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said
drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an
authorized enforcement agency; or,
(b) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the
Storm Drainage System that has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent
records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
Subd. 9. Illicit Discharge. Any direct or indirect non-Storm Water discharge to the Storm
Drainage System, except as exempted in 703.15 of this ordinance.
Subd. 10. Industrial Activity. Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Storm Water Permits as
defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).
Subd. 11. Maximum Extent Practicable (MEP). The practical and technical limits of resources
required and capable of being implemented after taking into consideration cost, existing technology and
logistics in light of the overall desired outcome.
Subd. 12. Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). The system of conveyances
(including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
man-made channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the City and designed or used for collecting
or conveying Storm Water, and that is not used for collecting or conveying Sewage.
Subd. 13. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) - Storm Water Discharge
Permit. This is a permit issued by EPA (or by a State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC §
1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of Pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. This permit is also referred to in this
ordinance as an NPDES Permit.
Subd. 14. Non-Storm Water Discharge. Any discharge to the Storm Drainage System that is not
composed entirely of Storm Water.
Subd. 15. Person. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or
other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner’s agent.
Subd. 16. Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include,
but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous
liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; Hazardous Materials and wastes; Sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing and/or maintaining a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Robbinsdale City Code 703.03, Subd. 17
(Rev. 2012)
Subd. 17. Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or
unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and boulevards.
Subd. 18. Receiving Water. Body of water that receives runoff or discharges.
Subd. 19. Sewage. The organic waste and wastewater created at businesses and residences.
Subd. 20. Storm Drainage System. Publicly-owned facilities within the City by which Storm
Water is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention
basins, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
Subd. 21. Storm Water. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from
any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
Subd. 22. Storm Water Conveyance System. Curb lines, catch basins, Storm Water sewer lines,
in addition to in-line systems for catching debris.
Subd. 23. Storm Water Management Plan. A document which describes the Best Management
Practices and activities to be implemented by a Person to identify sources of pollution or contamination at
a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce Pollutant discharges to Storm Water, Storm Water
Conveyance System, and/or Receiving Water to the Maximum Extent Practicable.
Subd. 24. Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated Storm Water.
Subd. 25. Watercourse. Any natural or artificial channel through which water flows.
703.05. Applicability. This ordinance shall apply to all water entering the Storm Drainage System
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the City.
703.07. Responsibility for administration. The City Manager shall administer, implement, and enforce
the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the City Manager may be
delegated to Persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City.
703.09. Compatibility with other regulations. This ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any
other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance are in
addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where
any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance,
rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher
protective standards for human health or the environment shall control.
Robbinsdale City Code 703.11
(Rev. 2012)
703.11. Severability. The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this ordinance or the application thereof to any Person,
establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions
or application of this ordinance.
703.13. Ultimate responsibility. The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this
ordinance are minimum standards; therefore this ordinance does not intend or imply that compliance by
any Person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of
Pollutants.
703.15. Discharge prohibitions. Subdivision 1. Prohibition of Illicit Discharges. No Person shall throw,
drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise
discharge into the MS4 any Pollutants or waters containing any Pollutants, other than Storm Water. The
commencement, conduct or continuance of any Illicit Discharge to the Storm Drainage System is
prohibited except as described as follows:
(a) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this
ordinance: water line flushing; landscape irrigation; diverted stream flows; rising ground
waters; uncontaminated ground water infiltration; uncontaminated pumped ground water;
discharges from potable water sources; foundation drains; air conditioning condensation;
irrigation water; springs; water from crawl space pumps; footing drains; lawn watering;
individual residential car washing; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; dechlorinated
swimming pool discharges; street wash waters; and flows from fire fighting.
(b) Other discharges specified in writing by the City as being necessary to protect public
health and safety.
(c) Discharges associated with dye testing; however, dye testing requires a verbal
notification to the City prior to the test.
(d) The discharge prohibition shall not apply to any Non-Storm Water Discharge permitted
under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and
administered under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the
permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that
written approval has been granted for any discharge to the Storm Drainage System.
Subd. 2. Prohibition of Illicit Connections.
(a) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of Illicit Connections to the
Storm Drainage System is prohibited.
(b) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, Illicit Connections made in the
past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
Robbinsdale City Code 703.15, Subd. 2(c)
(Rev. 2012)
(c) A Person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if the Person connects a line
conveying Sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
(d) Improper connections in violation of this ordinance must be disconnected and redirected,
if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer
system upon approval of the City.
(e) Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and
which may be connected to the Storm Drainage System, shall be located by the owner or
occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the City
requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time
period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the
drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the
outfall location or point of connection to the Storm Drainage System, sanitary sewer
system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be
documented and provided to the City.
703.17. Watercourse and Receiving water protection. Every Person owning property through which a
Watercourse passes, or abuts a Receiving Water, or such Person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part
of the Watercourse and/or Receiving Water within or adjacent to the property free of trash, debris,
excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow
of water through the Watercourse and/or Receiving Water. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a Watercourse and/or Receiving Water, so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the Watercourse
and/or Receiving Water.
703.19. Industrial or construction activity discharges. Subdivision 1. Submission of Notice Of Intent
(NOI) to the City.
(a) Any Person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES Permit shall comply
with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required
in a form acceptable to the City prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(b) The operator of a Premises, including construction sites, required to have an NPDES
Permit to discharge Storm Water associated with Industrial Activity shall submit a copy
of the NOI to the City at the same time the operator submits the original NOI to the EPA
as applicable.
(c) The copy of the NOI may be delivered to the City either in Person or by mailing it to:
Notice of Intent to Discharge Storm Water, c/o City Engineer, City of Robbinsdale, 4100
Lakeview Avenue, Robbinsdale, MN 55422.
(d) A Person commits an offense if the Person operates a Premises that is discharging Storm
Water associated with Industrial Activity without having submitted a copy of the NOI to
do so to the City.
Robbinsdale City Code 703.21
(Rev. 2012)
703.21. Compliance monitoring. Subdivision 1. Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling. The City is
permitted to enter and inspect the premises subject to regulation under this ordinance as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance.
Subd 2. Authority to inspect. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any
provision of this ordinance, or whenever the City Manager has cause to believe that there exists, or
potentially exists, in or upon any Premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this ordinance,
the City Manager may enter such Premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and
copy records related to Storm Water compliance. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a
request to enter and inspect has been made, the City Manager is hereby empowered to seek assistance
from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.
(a) If a Premises operator has security measures in force which require proper identification
and clearance before entry into its Premises, then the Premises operator shall make the
necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the City.
(b) Premises operators shall allow the City ready access to all parts of the Premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept
under the conditions of an NPDES Permit to Discharge Storm Water, and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
(c) The City shall have the right to set up on any permitted Premises such devices as are
necessary in the opinion of the City to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
Premises’ Storm Water Discharge.
(d) The City has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment. The
Premises’ sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure Storm Water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure accuracy.
(e) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the Premises to be
inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the Premises operator at the
written or oral request of the City and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such
access shall be borne by the Premises operator.
(f) Unreasonable delays in allowing the City access to a permitted Premises is a violation of
a NPDES Permit and of this ordinance. A Person who is the operator of a Premises with
an NPDES Permit to Discharge Storm Water associated with Industrial Activity commits
an offense if the Person denies the City reasonable access to the permitted Premises for
the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this ordinance.
Subd. 3. Search warrants. If the City Manager has been refused access to any part of the Premises
or Premises from which Storm Water is discharged, and the City is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect or sample as part
of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then
the City may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
Robbinsdale City Code 703.23
(Rev. 2012)
703.23. Regulations and requirements to prevent, control, and reduce Storm Water Pollutants by the use
of Best Management Practices. Subdivision 1. Best Management Practices (BMPs). The City may adopt
requirements identifying BMPs for any activity, operation, or Premises which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of Storm Water, the Storm Drainage System, or waters of the United States.
The owner or operator of such activity, operation, or Premises shall provide, at their own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the Storm
Drainage System or Watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further,
any Person responsible for a property or premise that is, or may be, the source of an Illicit Discharge, may
be required to implement, at said Person’s expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to
prevent the further discharge of Pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a
valid NPDES Permit authorizing the discharge of Storm Water associated with Industrial Activity, to the
maximum extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of 703.23. These BMPs
shall be part of a Storm Water Management Plan (SWMP) as necessary for compliance with requirements
of a NPDES Permit.
Subd. 2. New development and redevelopment. The City may adopt requirements identifying
appropriate BMPs to control the volume, rate, and potential Pollutant load of Storm Water runoff from
new development and redevelopment projects as may be appropriate to minimize the generation, transport
and discharge of Pollutants. The City shall incorporate such requirements in any planning or buildingrelated
permit to be issued relative to such development or redevelopment. The owner and developer shall
comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of such permits.
Subd. 3. Responsibility to implement BMPs. Notwithstanding the presence or absence of
requirements promulgated pursuant to subdivisions 1 and 2 of 703.23, any Person engaged in activities or
operations, or owning a Premises or property which will or may result in Pollutants entering Storm Water,
the Storm Drainage System, or waters of the U.S. shall implement BMPs to the extent they are
technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such Pollutants. The owner or operator of a commercial
or industrial establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the Storm Drainage System or Watercourses. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at the owner
or operator’s expense.
Subd. 4. Requirement to eliminate Illiciit Discharges. Notwithstanding the requirements of
703.21, subdivision 2, the City Manager may require by written notice that a Person responsible for an
Illicit Discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge and, if necessary, take
measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future Illicit Discharges.
Subd. 5. Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for Illicit Connections.
(a) The City Manager may require by written notice that a Person responsible for an Illicit
Connection to the Storm Drainage System comply with the requirements of this ordinance
to eliminate or secure approval for the connection by a specified date, regardless of
whether or not the connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to
the effective date of this ordinance.
Robbinsdale City Code 703.23, Subd. 5(b)
(Rev. 2012)
(b) If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this ordinance, the
responsible Person can demonstrate that an Illicit Discharge will no longer occur, said
Person may request City approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the
connection shall be at the responsible Person’s expense.
Subd. 6. Requirement to remediate. Whenever the City Manager finds that a discharge of
Pollutants is taking place or has occurred that will result in or has resulted in pollution of Storm Water,
the Storm Drainage System, or water of the U.S., the City Manager may require by written notice to the
owner of the property or the responsible Person that the pollution be remediated and the affected property
restored within a specified time pursuant to the provisions of 703.29 through 703.33.
Subd. 7. Requirement to monitor and analyze. The City Manager may require by written notice
of requirement that any Person engaged in any activity or owning or operating any Premises which may
cause or contribute to Storm Water pollution, Illicit Discharges, or Non-Storm Water Discharges to the
Storm Drainage System or waters of the U.S., to undertake at said Person’s expense such monitoring and
analyses and furnish such reports to the City as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this
ordinance.
703.25. Notification of spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any Person
responsible for a Premises or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a Premises or
operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials that are resulting or may result
in Illicit Discharges or Pollutants discharging into Storm Water, the Storm Drainage System, or waters of
the United States, said Person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and
cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of Hazardous Materials said Person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services
(911). In the event of a release of non-Hazardous Materials, said Person shall notify the City’s Public
Works Department in Person or by phone, facsimile or email no later than 3:00 p.m. the next business
day. Notifications in Person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the
City within three (3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates
from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also
retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such
records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. Failure to provide the notifications of a release as
required by 703.25 is a violation of this ordinance.
703.27. Violations, enforcement, and penalties. Subdivision 1. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any
Person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any requirement of this ordinance. If a Person has
violated or continues to violate a provision of this ordinance, the City may petition for a preliminary or
permanent injunction restraining the Person from any activity that would create a further violation or
compel the Person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. In the event the violation
constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the City is authorized to enter upon the
subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and restore the property. The City is authorized to seek its costs as set forth in 703.33.
Robbinsdale City Code 703.27, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2012)
Subd. 2. Warning notice. When the City finds that any Person has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, or any order issued hereunder, the City may serve upon that
Person a written warning notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and
requesting the violator to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution whereby any
offending discharge will cease. Investigation and resolution of the matter in response to a warning notice
in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of a
warning notice. Nothing in this subdivision shall limit the authority of the City to take any action,
including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a warning notice.
Subd. 3. Notice of violation. Whenever the City finds that a Person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this ordinance, the City may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible Person. The notice of violation shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the alleged violator;
(b) The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which
the violation is occurring, or has occurred;
(c) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(d) A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this
ordinance and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
(e) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the Person to
whom the notice of violation is directed;
(f) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City by filing a
written notice of appeal within five (5) days of service of notice of violation; and
(g) A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restore compliance within the
established time schedule, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or
a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
Such notice of violation may require without limitation:
(a) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(b) The elimination of an Illicit Connections or Illicit Discharge;
(c) That a violating discharge, practice, or operation shall cease and desist;
(d) The abatement or remediation of Storm Water pollution or contamination hazards and the
restoration of any affected property;
(e) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
(f) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
Robbinsdale City Code 703.27, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2012)
Subd. 4. Compensatory action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies
authorized by this ordinance, the City may impose upon a violator, alternative compensatory actions, such
as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, lake / pond / creek cleanup, or any similar
activity.
Subd. 5. Suspension of MS4 access.
(a) Emergency cease and desist order. When the City finds that any Person has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, or any order issued hereunder, or
that the Person’s past violations are likely to recur, and that the Person’s violation(s) has
(have) caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of
the United States which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of Persons or to the environment, the City may
issue an order to the violator directing it immediately to cease and desist all such
violations and directing the violator to:
(1) Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and
terminating the discharge.
Any Person notified of an emergency order directed to it under pursuant to this
subdivision shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In
the event of a discharger’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with an emergency
order, the City may take such steps as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize harm to
the MS4 or waters of the United States, and the endangerment to Persons or to the
environment, including immediate termination of a Premises’ water supply, sewer
connection, or other municipal utility services. The City may allow the Person to
recommence its discharge when the Person has demonstrated to the sole satisfaction of
the City that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination
proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this ordinance. A Person that is
responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment
shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge
and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the City within five (5) days
of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall
not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
(b) Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in emergency situations. The City may, without prior
notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a Person when such suspension is necessary to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of Persons, or to the
MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension
order issued in an emergency, the City may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize
danger to Persons.
Robbinsdale City Code 703.27, Subd. 5(c)
(Rev. 2012)
(c) Suspension due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge. Any Person discharging to the MS4
in violation of this ordinance may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination
would abate or reduce an Illicit Discharge. The City will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the City for a reconsideration
and hearing.
(d) A Person commits an offense if the Person reinstates MS4 access to Premises terminated
pursuant to this Section, without the prior approval of the City.
Subd. 6. Administrative penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial
measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein
within ten (10) working days, or such greater period as the City shall deem appropriate, after the City has
taken one or more of the actions described above, the City may impose a penalty as outlined in Appendix
B (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains after receipt of the notice
of violation.
Subd. 7. Criminal prosecution. Any Person that has violated or continues to violate this
ordinance shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law. Each act of violation and
each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
703.29. Appeal of notice of violation. Any Person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the
determination of the City. The notice of appeal must be received within five (5) days from the date of the
notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the City Manager shall take place within fifteen (15)
days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the City Manager shall be final.
703.31. Abatement by the City. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten (10) days of the decision of the
City Manager upholding the decision, then representatives of the City may enter upon the subject private
property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and restore the
property. It shall be unlawful for any Person, owner, agent or Person in possession of any Premises to
refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the Premises for the
purposes set forth herein.
703.33. Cost of abatement of the violation. Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the
owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment with the city clerk
within fifteen (15) days of date the notice was sent to the property owner. The city clerk shall set the
matter for a public hearing before the city council. The decision of the city council shall be set forth by
resolution and shall be final. If the amount due is not paid within the time as determined by the decision
of the city council or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a
special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the
assessment. A copy of the resolution shall be remitted to the county so that the assessment may be added
to taxes levied against the parcel of land.
Robbinsdale City Code 703.35
(Rev. 2012)
703.35. Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties
provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance
is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be
summarily abated or restored at the violator’s expense, and an administrative or civil action to abate,
enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the City.
703.37. Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the
City to seek cumulative remedies. The City may recover its attorney’s fees, court costs, and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
Robbinsdale City Code 704.01
(Revised 2017)
Section 704 - Regulation of Nonessential Water Usage During Declared Critical Water Deficiency
(Added, Ord. No. 17-13)
704.01. Purpose. Subdivision 1. This section establishes water conservation restrictions; and the plan will
be in effect at any time the governor declares by executive order a critical water deficiency, pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes section 103G.291.
704.03. Definitions. Subdivision 1. Terms defined in this section have the meanings given them in this
subsection.
Subd. 2 “Department” means the city water department.
Subd. 3 “Emergency” means the declaration of a critical water deficiency by the governor.
Subd. 4 “Irrigation” means the watering of shrubs, trees, sod, seeded areas, gardens, lawns, or any other
outdoor vegetation, except outdoor vegetation utilized for agricultural purposes.
Subd. 5 “Notification to public” means notification through local media, including interviews and
issuance of news releases.
Subd. 6 “Public water supplier” means the city of Robbinsdale.
Subd. 7 “Reclaimed water” means water collected from rooftops, paved surfaces, or other collection
devices and all water utilized more than once before re-entering the natural water cycle.
Subd. 8 “Water recirculation system” means any system which enables a user to reuse water at least once
prior to returning the water to the natural water cycle.
704.05. Application. Subdivision I. This section applies to all customers of public water suppliers who
own or control water use on any premises.
Subd. 2 No person shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water received from a public water supply
for residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, or any other purpose in any manner contrary to any
provision in this ordinance.
Subd. 3 Mandatory emergency conservation measures shall be implemented based upon the declaration of
a critical water emergency by the governor.
704.07 Declaration of Critical Water Deficiency. Upon the declaration of a critical water deficiency by
the governor, the public water supplier shall immediately post notice of the emergency declaration on the
official city bulletin board. The city shall provide notification to the public as quickly as possible.
704.09. Mandatory Emergency Water Conservation Measures. Upon declaration of a water emergency and
notification to the public, the following mandatory restrictions upon nonessential water use shall be
enforced:
Robbinsdale City Code 704.09(a)
(Revised 2017)
a) Outdoor irrigation of yards, gardens, golf courses, parklands, and other
nonagricultural
land, except for those areas irrigated with reclaimed water, is
prohibited.
b) Washing or spraying of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, or
other paved areas with water from any pressurized source, including garden hoses,
except to alleviate immediate health or safety hazards, is prohibited.
c) The outdoor use of any water-based play apparatus connected to a pressurized source
is prohibited.
d) Restaurants and other food service establishments are prohibited from serving water to
their customers, unless water is specifically requested by the customer.
e) Operation of outdoor misting systems used to cool public areas is prohibited.
f) The filling of swimming pools, fountains, spas, or other exterior water features is
prohibited.
g) The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, and other types of mobile equipment is
prohibited, except at facilities equipped with wash water recirculation systems, and for
vehicles requiring frequent washing to protect public health, safety, and welfare.
704.11. Variances. The City Manager is authorized to grant variances to this ordinance where strict
application of its provisions would result in serious hardship to a customer. A variance may be granted
only for reasons involving health or safety. An applicant may appeal the denial of a variance within five
(5) days of the decision by submitting a written appeal to the City Clerk. The City Council shall hear the
appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of the City Council is final.
704.13. Violation. Subdivision 1. Violations shall be determined and cited by the City Manager. A
violator may appeal the citation within five (5) days of its issuance by submitting a written appeal to the
City Clerk. The City Council shall hear the appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of the
City Council is final. Violators may be granted an administrative waiver if evidence is provided that
equipment failure was the cause of the violation. A letter from a qualified vendor or equipment invoice
will be required to show proof of equipment failure.
Subd. 2 Upon discovery of a first violation, the violator shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a
warning letter that sets forth the violation and which shall describe the remedy and fines for future
violations.
Subd. 3 Upon subsequent violations at the same location, the violator shall be issued, either personally or
by mail, a citation that sets forth the violation and shall describe the remedy. Fines shall be added to the
monthly water bill of the owner or current occupant of the premises where the violation occurred. The
imposition of the fine shall in no way limit the right of the City to pursue other legal remedies.
704.15 Enforcement. The City Manager is authorized to designate city employees to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance.
Robbinsdale City Code 705.01
(Revised 2017)
Section 705 - Sewer, Water and Other Service Charges
705.01. Service charges. The council by resolution establishes the service charge to be collected for
water supply, Sewage disposal, and any other special utility services rendered by the city. Unless
otherwise authorized in writing by the city, each dwelling unit in a residential dwelling unit will be
charged a service charge for water, sanitary sewer, and any other special utility services rendered by the
city, regardless of whether the services are utilized and the unit's occupancy status. (Amended, Ord. No.
17-04)
705.03. Water. Subdivision 1. Metered. Premises to which water is supplied must be equipped with a
water meter. Charges are based on the quantity of water used.
Subd. 2. Fire water charge. Premises to which water is supplied for fire protection purposes that
do not use city water for consumption will be charged a quarterly fee as established by Appendix B.
705.05. Sewer. A uniform fee is charged for city sewer facilities for single-family dwellings. The sewer
charge for two-family and multiple dwellings may be based upon the number of units occupied. A sewer
charge for schools, churches, commercial and industrial establishments may be based upon the metered
water supply or on a formula the council determines fair and equitable.
705.06. Special utility services. A uniform fee is charged for city recycling and garbage facilities for
single-family dwellings. The recycling and garbage charge for two-family and multiple dwellings may be
based upon the number of units occupied. A recycling and garbage charge for schools, churches,
commercial and industrial establishments may be based upon a formula or other method the council
determines fair and equitable. (Added, Ord. No. 14-10)
705.07. Separate fund. Separate funds are kept for each utility service. Moneys collected for the services
are deposited in the fund established for the respective utility service and costs of rendering that service
are charged against that fund.
705.09. Collection of fees. The city bills the owners of premises receiving water, sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, recycling or garbage service at least twice each year. Services may be discontinued to any
customer upon five days notice to the last known address of the customer for non-payment of a bill.
Wherever service is discontinued, it shall not be resumed until the customer has paid outstanding bills in
full together with the interest thereon at the rate of 10% per annum from the date due and the fee set by
Appendix B for restoring the service. The clerk is authorized and directed to assess any accounts
delinquent for 30 days or more against the property to which such service was rendered by certifying the
accounts to the county auditor each year for collection in accordance with law. (Amended, Ord No. 14-
10)
705.11. Permission to enter premises. The director may enter the premises served for the purpose of
reading meters, inspecting facilities or other purposes reasonably necessary for the proper supplying of
the utility service.
705.13. Water meter readings. The city may provide a system of water meter reading by postcard, meter
reader, or other method deemed suitable by the council. In the case of a postcard meter reading, the
consumer must mail or return the meter card on or before the 15th of the month prior to the next billing.
A consumer will be assessed a $1 penalty for any card not returned on or before the due date. The penalty
may be included on the next and subsequent billings until paid.
705.15. Estimated bills. If the water meter or any other device used in determining the charge to be made
for utility services is not accessible at the time that the city attempts to read it, the owner or occupant will
be given an estimated bill, so marked. Credits or debits resulting from the use of such estimate will be
adjusted at the next meter reading.
Robbinsdale City Code 705.17
705.17. City equipment. No person may alter, damage, destroy, deface or tamper with a meter or other
property or device installed for the purpose of supplying a utility service.
705.19. MWCC strength charges. Subdivision 1. Recitals. The Metropolitan Waste Control
Commission, a metropolitan commission organized and existing under the laws of the state of Minnesota
(the "Commission"), in order to receive and retain grants in compliance with the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972 and regulations thereunder (the "Act"), has determined to impose an
industrial user sewer strength charge upon users of the Metropolitan Disposal System (as defined in
Minnesota Statutes, section 473.121, subdivision 24) to recover operation and maintenance costs of
treatment works attributable to the strength of the discharge of industrial waste, such sewer strength
charge being in addition to the charge based upon the volume of discharge. In order for the city to pay
such costs based upon strength of industrial discharge and allocated to it each year by the commission, it
is hereby found, determined and declared to be necessary to establish sewer strength charges and a
formula for the computation thereof for all industrial users receiving waste treatment services within or
served by the city. Furthermore, Minnesota Statutes, section 444.075, subdivision 3, empowers the city to
make such sewer charge a charge against the owner, lessee, occupant or all of them and certify unpaid
charges to the county auditor as a tax lien against the property served.
Subd. 2. Establishment of strength charges. For the purpose of paying the costs allocated to the
city each year by the commission that are based upon the strength of discharge of all industrial users
receiving waste treatment services within or served by the city, there is hereby approved, adopted and
established, in addition to the sewer charge based upon the volume of discharge, a sewer charge upon
each person, company or corporation receiving waste treatment services within or served by the city,
based upon strength of industrial waste discharge into the sewer system of the city (the "Strength
Charge").
Subd. 3. Establishment of strength charge formula. For the purpose of computation of the
strength charge established in subdivision 2 hereof, there is hereby established, approved and adopted in
compliance with the act the same strength charge formula designated in Resolution No. 76-172 adopted
by the governing body of the commission on June 15, 1976, such formula being based upon pollution
qualities and difficulty of disposal of the sewage produced through an evaluation of pollution qualities
and quantities in excess of an annual average base and the proportionate costs of operation and
maintenance of waste treatment services provided by the commission.
Subd. 4. Strength charge payment. It is hereby approved, adopted and established that the
strength charge established by subdivision 2 hereof shall be paid by each industrial user receiving waste
treatment services and subject thereto before the 20th day next succeeding the date of billing thereof to
such user by or on behalf of the city, and such payment thereof shall be deemed to be delinquent if not so
paid to the billing entity before such date. Furthermore, it is hereby established, approved and adopted
that if such payment is not paid before such date an industrial user shall pay interest compounded monthly
at the rate of two-thirds of one percent (2/3%) per month on the unpaid balance due.
Robbinsdale City Code 705.19, Subd. 5
(Rev. 1992)
Subd. 5. Establishment of tax lien. As provided by Minnesota Statutes, section 444.075,
subdivision 3, it is hereby approved, adopted and established that if payment of the strength charge
established by subdivision 2 hereof is not paid before that 60th day next succeeding the date of billing
thereof to the industrial use by or on behalf of the city, said delinquent sewer strength charge, plus
accrued interest established pursuant to subdivision 4 hereof, shall be deemed to be a charge against the
owner, lessee and occupant of the property served, and the city or its agent shall certify such unpaid
delinquent balance to the county auditor with taxes against the property served for collection as other
taxes are collected; provided, however, that such certification shall not preclude the city of its agent from
recovery of such delinquent sewer strength charge and interest thereon under any other available remedy.
705.21. (Added, Ord. No. 92-5) Installation of mid-block street lights. Subdivision 1. General rule.
Any property owners wishing to have a street light installed mid block may request installation via
petition to the city in accordance with the enforcement policy (the "policy") which shall be set and
amended from time to time by resolution of the city council.
Subd. 2. Installation of mid-block street lights. The city shall order installation of street lights
mid-block upon receipt of a petition by the affected property owners as specified in the policy. The cost
for operation and maintenance thereof will be charged to property owners in the affected block via the
city utility bill.
Subd. 3. Assessment. On or before September 1 of each year, the city clerk shall list the total
unpaid charges for operation and maintenance of street lighting against each separate lot or parcel to
which they are attributable under this subsection. After notice and hearing as required by law, the council
may then assess the charges against the properties benefited as a special assessment under Minnesota
Statutes, section 492.101, for certification to the county auditor and collection along with current taxes.
The certification shall provide for the payment of the special assessments the following year.
Robbinsdale City Code 710.01
(Rev. 2012)
Section 710 - Storm Sewer Utility
710.01. Statutory authority. Minnesota Statutes, section 444.075, authorizes the city to impose just and
reasonable charges for the use and availability of storm sewer facilities ("charges"). The city elects to
exercise that authority. (Amended, Ord. No. 12-10)
710.03. Findings and determinations. In providing for the charges, the following findings and
determinations are made.
(1) In the exercise of its governmental authority and in order to promote the public health,
safety, convenience and general welfare, the city has constructed, operated and
maintained a storm sewer system ("the system"). This section is adopted in the further
exercise of such authority and for the same purposes.
(2) The system, as constructed, heretofore has been financed and paid for through the
imposition of special assessments and ad valorem taxes. Such financing methods were
appropriate to the circumstances at the time they were used. It is necessary and desirable
to provide an alternative method of recovering some or all of the future costs of
improving, maintaining and operating the system through the imposition of charges as
provided in this section.
(3) In imposing charges, it is necessary to establish a methodology that undertakes to make
them just and equitable. Taking into account the status of completion of the system, past
methods of recovering system costs, the topography of the city and other relevant factors,
it is determined that it would be just and equitable to assign responsibility for some or all
of the future costs of operating, maintaining and improving the system on the basis of the
expected storm water runoff from the various parcels of land within the city. (Amended,
Ord. No. 12-10)
(4) Assigning costs and making charges based upon expected typical storm water runoff
cannot be done with mathematical precision but can only be accomplished within
reasonable and practical limits. (Amended, Ord. No. 12-10)
710.05. Rates and Charges (Amended, Ord. No. 12-10)
(a) Storm water utility rate calculation. Rates and charges for the use and availability of the system
are be determined through the use of a "Residential Equivalent Factor" ("REF"). For the purpose of this
section, one REF is defined as the average volume of runoff coming from one acre of land subjected to
typical single-family residential use within the city during a standard rainfall event.
For the purpose of simplifying and equalizing charges, property used for single-family purposes will be
considered to have an acreage of 0.18 acres and two-family residential purposes will be considered to
have an acreage of 0.18 acres per residential unit. Properties other than those occupied by residential use
shall be assigned an REF value based on the estimated percent of the acreage of the site that is covered
with a building or structure or paved area (i.e. impervious.)
Robbinsdale City Code 710.05
(Rev. 2012)
Calculation for storm water utility rates for various site coverages are based upon their residential
equivalent factor (REF). The REF values for various site coverages are as follows:
REF % IMPERVIOUS/OTHER
0.25 <20%
1 20 to 40% plus single family and two family
2 41 to 60%
3 61 to 80% plus all townhomes, and multi-family (3 units plus)
5 >81%
(b) Calculation of Fees. The Service charge to be billed each billing period shall be a fair and
equitable share of the total costs of the system. In determining charges the council will, from time to
time, by resolution establish a basic system rate to be charged against one acre of land having a REF of
one. The charge to be made against each parcel of land shall then be determined by multiplying (i) the
REF for the parcel based on the relative percentage of impervious surface or residential land use
classification times (ii) the parcel's acreage times the basic system rate.
(c) Appeals. Appeals from the City Manager's determination of the proper classifications may be
made to the City Council in the same manner as other appeals from administrative determinations under
this code.
710.13. Adjustments of charges. The City Council may by resolution, from time to time, adopt policies
providing for the adjustment of charges for parcels or groups of parcels, based upon data supplied by
affected property owners, demonstrating an actual coverage substantially different from the calculation
being used for the parcel or parcels. The adjustment may be made only after receiving the
recommendation of the City Manager and will not be made effective retroactively. If the adjustment
would have the effect of changing the calculation for all or substantially all of the land in a particular
classification, however, such adjustment must be accomplished by an ordinance amending the class
charge rate calculation table in subsection 710.05. (Amended, Ord. No. 12-10)
Robbinsdale City Code 710.15
(Rev. 2012)
710.15. Excluded lands. A charge for system availability or service will not be made against land that is
either (a) public street right-of-way or railroad right-of-way or (b) vacant and unimproved with
substantially all of its surface having vegetation as ground cover, (c) city owned land and (d) parks.
(Amended, Ord. No. 12-10)
710.17. Supplying information. The owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises will supply the
city with such information as the city reasonably requests related to the use, development and area of the
premises. Willful failure to provide such information or to falsify it is a violation of this section.
710.19. Estimated charges. If the owner, occupant or person in charge of a premises fails or refuses to
provide the information requested pursuant to subsection 710.17, the charge for such premises will be
estimated and billed in accordance with the estimate, based upon information then available to the city.
710.21. Billings and collections. Storm sewer service charges shall be placed on the utility accounts of
property for the use and availability of the system and are payable periodically in accordance with usual
and customary practices in rendering of water and sanitary sewer bills. (Amended, Ord. No. 12-10)
710.23. Penalties and remedies. Penalties and remedies for late payments or non-payment of billings
shall be the same as those applicable to billings rendered for water and sanitary sewer service. In the
event a bill becomes delinquent, the City Council may cause the delinquent charges to become a lien
against the property served by certifying to Hennepin County the amount of such delinquent bill in
accordance with the Act. (Amended, Ord. No. 12-10)
710.25. Use of revenues. Revenues received from charges will be placed in a separate storm sewer
system account and used first to pay the normal, reasonable and current costs of operating and
maintaining the system and next to other purposes permitted or required by law. Revenues from time to
time received in excess of such costs may be used to finance improvements to and betterments of the
storm sewer utility and other utility enterprise funds. (Amended, Ord. No. 12-10)
Robbinsdale City Code 715.01 (Rev. 1995)
Section 715 - Telecommunications Facilities and Equipment
(Added, Ord. No. 95-10)
715.01. Definitions. Subdivision 1. The terms defined in this section have the meanings given them.
Subd. 2. Company. A natural or corporate person, business association, political subdivision,
public or private agency of any kind, its successors and assigns, who or which seeks or is required to
construct, install, operate, repair, maintain, remove or relocate facilities in the city.
Subd. 3. Director. The city engineer or designated representative.
Subd. 4. Facilities. Telecommunications equipment of any kind, including but not limited to
audio, video, paging, facsimile or similar service, not governed by Minnesota Statutes, chapter 238,
including all trunks, lines, circuits, physical connections, switching equipment, wireless communication
equipment of all kinds, and any necessary appurtenances owned, leased or operated by a company on,
over, in, under, across or along public ground.
Subd. 5. Public ground. Highways, roads, streets, alleys, public ways, utility easements and
public grounds in the city.
715.03. Permit procedure. Subdivision 1. Permit required. A company may not construct, install, repair,
remove or relocate facilities, or any part thereof, in, on, over, under or along public ground without first
obtaining a permit from the city.
Subd. 2. Application. Application for a permit is made to the director.
Subd. 3. Issuance of permit. If the director determines that the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this section the director may issue a permit to the company. An applicant may contest a
permit denial or the conditions of approval by written notice to the clerk requesting a city council review
within 14 days of the director's action. The council shall hear any contest of the director's actions under
this section within 45 days of the city clerk's receipt of the contest notice. Nothing in this section
precludes the city from requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition
to the issuance of a permit set forth herein.
Subd. 4. Permit fee. The permit fee shall be in the amount shown in Appendix B. The
application must be accompanied by the permit fee.
Subd. 5. Security for completion of work. Prior to commencement of work, the company must
deposit with the city security in the form of certified check, letter of credit or construction bond, in a
sufficient amount as determined by the director for the completion of the work. The securities will be
held until the work is completed plus a period of three months thereafter to guarantee that restoration
work has been satisfactorily completed. Upon application of the company, providing such information as
the director may require, if two or more work projects are to be constructed during a calendar year, the
director may accept, in lieu of separate security for each project, a single security for multiple projects in
such form and amount as determined, in the discretion of the director, to be sufficient to assure
completion of all projects which may be in progress at any one time during that calendar year and to
guarantee that restoration work will be satisfactorily completed. The security will then be returned to the
company with interest if required by law and then interest at 8.00% per annum.
Robbinsdale City Code 715.03, Subd. 6
(Rev. 1995)
Subd. 6. Inspection of work. When the work is completed the company must request an
inspection by the director. The director will determine if the work has been satisfactorily completed and
provide the company with a written report of the inspection and approval.
715.05. Restoration and relocation. Subdivision 1. Restoration. Upon completion of the work, the
company must restore the general area of the work, including paving and its foundations, to the same
condition that existed prior to commencement of the work and must exercise reasonable care to maintain
the same condition for two years thereafter. The work must be completed as promptly as weather
permits. If the company does not promptly perform and complete the work, remove all dirt, rubbish,
equipment and material, and restore the public ground to the same condition, the city may put it in the
same condition at the expense of the company. The company must, upon demand, pay to the city the
direct and indirect cost of the work done for or performed by the city, including but not limited to the
city's administrative costs. To recover its costs, the city will first draw on the security posted by the
company and then recover the balance of the costs incurred from the company directly by written
demand. This remedy is in addition to any other remedies available to the city.
Subd. 2. Company initiated relocation. The company must give the city written notice prior to a
company initiated relocation of facilities. A company initiated relocation must be at the company's
expense and must be approved by the city, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld.
Subd. 3. City required relocation. The company must promptly and at its own expense, with due
regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently relocate its facilities whenever the city requires such
relocation.
Subd. 4. Relocation where public ground vacated. The vacation of public ground does not
deprive the company of the right to operate and maintain its facilities in the city. If the vacation
proceedings are initiated by the company, the company must pay the relocation costs. If the vacation
proceedings are initiated by the city or other persons, the company must pay the relocation costs unless
otherwise agreed to by the city, company, and other persons.
715.07. Company default. Subdivision 1. Notice. If the company is in default in the performance of the
work authorized by the permit, including but not limited to restoration requirements, for more than 30
days after receiving written notice from the city of the default, the city may terminate the rights of the
company under the permit. The notice of default must be in writing and specify the provisions of the
permit under which the default is claimed and state the grounds of the claim. The notice must be served
on the company by personally delivering it to an officer thereof at its principal place of business in
Minnesota or by certified mail to that address.
Subd. 2. City action on default. If the company is in default in the performance of the work
authorized by the permit, the city may, after the above notice to the company and failure of the company
to cure the default, take such action as may be reasonably necessary to abate the condition caused by the
default. The company must reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including costs of collection
and attorney fees incurred as a result of the company default. The security posted under section 2,
subdivision 5 will be applied by the city first toward payment for such reimbursement.
Robbinsdale City Code 715.09 (Rev. 1995)
715.09. Indemnification. Subdivision 1. Scope. The company will indemnify, keep and hold the city, its
elected officials, officers, employees, and agents free and harmless from any and all claims and actions on
account of injury or death of persons or damage to property occasioned by the construction, installation,
maintenance, repair, removal, relocation or operation of the facilities affecting public ground, unless such
injury or damage is the result of the negligence of the city, its elected officials, employees, officers, or
agents. The city will notify the company of claims or actions and provide a reasonable opportunity for
the company to accept and undertake the defense.
Subd. 2. Claim defense. If a claim or action is brought against the city under circumstances
where indemnification applies, the company, at its sole expense, shall defend the city if written notice of
the claim or action is given to the company within a period wherein the company is not prejudiced in the
defense of such claim or action by lack of such notice. If the company undertakes the defense, the
company shall have complete control of such claim or action, but it may not settle without the consent of
the city, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any
defense or immunity otherwise available to the city. In defending any action on behalf of the city, the
company is entitled to assert every defense or immunity that the city could assert in its own behalf.
715.11. Other conditions of use. Subdivision 1. Use of public ground. Facilities must be located,
constructed, installed, maintained or relocated so as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with the
usual and customary traffic, travel, and use of public ground. The facilities are subject to additional
conditions of the permit as established by the director including but not limited to (i) the right of
inspection by the city at reasonable times and places; (ii) the obligation to relocate the facilities pursuant
to section 3, subdivisions 3 and 4; and (iii) compliance with all applicable regulations imposed by the
Minnesota Public Utilities Commission and other state and federal law, including prompt compliance
with the requirements of the Gopher State One Call program, Minnesota Statutes, chapter 216D.
Subd. 2. Location. The facilities must be placed in a location agreed to by the city. The
company shall give the city 45 days advanced written notice of the company's proposed location of
facilities within the public ground. No later than 45 days after the city's receipt of the company's written
notice the city will notify the company in writing of the city's acceptance or rejection of the proposed
location. If the city rejects the company's proposed location, the city shall propose alternative locations.
The city does not waive or forfeit its right to reject the location of facilities by failure to respond within
the 45 days.
Subd. 3. Emergency work. A company may open and disturb the surface of public ground
without a permit where an emergency exists requiring the immediate repair of its facilities. In such event
the company must request a permit not later than the second working day thereafter and comply with the
applicable conditions of the permit. In no event, may the company undertake such an activity which will
result in the closing of a street or alley without prior notification to the city.
Subd. 4. Street improvements, paving or resurfacing. The city will give the company written
notice of plans for street improvements where permanent paving or resurfacing is involved. The notice
must contain (i) the nature and character of the improvements; (ii) the streets upon which the
improvements are to be made; (iii) the extent of the improvements, the time when the city will start the
work; and (iv) if more than one street is involved, the sequence in which the work is to proceed.
Robbinsdale City Code 715.11, Subd. 5
(Rev. 1995)
Subd. 5. Company protection of facilities. The company must take reasonable measures to
prevent the facilities from causing damage to persons or property. The company must take reasonable
measures to protect its facilities from damage that could be inflicted on the facilities by persons, property,
or the elements. The company must take specific protective measures when the city performs work near
the facilities.
Subd. 6. Prior service connections. In cases where the city is undertaking the paving or
resurfacing of streets and the facilities are located under such street, the company may be required to
install service connections prior to the paving or resurfacing, if it is apparent that service will be required
during the five year period following the paving or resurfacing.
715.13. Effective date and applicability to existing facilities. Companies with facilities in, on, over,
under or along public ground on the effective date of this section must take prompt action to comply with
this section and the permits authorized by this section. A company, however, is not required to reapply
for a permit obtained from the city prior to the effective date of this section. A company is not required to
pay the difference between the permit fee of a previously obtained permit and the equivalent newly
obtained permit under this section. All other provisions of this section apply to existing facilities.
715.15. Acceptance of requirements. By receiving a permit pursuant to this section, the company accepts
and agrees to comply with all of the requirements of this section.
715.17. Public ground other than right-of-way. Nothing in this section is intended to grant to the
company authority beyond that given by Minnesota Statutes, section 222.37 for use of the public right-ofways
for construction and operation of facilities. If the city allows the company to use its non-right-ofway
public ground, the terms of this section apply to the extent they are consistent with the contract,
statutory and common law rights the city owns in such property.
715.19. Regulations and permit schedules. The director is authorized and directed to prepare suitable
regulations and schedules for the administration of permits issued under this section.
715.21. Severability. If any provision of this section is contrary to law and therefore unenforceable, such
provision will be severed and will not affect the other provisions of this section.
715.23. Construction with other sections. Unless otherwise expressly provided in the code, this section
supersedes all other sections setting forth duplicative or conflicting provisions.
Robbinsdale City Code 720.01 (Rev. 1997)
Section 720 - Telecommunications Towers and Facilities
(Added, Ord. No. 97-04, Sec. 1)
720.01. Findings. The federal communications act of 1934 as amended by the telecommunications act of
1996 (Act) grants the federal communications commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over:
(a) The regulation of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions from
telecommunications facilities.
(b) The regulation of radio signal interference among users of the radio frequency spectrum.
The city's regulation of towers and telecommunications facilities do not have the effect of
prohibiting any person from providing wireless telecommunications services in violation
of the act. The regulations contained in this section are necessary to protect
Robbinsdale's unique characteristics as listed below:
(1) the "bedroom" nature of the community which historically has no industrially
zoned land, and
(2) the historical nature of its downtown having been a free standing growth center at
the turn of the century.
720.03. Purposes. The general purpose of this section is to regulate the placement, construction and
modification of towers and telecommunications facilities in order to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the public, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the
competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace.
Specifically, the purposes of this section are:
(a) to regulate the location of towers and telecommunications facilities in the city;
(b) to protect residential areas and land uses from the potential adverse impact of towers and
telecommunications facilities;
(c) to minimize adverse visual impact of towers and telecommunications facilities through
careful design, siting, landscaping and innovative camouflaging techniques;
(d) to promote and encourage shared use/collocation of towers and antenna support
structures as a primary option;
(e) to avoid potential damage to property caused by towers and telecommunications facilities
by ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, sited, constructed,
modified, maintained and removed when no longer used or determined to be structurally
unsound; and
(f) to ensure that towers and telecommunications facilities are compatible with surrounding
land uses.
Robbinsdale City Code 720.05 (Rev. 1997)
720.05. Definitions. Subdivision 1. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
Subd. 2. "Antenna support structure" means any building or other structure other than a tower
which can be used for location of telecommunications facilities.
Subd. 3. "Applicant" means any person that applies for a tower development license.
Subd. 4. "Application" means the process by which an applicant submits a request to the city to
develop, construct, build, modify or erect a tower upon such land.
Subd. 5. "City" means the city of Robbinsdale, Minnesota.
Subd. 6. "Engineer" means any structural engineer licensed by the state of Minnesota.
Subd. 7. "Owner" means any person with equitable or legal fee title or a long term (exceeding ten
years) leasehold to any plot of land within the city.
Subd. 8. "Person" means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether for profit or non-profit.
Subd. 9. "Telecommunications facilities" means any cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas
and any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of wireless
communications which a person seeks to locate or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support
structure. However, the term telecommunications facilities shall not include:
(a) any satellite earth station antenna;
(b) any amateur radio operator equipment as licensed by the FCC;
(c) any television station or radio station equipment; or
(d) any television or radio equipment designed only to receive television or radio signals.
Subd. 10. "Tower" means a self-supporting lattice, guyed or monopole structure constructed
from grade which supports telecommunications facilities. The term tower shall not include amateur radio
operators' equipment, as licensed by the FCC.
720.07. Development of towers. Subdivision 1. License required. No person shall build, erect or
construct a tower without having first secured a license as provided for in this subsection. No license
shall be issued for a tower unless it complies with the Robbinsdale zoning section.
Subd. 2. Application. Application for a tower license shall be submitted on a form provided by
the city and shall include:
Robbinsdale City Code 720.07, Subd. 3
(Rev. 2002)
(a) the name, address and telephone number of the owner and lessee of the parcel of land
upon which the tower is situated. If the applicant is not the owner of the parcel of land
upon which the tower is situated, the written consent of the owner shall be evidenced in
the application;
(b) the legal description, property identification number (PID) and street address of the
parcel of land upon which the tower is situated;
(c) the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of other towers or usable
antenna support structures within a one mile radius of the proposed new tower site,
including city-owned property;
(d) written, technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed structure meets the
standards set forth in section 720.09, subdivision 4, "structural requirements", of this
section;
(e) written, technical evidence from an electrical engineer that the proposed site of the tower
or telecommunications facilities does not pose a risk of explosion, fire or other danger
due to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials such as LP
gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas, corrosive or other dangerous chemicals;
(f) a map of the city and the first half-mile of all bordering communities showing the design
of the applicant's entire existing or proposed wireless telecommunications network. Such
map shall, at minimum, indicate the exact location of all proposed or existing tower and
antenna sites, their dimensions, specifications and signal area coverage;
(g) the results of drive test data or other computerized signal area coverage studies conducted
by the applicant within the city; and
(h) the zoning of the proposed tower and evidence of any zoning approval.
Subd. 3. Proprietary information. All information submitted with an application that is trade
secret information or is for other reasons proprietary shall be clearly marked as such when submitted with
an application.
Subd. 4. License fees. The annual license fee is set by Appendix B.
(a) Each application for a license shall be submitted to the city clerk and payment made to
the city. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by payment in full of the
required license fee. Upon rejection of any application for a license, the city shall refund
the license fee.
(b) Licenses expire annually on December 31. Each license shall be issued for a period of
one year, except that if a portion of the license year has elapsed when the application is
made, a license may be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rated fee. In
computing such fee, any unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as one month.
(Amended, Ord. No. 02-05)
Robbinsdale City Code 720.07, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2002)
(c) No part of the fee paid for any license shall be refunded if the use is discontinued.
Subd. 5. Process for application. An application for a license shall be placed on the city council
agenda for consideration. The complete application for a new license must be received four weeks prior
to the city council meeting at which formal action is requested. License renewal is subject to the license
provisions described in section 1005 Licensing Procedures. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-05)
Subd. 6. Conditional licenses. The council may grant a license for a new or existing tower
conditioned upon the applicant making reasonable improvements to the proposed premises or the property
upon which the tower is situated. The council, in granting a conditional license, will specify when the
modifications must be completed. Failure to comply with the conditions of the license is grounds for the
city council to refuse to renew the license.
Subd. 7. Penalty/revocation of license.
(a) Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be punished not more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as
prescribed by state law.
(b) Any violation of this section shall be a basis for the suspension or revocation of any
license granted hereunder. In the event that the city council proposes to revoke or
suspend the license, the licensee shall be notified in writing of the basis for such proposed
revocation or suspension. The council shall hold a hearing for the purpose of
determining whether to revoke or suspend the license, which hearing shall be within ten
days and no later than 30 days of the date of the notice.
(c) The city council shall determine whether to suspend or revoke a license within 30 days
after the close of the hearing or within 60 days of the date of the notice, whichever is
sooner, and shall notify the licensee of its decision within that period.
720.09. Tower performance standards. Subdivision 1. The following performance standards apply to
any tower that is erected, constructed, placed, re-erected, or replaced in the city.
Subd. 2. Co-location. No new tower shall be built, constructed or erected in the city unless such
tower is capable of supporting two telecommunications facilities comparable in weight, size and surface
area to each other.
Subd. 3. Setbacks.
(a) All towers shall be set back on all sides at least a distance equal to the underlying setback
requirement in the applicable zoning district.
(b) Setback requirements for towers shall be measured from the base of the tower to the
nearest property line of the parcel on which it is located.
(c) In addition to the setback requirements in section 720.09, subdivision 3(a), towers shall
have a separation requirement as set forth in section 720.09, subdivision 5.
Robbinsdale City Code 720.09, Subd. 4
(Rev. 1997)
(d) The city council, at its discretion, may reduce the required setback or separation to allow
the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure or feature such as a
church steeple, light standard, power line support device, sports stadium or similar
structure or feature.
Subd. 4. Structural requirements. All towers must be designed and certified by an engineer to be
structurally sound and, at a minimum, in conformance with the state building codes and any other
standards outlined in this section.
Subd. 5. Separation or buffer requirements.
(a) Towers shall be separated from all residentially zoned lands by a minimum of 200 feet or
200% of the height of the proposed tower, whichever is greater.
(b) Tower separation distances for the purpose of compliance with this section shall be
measured from the base of a tower to the closest point of a designated area. The
minimum tower separation distance shall be calculated and applied irrespective of city
jurisdictional boundaries.
Subd. 6. Height. Towers are exempt from the maximum height restrictions of the districts where
located. Towers shall be permitted to a height of 175 feet. Towers may be permitted in excess of 175
feet in accordance with section 720.15, subdivision 2, "Criteria for site plan development modifications".
Subd. 7. Method of determining tower height. Measurement of tower height for the purpose of
determining compliance with all requirements of this article shall include the tower structure itself, the
base pad, and any other telecommunications facilities attached thereto. Tower height shall be measured
from grade.
Subd. 8. Illumination. Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the federal
aviation administration (FAA) or other federal or state authority.
Subd. 9. Design requirements. Proposed or modified towers shall meet the following design
requirements:
(a) towers shall be of a neutral color, not artificially lighted, and designed to minimize
visibility and blend into the surrounding environment except in cases where color and
lighting is dictated by the FAA or other federal or state authority;
(b) towers shall be of a monopole design unless the city council, at its discretion, approves an
alternative design;
(c) Treatment. Towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive resistant material;
and
(d) Appurtenant structures. No antenna or tower shall have affixed or attached to it, in any
way, any catwalk, crow's nest or like structure, except during periods of construction or
repair.
Robbinsdale City Code 720.09, Subd. 10
(Rev. 1997)
Subd. 10. Security. All towers must be reasonably posted and secured to protect against trespass.
All towers shall be protected to discourage climbing of the towers by unauthorized persons.
Subd. 11. Fencing. Fences constructed around or upon parcels containing towers, antenna
support structures, or telecommunications facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the fencing
requirements applicable in the zoning district where the tower or antenna support structure is located,
unless more stringent fencing requirements are required by FCC regulations. The city council may
require six foot fencing around any tower if deemed necessary.
Subd. 12. Landscaping. All landscaping on parcels containing towers, antenna support structures
or telecommunications facilities shall be in accordance with the applicable landscaping requirements in
the zoning district where the tower, antenna support structure or telecommunications facilities are located.
Subd. 13. Access. All parcels upon which towers are located must provide access to at least
three paved vehicular parking spaces on site.
Subd. 14. Certifications and inspections.
(a) All towers shall be certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and in conformance
with the requirements of the state building code and all other construction standards set
forth by the city's code, federal and state law. For new monopole towers such
certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to section 720.07,
subdivision 2 and every five years thereafter. For new lattice or guyed towers such
certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to section 720.07,
subdivision 2 and every two years thereafter. The tower owner may be required by the
city to submit more frequent certifications should there be reason to believe that the
structural and electrical integrity of the tower is jeopardized.
(b) The city and its agents shall have authority to enter onto the property upon which a tower
is located, between the inspections and certifications required above, to inspect the tower
for the purpose of determining whether it complies with the state building code and all
other construction standards provided by the city's code, federal and state law.
(c) The city reserves the right to conduct such inspections at any time, upon reasonable
notice to the owner and the operator of the telecommunications facility. All expenses
related to such inspections by the city shall be borne by the owner.
Subd. 15. Maintenance.
(a) Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and
maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing
failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the
public.
Robbinsdale City Code 720.11 (Rev. 1997)
(b) Tower owners shall install and maintain towers, telecommunications facilities, wires,
cables, fixtures and other equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements of
the national electric safety code and all FCC, state and local regulations, and in such
manner that will not unreasonably interfere with the use of other property.
(c) All towers, telecommunications facilities and antenna support structures shall at all times
be kept and maintained in good condition, order, and repair so that the same shall not
menace or endanger the life or property of any person.
(d) All maintenance or construction on towers, telecommunications facilities or antenna
support structure shall be performed by licensed maintenance and construction personnel.
(e) All towers shall maintain compliance with current radio frequency emission standards of
the FCC.
(f) In the event the use of a tower for which it was licensed is discontinued by the tower
owner, the tower owner shall provide written notice to the city of its intent to discontinue
use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. The tower and all equipment shall
be removed within 60 days and the entire site be restored to its original condition within
180 days.
720.11. Telecommunications facilities on antenna support structures. Subdivision 1. Any
telecommunications facilities which are not attached to a tower may be permitted on an antenna support
structure as set forth in the zoning code. Telecommunications facilities are prohibited on all other
structures. For any telecommunications facility on an antenna support structure, the owner of such
structure shall, by written certification to the building official, establish the following at the time plans are
submitted for a building permit:
(a) that the combined height from grade of the telecommunications facilities and antenna
support structures shall not exceed the height from grade of the antenna support structure
by more than 15 feet;
(b) that the antenna support structure and telecommunications facilities comply with the state
building code;
(c) that any telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances, located upon the roof of
an antenna support structure, are set back at least 15 feet from the edge of the roof of the
antenna support structure. However, this setback requirement shall not apply to
telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances located above the roof of an
antenna support structure if such facilities are appropriately screened from view through
the use of panels, walls, fences or other screening techniques approved by the city.
Setback requirements shall not apply to antennas designed to blend into the environment
which are mounted to the exterior of antenna support structures below the roof, but which
do not protrude more than 24 inches from the side of such an antenna support structure;
and
(d) that the appropriate zoning approvals, if necessary, have been obtained.
Robbinsdale City Code 720.13 (Rev. 1997)
720.13. Performance standards for telecommunications facilities on antenna support structures.
Subdivision 1. The following performance standards apply to any telecommunications facilities on
antenna support structures that are erected, constructed, placed, re-erected, or replaced in the city:
(a) Lighting. Telecommunications facilities and their appurtenances shall not be artificially
lighted unless it is required by the FAA or other federal or state authority;
(b) Structural requirements. All telecommunications facilities on antenna support structures
must be designed and certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and in
conformance with the uniform building code;
(c) Maintenance. All telecommunications facilities and antenna support structures shall be
maintained in accordance with section 720.09, subdivision 15; and
(d) Certification/inspection. All antenna support structures shall be inspected and certified as
deemed necessary by the city.
720.15. Accessory buildings and equipment. All buildings and structures accessory to a tower or
telecommunications facility attached to an antenna support structure shall be architecturally designed to
blend in with the surrounding environment and shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the
applicable sections of the zoning code. Ground mounted equipment shall be screened from view by
vegetation or other means of screening as approved by the city planner.
720.17. Additional site plan development review. Subdivision 1. The city council may waive or modify
the requirements of section 720.09, subdivision 3 (setbacks); section 720.09, subdivision 6 (height);
section 720.09, subdivision 9 (design requirements); and/or section 720.11, subdivision 1, 2 and 4
(telecommunications facilities on antenna support structures) based only on the criteria set forth in
subdivision 2 of this section.
Subd. 2. Criteria for site plan development modifications.
(a) The city council may grant a site plan development modification pursuant to subdivision
1 above if a person, upon application to the city, demonstrates with written evidence that:
(1) the location, shape, appearance or nature of use of the proposed tower will not
substantially detract from the aesthetics of the area nor change the character of
the neighborhood in which the tower is proposed to be located; and
(2) the site plan development modification will not create any threat to the public
health, safety or welfare.
(b) In addition to the requirements of subparagraph (a) of this section the applicant must also
demonstrate with written evidence, the following:
Robbinsdale City Code 720.17, Subd. 2(b)(1)
(Rev. 1997)
(1) in the case of a requested modification to the setback requirements, that the area
of the parcel of land upon which the tower is proposed to be located makes
compliance with section 720.09, subdivision 3 impossible, and the only
alternative for the person is to locate the tower at another site which poses a
greater threat to the public health, safety or welfare or is closer in proximity to a
residentially zoned land;
(2) in the case of a request for modification of the height limit in a zoning district for
towers and telecommunications facilities, that the modification is necessary to (i)
facilitate collocation of telecommunications facilities in order to avoid
construction of a new tower; or (ii) meet the coverage requirements of the
applicant's wireless communications system, which requirements must be
documented with written, technical evidence from an electrical engineer(s).
Robbinsdale City Code 800.01 (Rev. 2009)
CHAPTER VIII
STREETS, ALLEYS AND PUBLIC WAYS
Section 800 - Street Excavations
800.01. Definitions. Subdivision 1. For purposes of this section the terms defined in this subsection
have the meanings given them.
Subd. 2. "Applicant" means a person making written application to the city engineer for an
excavation permit who is not a right-of-way user as defined in section 850 of this code. Right-of-way
users as defined in section 850 must apply for permit pursuant to that section. (Amended, Ord. No. 01-
01)
Subd. 3. "Excavation work" means excavation and other work permitted under an excavation
permit issued pursuant to section 850 of this code. (Amended, Ord. 01-01).
Subd. 4. "Permittee" means a person who has been granted an excavation permit under this
section. (Amended, Ord. No. 01-01)
Subd. 5. "Street" means a street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, or other public way or
grounds or public easement in the city.
800.03. Permit. It is unlawful for a person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, drill, bore, undermine or in
any manner break up a street or to make or cause to be made an excavation in street earth or excavated
material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street without an excavation permit.
Augering or boring for purposes of placing fence poles is not an excavation.
800.05. Application. An application for the issuance of an excavation permit is made to the director of
public works/engineer (referred to in this section as the "director"). The application must state the name
and address of the applicant, the nature, location and purpose of the excavation, and other data as may
reasonably be required by the director. If required by the engineer, the application must be accompanied
by plans showing the extent of the proposed excavation work, the dimensions and elevations of both the
existing ground prior to the excavation and of the proposed excavated surfaces, the location of the
excavation work, and other information required by the director.
800.07. Surety bond. Subdivision 1. Conditions. Before an excavation permit is issued the applicant
must deposit with the city clerk a performance bond in the amount of $4,000 in favor of the city. The
required performance bond must be: (Amended, Ord. No. 09-01)
(a) with good and sufficient bond by an insurance company authorized to do business in the
state of Minnesota; (Amended, Ord. No. 09-01)
(b) satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance;
(c) conditioned that the applicant will faithfully comply with the terms and conditions of this
section and the rules, regulations and requirements required by the engineer; and
(d) conditioned that the applicant will secure and hold the city and its officers harmless
against all claims judgments, or other costs arising from the excavation permit or for
which the city, the City Council or any city officer may be liable by reason of any
accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the permittee.
Robbinsdale City Code 800.07, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2018)
Subd. 2. Coverage. Recovery on the performance bond will not exhaust the bond but it must in
its entirety cover any or all future accidents or injuries during the excavation work for which it is given.
(Amended, Ord. No. 09-01)
Subd. 3. Future claims. If a suit or claim is brought against the city by reason of the negligence
or default of the permittee, a final judgment against the city requiring it to pay for such damage will be
conclusive on the permittee and the surety if the city has notified the permittee of the claim.
Subd. 4. Blanket bond. A permittee may annually supply a single surety bond in the amount and
conditioned as required by subdivision 1, covering all work done by the permittee in the one year period
covered by the bond.
Subd. 5. Exemption. The bond provisions of this section do not apply to a duly licensed and
bonded plumber or to a public utility permitted to operate within the city by franchise or otherwise, for
the purpose of supplying gas, electric, or telephone service, or for any excavation made under a city
contract or by the city. (Amended, Ord. No. 09-01)
800.09. Engineer: rules. Work done pursuant to an excavation permit must be performed under the
direction of the director. The engineer is directed to prepare regulations with respect to excavations and
modify them with respect to particular work to protect the public from injury, to prevent damage to public
or private property, and to minimize interference with the public use of streets. A copy of the regulations
will be given to a permittee upon issuance of the excavation permit. Permit and street repair fees are set
forth in Appendix B. Special provisions will be made for simplifying procedures and supervision in
respect to excavations by franchised utilities. (Amended, Ord. No. 2018-02)
800.11. Emergency action. If a main, conduit, or utility facility breaks, bursts, or otherwise is in such
condition as to endanger property, health or safety, the person owning or controlling the facility must take
emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions. That person must apply for an
excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding city business day and may not proceed
with permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit.
800.13. Non-completion: abandonment. Work on the excavation must progress in an expeditious
manner until completion. If the work is not performed in accordance with this section or ceases or is
abandoned without due cause, the city may, after six hours' notice in writing to the holder of the permit
correct the work or fill the excavation and repair the street. The cost to the city of the work must be paid
by the person to whom the permit was issued and a permittee takes a permit subject to this condition.
800.15. Insurance. Prior to the commencement of excavation work the applicant must provide a
certificate of insurance with the city with public liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000 combined
single limit issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota. The
insurance to remain in force, during the performance of the excavation work and during the period of the
excavation permit. The city must be named as an additional insured. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-22)
Robbinsdale City Code 800.17 (Rev. 2009)
800.17. Indemnification. The permittee must indemnify, keep and hold the city free and harmless from
liability on account of injury or damage to persons or property arising or growing out of the permittee's
negligence in making a street excavation. If a suit is brought against the city, either independently or jointly
with the permittee on account thereof, the permittee, upon notice to it by the city must defend the city in any
suit at the cost of the permittee. If a final judgment is obtained against the city, either independently or
jointly with the permittee, the permittee must pay such judgment with costs and hold the city harmless
therefrom.
800.19. (Deleted, Ord. No. 01-01)
800.21. Refusal of permits. If a person fails to comply with the provisions of this section, the director may
refuse to issue further permits to that person until compliance is assured.
800.23. Other activities in right-of-way. Subdivision 1. Permit required. It is unlawful to make an
excavation, build or construct a fence, sidewalk, or building or structure, or to plant a tree or shrub in or
upon a street, road, avenue, lane, alley or public grounds in the city, or remove any earth or soil therefrom
unless authorized to do so by a written permit from the city. The excavation or construction must be made
in accordance with the conditions, provisions, limitations and specifications contained in the permit. The
permittee must erect a guard or fence about the excavation or building, sufficient to prevent persons or
animals from being injured by the excavation or construction or by articles falling from such construction.
A person making the excavation or construction, when it is completed, or at any time when ordered by the
city, must fill or remove the same so that the public grounds or thoroughfares are in a condition equally as
good as the condition that existed prior to the excavation or construction. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-21)
Subd. 2. Prohibited practices. It is unlawful to mark, injure, deface, destroy or place or cause to be
placed any sign, poster, advertising device or representation of any kind or nature including political signs,
posters and representations, upon a fence, tree, guide post, public utility pole or post, street sign or other
object upon or in any public street, roadway, avenue, alley, right-of-way, or in any public park or other
public property in the city, without a written permit therefore from the council.
Subd. 3. Use of streets and grounds restricted. It is unlawful to use a portion of a public street or
public grounds for the purpose of maintaining, constructing or parking a wagon, vehicle, pump or other
vending device without first obtaining a written permit therefore from the council.
Subd. 4. Cutting of trees and foliage restricted. It is unlawful to cut down, injure or destroy trees or
shrubbery or any flowers, bushes or other vegetation planted by the city for the beautification of such areas,
growing or being in any public street, alley, park, parkway or other public grounds in the city without first
obtaining a permit therefore from the council.
Subd. 5. Application for permit. A person desiring a permit must make written application therefor
to the city for filing the application with the clerk. The permit fee is set by Appendix B. The city engineer
shall maintain a list of structures and other features that may be allowed within a street or alley right-of-way.
The city may require an agreement for the said structure or feature. If the city engineer denies a listed item,
the person can appeal to the City Council. The City Council may request the planning commission to
schedule and hold a public hearing regarding the requested structure or feature, the cost of which shall be
borne by the applicant. The fee shall be set by Appendix B. The applicant shall record said agreement.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 04-01)
800.25. Street closure for neighborhood/community events. The City Council may authorize closure of a
city street (not county or state) for the purpose of a neighborhood gathering, community celebration, or other
event. All requests must be made in writing on forms provided by the city and indicate the names of those
in charge. The City Council may adopt and/or amend guidelines for such events by resolution. (Added,
Ord. No. 09-04)
In making its determination of whether a street may be closed the City Council will consider bus routes,
traffic patterns, alternate location options, and impact on adjacent properties. (Added, Ord. No. 09-04)
Robbinsdale City Code 805.01
Section 805 - Ice and Snow Removal
805.01. Removal. It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of a building fronting on or adjacent to a
sidewalk to allow an unreasonable accumulation of snow or ice to remain upon the sidewalk longer than
reasonably necessary or to fail to remove the snow or ice depending on the severity of weather conditions.
805.03. Nuisance. Snow and ice remaining upon public sidewalks is declared a public nuisance. Persons
owning vacant property adjacent to public walks are required to abate the nuisance or cause the same to
be abated within 12 hours after the snow or ice has ceased to be deposited on the sidewalk.
805.05. Cost assessed. If city forces are utilized to remove snow or ice the cost of removal may be
assessed against the property abutting the walks. The special assessment shall at the time of certifying
taxes to the county auditor be certified for collection as other special charges are certified and collected.
Robbinsdale City Code 810.01
Section 810 - Improvements on Public Property
810.01. General provisions. It is unlawful to construct, repair, remove or improve a street, sidewalk,
curb, gutter, sewer or sewer system, or other improvement upon public property in the city without a
permit to do so.
810.03. Permit: bond. Before any work described in this section is begun, a permit must be obtained.
Before a permit is issued, complete plans and specifications for the work must be presented to and
approved by the director of public works/engineer. Application for a permit is made to the city engineer.
810.05. Bond. The permit application must be accompanied by a bond with a sufficient corporate surety
running in favor of the city for damage done to existing streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, sewer or sewer
system or other public property. The bond must be in the principal amount of $500 if the cost of the work
to be done is less than $500, $2,000 if the cost of the work to be done is $500 or more but less than
$2,000, and $5,000 if the cost of the work to be done exceeds $2,000.
810.07. Insurance. Prior to commencement of work the permittee must furnish the engineer with
satisfactory evidence of the insurance in the form, amount and conditions specified in subsection 800.15.
Robbinsdale City Code 815.01
Section 815 - Parks and Recreation Areas
815.01. Definitions. Subdivision 1. For the purposes of this section the terms defined in this subsection
have the meanings given them.
Subd. 2. "Park" means an area reserved, designated or used for active or passive recreation and
owned, operated or controlled by the city or which is located within the city but owned, operated or
controlled by another governmental unit.
Subd. 3. "Intoxicating liquor" and "non-intoxicating malt liquor" or "beer" have the meanings
given by chapter XII.
Subd. 4. "Structure” includes any building/temporary fabrication/amusement apparatus set up,
constructed or inflated. (Amended, Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
815.02 Interim Rule and Regulation Changes. The City Manager shall have authority to make and
establish additional rules and regulations concerning the use of any park or park facilities for either
emergency or temporary situations. (Added, Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
815.03. Prohibitions. It is unlawful to:
(a) willfully mark, deface and disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove property
or facilities in a park, or break, cut, mutilate, injure, remove or carry away a tree, plant,
flower, shrub, rock, soil, sand, fence, bench, sign, table or other property or facilities in a
park;
(b) fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and wash rooms and portable restrooms in a
neat and sanitary manner; (Amended, Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
(c) throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of a fountain,
pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or adjacent to a park or tributary, stream,
storm sewer or drain flowing into such water, any substance, matter or object, liquid or
solid, which may result in the pollution of said water;
(d) have brought in and dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, hot coals,
paper boxes, cans, dirt, leaves, grass clippings, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or other
trash unless placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles
are not so provided, the material must be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere; (Amended, Ord. No.
18-14, Sec. 1)
(e) bring into a park, or possess, display, consume or use intoxicating liquor or beer without
obtaining a permit in advance. Permits for the consumption of wine or beer will only be
issued as an addition to an approved reserved event and must be approved by City Clerk.
A deposit of $100 is required to obtain a permit, the deposit to be returned when the City
determines that the person obtaining the permit has fulfilled the obligations stated in the
permit, state statutes and city code; (Amended, Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
(f) display or offer for sale any article in a park unless specifically authorized by the City
Clerk and in compliance with city licensing; (Amended, Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
Robbinsdale City Code 815.03(g) (Rev. 2019)
(g) paste or affix or inscribe a handbill or poster or sign on a structure or property in a park,
unless authorized; (Amended, Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
(h) engage in golfing practice in a park outside of authorized areas within a park and only
light, plastic, hollow balls are allowed; regulation golf balls may not be used; (Amended,
Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
(i) construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or
temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across such
lands, except on special written permit issued hereunder; (Amended, Ord. No. 18-14,
Sec. 1)
(j) engage in any course of conduct or participate in any activity in any park after he or she
is advised by police officer or other park employee, that such conduct or participation is
unreasonably and unnecessarily hazardous to the personal safety of said person or another
person; or impairs or limits the lawful use and enjoyment of the facility or area by other
persons; (Added, Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
(k) park or leave a vehicle standing except in a designated hard surface area and then only in
a manner so as not to restrict normal traffic flow; leave a vehicle standing after posted
closing hours without written permission; leave a vehicle in a park for the purpose of
offering it for sale; park or leave a vehicle in an area designated for drop-off/pickup/
loading only; (Added, Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
(l) operate a vehicle within a park in violation of posted regulations, county or municipal
traffic codes, or orders or directions of traffic officers or park employees authorized to
direct traffic; (Added, Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
(m) allow any animals on play fields, picnic or playground areas; or (Added, Ord. No. 18-14,
Sec. 1)
(n) fail to follow related regulations (pets, noise, signs, etc.) stated in other sections of City
Code. (Added, Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
815.05. Permits Required. Subdivision 1. Reservations. If a person wishes to reserve a park facility for
a particular purpose the person shall obtain a permit from Recreation Services. Fees and deposits may be
required depending on the reservation request and such fees shall be provided in Appendix B. (Amended,
Ord. No. 19-01, Sec. 1)
Subd. 2. Gatherings. A permit shall be required for any gathering which can reasonably be
expected to have 25 or more persons involved or which may have a potentially detrimental effect on park
property or the safety of other park users. Security, insurance and/or security bonds may be required and
paid by the permit holder prior to usage. This includes tournaments, entertainment, and exhibitions.
(Added, Ord. No. 19-01, Sec. 1)
815.06. (Added, Ord. No. 98-11) Parks and recreation areas. Subdivision 1. Closing hours. Except as
otherwise provided, parks shall be closed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following
day, no person shall be upon city park property during these hours. The fact that any person not engaged
in official city business as authorized or delegated by the city manager is present in a posted park and
open space during said hours shall be prima facie evidence that said person is there unlawfully.
Subd. 2. Exemptions. It shall not be a violation to be in a city park under the following
circumstances: (Amended, Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
Robbinsdale City Code 815.06, Subd. 2(a) (Rev. 2019)
(a) persons shall be allowed upon city park property after closing hours if they have a permit
from Recreation Services; (Amended, Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
(b) if a person is in Lakeview Terrace Park between 10:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m.; (Amended,
Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
(c) if the City Council has by resolution modified the closing hours and directed posting of
such modified hours; (Amended, Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
(d) City personnel may be in the parks at any time if acting in the course of their official
duties;
(e) City personnel may assign special hours of use by posting at park site;
(f) if a person is walking through city park property on park pathways after closing hours;
and (Amended, Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
(g) dogs are allowed to be unleashed in designated dog parks as long as owner complies with
rules stated at the park. (Added, Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
Subd. 3. A person violating the provisions of this subsection or a resolution enacted in
accordance with subsection 815.06, subdivision 2(c) is guilty of a misdemeanor or required to pay an
administrative fee. (Amended, Ord. No. 18-14, Sec. 1)
815.07. Speed and operation of watercraft; regulation of docks. Subdivision 1. Application. It is
unlawful to navigate, operate, dock or anchor a boat, motor boat, or watercraft (excluding canoes) on
Crystal Lake, Twin Lakes or Ryan Lake (the lakes) except in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection. This subsection applies to the operation of boats, motorboats and watercraft in the lakes.
Subd. 2. Mufflers required. It is unlawful to use a boat propelled in whole or in part by gas,
gasoline or naphtha unless the same is provided with a stock factory muffler, underwater exhaust or other
modern device capable of adequately muffling the sound of the exhaust of the engine. The phrase
"adequately muffling" means that the motor's exhaust must be so muffled or suppressed as not to create
excessive or unusual noise. The discharge of cooling water through the exhaust of an inboard engine is
considered an adequate muffling device. Motorboats may be operated with cut-outs or mufflers open
while actually competing in a race licensed to be held by the city.
Subd. 3. Speed and operation of motorboats.
(a) General rule. The operator of a motorboat must navigate the same in a careful and
prudent manner and at a safe speed and along a safe course. It is unlawful to operate a
motorboat at a rate of speed greater than that which will permit the motorboat to be
brought to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. It is unlawful to operate a
motorboat in a careless or reckless manner. Reckless navigation of a motorboat includes
operating the same in a manner which unnecessarily interferes with the free and proper
use of the navigable waters of the state or unnecessarily endangers other boats therein, or
the life, limb or property of any person. It is unlawful to exceed the speed limit of five
miles per hour while going under bridges or through channels. (Amended, Ord. No.
19-01, Sec. 2)
Robbinsdale City Code 815.07(b) (Rev. 2019)
(b) Slow-no wake speed regulations during high water levels. Refer to Section 2040.
(Added, Ord. No. 19-01, Sec. 2)
Subd. 4. Operating distances. It is unlawful to run, operate, navigate or direct a boat, motorboat
or watercraft within 75 feet of an area in which a person is fishing or within 100 feet of an area in which a
person is swimming or within 200 feet of any area designated as a public swimming beach or within 150
feet of a shoreline, except when the craft is entering or leaving the lake. An area designated as a public
swimming beach will be clearly marked with buoys.
Subd. 5. Time.
(a) Crystal and Ryan Lakes. A mechanical powered boat, motorboat, or watercraft may not
be operated from sunset to sunrise the following day.
(b) South Twin Lake: Gasoline-powered watercraft. Watercraft which is powered by means
of an internal combustion engine may not be operated: (a) between the hours of 12:00
(noon) and 6 o'clock P.M. on any day: unless such watercraft is operated for the limited
purpose of traveling on South Twin Lake to or from Middle or Upper Twin Lake, and at a
no wake speed (not greater than five miles per hour); or (b) from sunset to sunrise of the
following day. (Amended, Ord. No. 90-14, Sec. 1)
Subd. 6. Channels. It is unlawful to obstruct a channel. It is unlawful for a person to swim or
dive from a bridge that crosses a channel.
Subd. 7. Water skiing. For the purpose of this section, the term "other similar devices" means
any device such as knee boards or inner tubes which are towed or dragged behind a watercraft and upon
or in which a person can be carried. The term does not include watercraft which is being towed.
(a) Crystal and Ryan Lakes. Water skiing and the use of other similar devices are prohibited
in the primary harbor, which is defined as 150 feet from shoreline. Water skiing and the
use of other similar devices are permitted from the hours 10 o'clock A.M. to 7:30 o'clock
P.M., and it is unlawful to ski or use other similar devices at any other time.
(b) South Twin Lake. Water skiing and the use of other similar devices are prohibited in the
primary harbor which is defined as 150 feet from shoreline. Water skiing and the use of
other similar devices are prohibited from the hours of 12 noon to 6 o'clock P.M., and
from sunset to sunrise of the following day. (Amended, Ord. No. 90-14, Sec. 2)
Subd. 8. (Repealed, Ord. No. 90-14, Sec. 3)
Subd. 8. Duties of operator in case of accident. The operator of a boat involved in an accident
resulting in injury or death to a person or in damage to property must immediately stop the boat at the
scene of the accident and give to the person struck or the operator or occupants of the boat collided with,
the person's name and address and full identification of the boat, together with the name and address of
the owner and render to any person injured in such an accident reasonable assistance, and report such
accident to the nearest or most convenient law enforcement agency or office. (Renumbered, Ord. No. 90-
14, Sec. 4)
Robbinsdale City Code 815.07, Subd. 10(a)
(Rev. 2019)
(a) Hennepin County Sheriff's Department; and
(b) Conservation officers of the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Minnesota.
Provided, however, that all such enforcement activities shall be deemed to be under the exclusive
supervision and control of the agency employing such personnel and the city shall have no responsibility
or control over such activities. (Added, Ord. No. 90-14, Sec. 5)
Subd. 11. Exemption. All authorized resource management, emergency and enforcement
personnel, while acting in the performance of their assigned duties are exempt from the foregoing
restrictions. (Added, Ord. No. 90-14, Sec. 6)
Subd. 12. Signs. The city shall erect and maintain signs at each public launching facility on
South Twin Lake, and at other locations if deemed necessary by the city, notifying the public of the
essential requirements of subsections 815.07, subd. 5(b) and 815.07, subd. 7(b). (Added, Ord. No. 90-14,
Sec. 7)
Robbinsdale City Code 820.01 (Rev. 2017)
Section 820 – Public and Right of Way Trees: Vegetation
820.01. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to protect and promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of the people of the city by regulating the planting and maintenance of trees in order to
protect trees and to prevent and abate hazardous and nuisance conditions in the city.
820.03. Permitted street trees. The Forester shall maintain a list of permitted street trees to be planted
within the right-of-way of public streets. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-21)
820.05. Prohibited trees. The following trees, vines and shrubs may not be planted on city rights-of-way:
Genus
Acer
Species
freemanii
Common Name
Freeman Maple
Acer negundo Boxelder (Ash-leaved Maple)
Acer saccharinum Silver Maple
Celatrus orbiculatus Oriental Bittersweet
Frangula alnus Glossy Buckthorn
Fraxinus spp. Ash (Black, Green, White)
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo (Maidenhair Tree - female only)
Populus deltiodes Eastern Cottonwood
Populus nigra italica Lombardy Poplar
Rhamnus cathartica European Buckthorn
(Amended, Ord. No. 03-21, Ord. No. 15-02, Ord. No. 17-02)
820.07. Order to treat or remove. The Forester may order the pruning, treatment or removal of trees or
plants upon public or private property if the Forester determines that the action is necessary to public
safety or necessary to prevent the spread of disease or of insects harmful to trees and shrubs. (Amended,
Ord. No. 17-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 820.09 (Rev. 2017)
820.09. Order. Subdivision 1. Procedure. When the Forester determines that it is necessary to order the
pruning, treatment or removal of trees or plants, a written order to correct the condition must be served
upon the owner, occupant, operator or other person responsible for such tree or plant. (Amended, Ord.
No. 17-02)
Subd. 2. Notice. In cases where summary abatement of a public nuisance is required, the city
will serve notice on the owner as described below. The notice shall contain the following information.
(a) The address the property upon which the condition exists.
(b) The nature of the violation and appropriate ordinance citation.
(c) The necessary action needed to correct the violation.
(d) The date by which the corrections must be made before the city will seek abatement.
(e) The right of and the manner for the alleged violator to request a hearing before the City
Council unless it is an emergency case.
(f) A description of the penalties if the violation is not corrected.
(g) A statement that all unreimbursed costs, including staff time and administrative costs
incurred by the city in abating the nuisance shall be assessed against the property unless
payment is received within 30 days of the original billing to the property owner. An
administrative charge will apply for all assessed property, as noted in Appendix B.
(Added, Ord. No. 03-32)
Subd. 3. Method of service. The order shall be served in one of the following ways:
(a) by first class mail to the person responsible; (Amended, Ord. No. 17-02)
(b) by personal delivery to the person responsible;
(c) by leaving with a person of suitable age and discretion residing at the premises;
(d) if no person residing at the premises can be found, by affixing a copy of the order to the
front door of the premises; or
(e) by publishing in the official paper once a week, for two successive weeks. (Amended,
Ord. No. 03-32)
Subd. 4. Time limit. The order must establish a time limit for compliance dependent upon the
hazard and danger created by the violation. In cases of extreme danger, immediate compliance upon
service of the order is authorized. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-32)
Subd. 5. Appeal. A person receiving an order hereunder may, within ten days of the service of
such order, appeal to the city manager, who must review the order within seven days. (Amended, Ord.
No. 03-32)
Subd. 6. Special assessment. On or before September 30 of each year, the city clerk shall list the
total unpaid charges against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this
subsection. The cost shall be levied as a special assessment against the property upon which the condition
was remedied in the manner provided by Minnesota Statutes, section 429.101. The levying of such
assessment does not affect the liability of the owner for any other penalty that may be imposed. The
special assessment will be certified and thereupon be a lien upon such property, and will be included in
Robbinsdale City Code 820.09, Subd. 6
(Rev. 2017)
the next tax bill on such property unless paid before and collected in the same manner as other taxes
against such property. The certification shall provide for the payment of the special assessments the
following year. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-32)
Subd. 7. City work. The order procedure need not be followed with reference to trees or plants
located on public property when the costs of plantings, pruning, treatment or removal are done at the cost
of the city. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-02)
820.11. Other regulations. Subdivision 1. Traffic hazard. No tree may be planted, placed or allowed to
remain in a position which the engineer determines to be a traffic hazard.
Subd. 2. Rights-of-way. On arterial or collector street right-of-way as shown on the major street
plan, the location of trees will be determined by the engineer. It is unlawful to plant a tree in the right-ofway
of an arterial or collector street in a location that does not conform to generally accepted engineering
standards or utility placement constraints. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-02)
Subd. 3. Permits.
(a) It is unlawful to plant, prune, tap, cut, wound or remove trees or shrubs in public places,
including street rights of way, without a permit from the Forester. Planting, pruning,
tapping, cutting, wounding or removal must be performed in accordance with conditions
stated in the permit. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-02)
(b) The following provisions apply to the issuance of permits where required for planting in
public places.
(1) Application data. The application must state the address, number of trees or
plants to be planted, the location, name of planter(s) and specific species name of
each tree or plant. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-02)
(2) Standards for issuance. A permit will be issued if it is found that the proposed
plantings conform to the requirements of this section.
820.13. Abuse or mutilation. It is unlawful to (i) damage, cut, carve, kill or injure the bark of any tree or
plant on public property; (ii) attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant on public
property; (iii) dig in or otherwise disturb public grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the
natural beauty or usefulness of any area of public property; (iv) cause or permit a wire charged with
electricity or any gaseous, liquid or solid substance harmful to tree or plants to come into contact with
them.
820.15. Weed and grass cutting. Subdivision 1. General rule. The owner of property abutting on any
public street or alley must maintain the property and abutting public property to the center of such platted
street or alley. Weeds, including tall grass, that exceed eight inches in height, must be cut, destroyed or
otherwise eradicated by the owner of the property. Perennial native prairie vegetation including grasses
and/or wildflowers as identified by the city Forester, installed as a primary component of an approved
raingarden or a restored prairie, is excluded from this rule on a case-by-case basis. (Amended, Ord. No.
91-05, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 03-32; Ord. No. 17-02)
Subd. 2. Weed and grass cutting by the city. The weed inspector shall cause the weeds to be cut
and destroyed by city crews or private contractors as the inspector shall determine, including tall grass,
that exceed eight inches in height that are growing on the property or within the platted limits of an
abutting public street or alley when the vegetation is not cut by the property owners. Grasses and/or
wildflowers identified by the city Forester as native prairie species that exceed eight inches in height are
exempt from this requirement. The cost, including staff time and administrative costs, will be reported to
Robbinsdale City Code 820.15, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2017)
the city clerk and may be charged to abutting property owners. An administrative charge will apply for
all assessed property, as noted in Appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-32; Ord. No. 17-02)
Subd. 3. Notice. When the weed inspector determines there is a violation a compliance order to
the owner of the property shall be issued. The compliance order shall contain the following information:
(a) Notice that if the nuisance is not abated within seven calendar days that the city will abate
the nuisance at the owner’s cost;
(b) The hourly cost of abating the nuisance and any additional costs, including staff time;
(c) Upon city completion of the abatement, an invoice shall be sent to the property owner for
the cost of the abatement, any additional costs, and staff time. (Added, Ord. No. 03-32)
Subd. 4. Method of service. The order shall be served in one of the following ways:
(a) by first class mail to the person responsible; (Amended, Ord. No. 17-02)
(b) by personal delivery to the person responsible;
(c) by leaving with a person of suitable age and discretion residing at the premises;
(d) if no person residing at the premises can be found, by affixing a copy of the order to the
front door of the premises; or
(e) by publishing in the official paper once a week, for two successive weeks. (Added, Ord.
No. 03-32)
Subd. 5. Assessment. On or before September 30 of each year, the city clerk shall list the total
unpaid charges for weed cutting services against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable
under this subsection. The council may then assess the charges against the properties benefited as a
special assessment under Minnesota Statutes, section 429.101, for certification to the county auditor and
collection along with current taxes. The certification shall provide for the payment of the special
assessments the following year. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-32)
Robbinsdale City Code 825.01
(Revised 2018)
Section 825 - Tree Pruning and Chemical Treatments
825.01. Tree pruning, chemical treatments, licenses. It is unlawful to engage in the business of tree
pruning, chemical treating, or removal unless a license to do such work is first obtained from the city.
Application for the license is made to the clerk. The license will be granted by the clerk after approval by
the city Forester and upon proof of the applicant's qualifications. The annual fee for a license is set forth
in Appendix B. The license expires annually on December 31. Licenses are not transferable. The license
fee must be paid to the clerk at the time of filing on the application. The license fee will not be prorated.
(Amended, Ord. No. 2018-02)
825.03. Insurance. The applicant must provide a certificate of insurance with the city with public
liability insurance of not less than $1,500,000 combined single limit issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota. The policy must provide that it may not be cancelled
by the issuer except upon ten days' written notice to the city. If the insurance is cancelled the license will
be automatically suspended until the insurance is replaced. The city must be a named insured on the
insurance policy. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-22, Ord. No. 13-01)
825.05. Standards. Tree pruning, chemical treatments and other tree care practices are governed by the
ANSI A300 Standards for Tree Care Practices manual.
(Amended, Ord. No. 17-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 830.01
(Revised 2014)
Section 830 - Vacation of Streets
830.01. Petition. The council must, upon petition of a majority of the owners of the land abutting on a
street or alley, or any part thereof to be vacated, consider the same and if it appears to be in the interest of
the public to vacate the street or alley or any portion thereof, the council will adopt a resolution
designating a time and place for a public hearing for the consideration of the petition. The council may
initiate such action without a petition. The council may, from time to time by resolution, establish
appropriate fees to cover some or all of the city's costs of processing the petition.
830.03. Notice. Notice of the public hearing for street vacation setting out (i) the time and place of the
hearing and the matter to be considered and (ii) the public street or alley or any part thereof that is
proposed to be vacated, must be in accordance with State law. (Amended, Ord. No. 14-07)
830.05. Ordinance vacating. If the council determines after public hearing that it is in the best interest of
the public to vacate a public street or alley or any part thereof, the council may by a vote of four members
adopt an ordinance vacating the street or alley or any part thereof. A certified copy of the ordinance must
be filed in the office of the registrar of deeds of Hennepin county, or if the property is registered, with the
registrar of titles, or with both as necessary.
Robbinsdale City Code 835.01 (Rev. 2017)
Section 835 - Tree Disease & Insect Program
835.01. Policy. The City Council has determined that the health of the trees within the city limits is
threatened by contagious and fatal diseases and certain destructive insect pests. The council has further
determined that the loss of trees growing upon public and private property would substantially depreciate
the value of property within the city and impair the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience
of the public. It is declared to be the intention of the council to control and prevent the spread of serious
tree diseases and insect infestations and this ordinance is enacted for that purpose. (Amended, Ord. No.
06-04)
835.03. Forester. The powers and duties as set forth in this section are conferred upon the Forester. It is
the duty of the Forester to coordinate, under the direction and control of the council, activities of the city
relating to the management of serious tree diseases, insect infestations and other threats to tree health.
(Amended, Ord. No. 06-04)
835.04. Tree inspector. A person possessing a tree inspector license as administered by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources. (Added, Ord. No. 06-04; Amended, Ord. No. 17-02)
835.05. Program. It is the intention of the City Council to conduct a program of plant pest management
pursuant to the authority granted by Minnesota Statutes to control certain diseases and insects detrimental
to public and private trees. (Amended, Ord. No. 06-04; Ord. No. 17-02)
835.07. Nuisances. The following are declared public nuisances whenever they may be found within the
city:
(a) any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected and showing signs or symptoms of
Dutch elm disease fungus Ophiostoma ulmi (Buisman) or Ophiostoma nova-ulmi Moreau
or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus (Eichh.) or
Hylurgopinus Rufipes (Marsh); and (Amended, Ord. Nos. 06-04, No. 15-02; Ord. No.
17-02)
(b) any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other elm
material from which the bark has not been removed or destroyed; and (Amended, Ord.
No. 06-04, Ord. No. 15-02; Ord. No. 17-02)
(c) any living or standing oak tree or part thereof, infected to any degree with the oak wilt
fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum; and (Added, Ord. No. 06-04, Amended, Ord. No. 15-
02; Ord. No. 17-02)
(d) any living or standing ash tree or part thereof of the Fraxinus genus infested to any
degree with the emerald ash borer beetle Agrilus planipennis as confirmed by the
Minnesota Department of Agriculture; and (Added, Ord. No. 15-02; Ord. No. 17-02)
(e) any dead or dying ash tree of the Fraxinus genus or part thereof including logs, branches,
stumps, firewood or other material confirmed to have been infested with emerald ash
borer from which the outer 1” of bark/wood has not been removed or destroyed; and
(Added, Ord. No. 15-02; Ord. No. 17-02)
(f) any tree or shrub that the Forester has determined has become, or may become a hazard
or a significant threat to public safety and/or forest health. (Added, Ord. No. 06-04,
Amended, Ord. No. 15-02; Ord. No. 17-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 835.09 (Rev. 2017)
835.09. Abatement. It is unlawful for a person to permit a public nuisance as defined in section 835.07 to
remain on any premises owned or controlled by that person within the city. The nuisances may be abated
in the manner prescribed by city code. (Amended, Ord. No. 06-04)
835.11. Inspection and investigation. Subdivision 1. Inspection. The Forester must inspect all premises
and places in the city as often as practicable to determine whether any condition described in section
835.07 exists thereon. The Forester shall investigate all reported incidents of disease or infestation.
(Amended, Ord. No. 06-04)
Subd. 2. Entry on private premises. The Forester may enter private premises, excepting only a
private home, at reasonable times for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned under this
section.
Subd. 3. Diagnosis. The Forester or Forester's designated tree inspector shall identify diseased
elms and/or oaks according to generally accepted field diagnosis procedures such as wilting, yellowing of
leaves, staining of cambial wood under the tree bark and/or detection of fungal spore mats on oaks.
Confirmation of field diagnosis, when ordered by the Forester on an as-needed basis, shall be completed by
the University of Minnesota Plant Disease Clinic. The city Forester or tree inspector shall assess potentially
hazardous trees based upon the presence of structural defect(s) in a tree making that tree, or part thereof,
likely to fail, adversely affecting the public or public property. (Amended, Ord. No. 06-04; Ord. No. 17-02)
835.13. Abatement of tree nuisances. In abating or ordering the abatement of the nuisances defined in
ordinance section 835.07, the Forester may cause or order the infected or infested tree or wood to be
sprayed, removed, burned, chipped, ground, or otherwise effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as
fully as possible the spread of the disease fungus/infestation and its vectors. The abatement procedures must
be selected and carried out in accordance with current technical and expert opinions. (Amended, Ord. No.
06-04; Ord. No. 17-02)
835.15. Procedure. Subdivision 1. Notice. If the Forester finds with reasonable certainty that the infection
or infestation defined in section 835.07 exists in any tree or wood in any public or private place in the city,
the Forester will proceed as follows: (Amended, Ord. No. 06-04)
(a) If the Forester finds that danger of infection/infestation of other trees is imminent, or a
potentially hazardous condition is identified, the Forester shall notify the property owner by
first class mail and posted notice on the property that the nuisance will be abated within a
specified time, not more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of such notice, or such
time as determined in writing by the Forester or City Engineer/Public Works Director.
After the expiration of the time limited by the notice, the city may abate the nuisance, the
costs of which will be assessed against the benefiting property. (Amended, Ord. No. 06-04,
Ord. No. 15-02)
Subd. 2. Records. The Forester must keep a record of the costs of abatements done under this
subsection and report monthly to the clerk work done for which assessments are to be made stating and
certifying the description of the lands, lots, parcels involved and the amount chargeable to each.
Subd. 3. Assessment. On or before September 1 of each year the clerk must list the total unpaid
charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable. The council
may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the property involved as a special assessment
under Minnesota Statutes, section 429.101 and other pertinent statutes for certification to the county auditor
and collection the following year along with current taxes.
Robbinsdale City Code 835.17 (Rev. 2017)
835.17. Treating trees. If the Forester determines that the treatment of a tree or of wood within the city is
necessary, the Forester may treat said trees with an appropriate material. Such treatment activities must be
conducted in accordance with technical and expert opinions generally accepted or established in the field of
arboriculture whenever possible. The notice provisions section 835.15 apply to treatment operations
conducted under this subsection. (Amended, Ord. No. 06-04; Ord. No. 17-02)
835.19. Transporting wood. It is unlawful to transport within the city any bark-bearing elm wood, barkbearing
ash wood or any other wood determined by the Forester to imminently threaten community trees,
without a permit or written approval from the Forester. The Forester will grant permits or written approvals
when the purpose of this section will be served thereby. (Amended, Ord. No. 06-04, Ord. No. 15-02; Ord.
No. 17-02)
835.21. Interference prohibited. It is unlawful to prevent, delay or interfere with the Forester while engaged
in the performance of the Forester's duties.
Robbinsdale City Code 839.01 (Rev. 2010)
Section 839 – Newspaper Racks
(Added, Ord. No. 10-02)
839.01. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prescribe time, place and manner licensing
requirements for the placement of newspaper racks upon any public right-of-way within the City of
Robbinsdale, which protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare by:
(a) eliminating potential hazards to motorists and pedestrians using the public streets,
sidewalks and rights-of-way;
(b) safeguarding and enhancing property values;
(c) protecting government investments in public buildings, streets, sidewalks, traffic control
and utility devices, parks and public facilities already in place on or near the rights-ofway;
(d) protecting the City from unnecessary exposure to personal injury and property damage
claims;
(e) preserving and improving the appearance of the City through adherence to aesthetic
principles, in order to create a community that is attractive to residents and non-residents
who come to live, visit, work or trade;
(f) eliminating clutter along the streets, roadways and rights-of-way within the City;
(g) to encourage newspaper racks which by their design are integrated with and harmonious
to the surrounding environment and the buildings and sites they occupy; and
(h) to avoid arbitrary and unnecessary curtailment of freedom of speech and press.
839.02. Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
(a) Newspaper rack any type of unattended device placed upon or abutting any public rightof-
way for the vending, display, or free distribution of, newspapers, news periodicals, or
other written materials.
(b) Obstruct to place any tangible object in a public right-of-way so as to hinder free and
open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way for an aggregate period of eight
hours or more.
(c) Public Ground land owned by the City for park, open space or similar purpose, which is
held for use in common by the public.
839.03. License required. Subdivision 1. General rule. No person shall place, erect, install, service,
stock or maintain any newspaper rack which obstructs or intrudes upon, in whole or in part, any public
right-of-way or public ground in the City without first obtaining a license pursuant to this section. One
license may be issued to include a number of newspaper racks. Unlicensed newspaper racks are subject
to removal and impoundment. The owner of the unlicensed newspaper rack, if the owner’s identify and
address can be reasonably ascertained, shall be served by the City by regular mail with a Notice of Intent
to Impound stating that the newspaper rack will be removed and impounded ten days after mailing of the
Notice unless a completed license application has been filed with the City Clerk. Newspaper racks may
only be reclaimed upon payment of an impoundment fee as set forth in Appendix B. Any impounded
newspaper rack that remains unclaimed ten days after its impoundment shall be considered abandoned
property subject to destruction.
Robbinsdale City Code 839.02, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2010)
Subd. 2. Application. The owner of any existing newspaper rack to which this section applies
prior to the effective date of this section shall have until June 1, 2010 to submit a license application.
However, no license shall issue for any existing newspaper rack that has not been demonstrated by the
applicant to be in compliance with the standards set out in this section of the City code. The person
desiring a license must make written application to the City Clerk which shall include:
(a) the full name of the applicant, who must be the owner and principal in charge of the
newspaper rack.
(b) the name and address of the applicant, the street address, e-mail address, and telephone
number of the applicant and a responsible person whom the City may contact at any time
regarding the applicant’s newspaper rack.
(c) a site plan that is minimally sufficient to ascertain compliance with the placement
standards of this section and showing the exact requested location of each proposed
newspaper rack, its relationship to each curb, fixture, building or bus stop, right-of-way
or property line with an illustration and description of its supporting or enclosing
structure, as well as a dimensional drawing. A comprehensive list of all the applicant’s
desired placement locations including the nearest street addresses of each newspaper
rack, its distance from the nearest intersection, and its distance from the curb must also
accompany the license application. The applicant shall also provide such photographs of
each proposed location to ascertain compliance with the placement standards set forth in
section 839.05. Where the applicant fails to provide adequate photographic evidence of
compliance, the City Engineer, at the option of the applicant, upon payment of an
inspection fee, conduct a field inspection of the placement as an alternative method of
determining compliance with the placement standards of this section.
(d) A notarized statement by the applicant that the applicant will, in consideration of being
issued a license for the use of public space, agree to fully indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the City, its officers, Council members, employees and agents from any and all
claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages including, but not limited to,
expenses for reasonable legal fees, costs and disbursements assumed by the City in
connection therewith:
(1) For injury or death to any person or persons or damage to property arising from
or in connection with the acts or failure to act of the applicant, its officers, agents
or employees in the construction, operation, maintenance, location, placement or
removal of any newspaper rack of the applicant; or
(2) For injury or death to any person or persons or damage to property arising out of
the placement or display of any written or graphic materials, advertisements,
notices, signs or posters on any newspaper rack; or
(3) For any injuries or damage arising out of the exercise of any other right or
privilege under the license, provided, however, that the applicant shall have no
obligation as to any such claim arising from the City’s gross negligence or willful
misconduct.
Included in that statement, the applicant shall additionally agree to reimburse the City for
its cost of removal and storage of its licensed newspaper racks under the terms of this
section and for the cost of restoration of the right-of-way or public ground and the
adjacent area.
Robbinsdale City Code 839.02, Subd. 2 (e)
(Rev. 2010)
(e) A statement by the applicant certifying that the applicant has ascertained that each of the
applicant’s newspaper racks meets the operational standards, location requirements,
installation and maintenance standards set forth in this section and is in compliance with
the applicable county and state laws and regulations governing use of the public streets
and rights-of-way. The applicant must also agree in that statement, as a condition of
licensing to regularly monitor and maintain each of the applicant’s newspaper racks in
conformity with these standards and limitations. The statement shall also acknowledge
that any newspaper rack found to be in violation of the applicable standards and
limitations will be subject to corrective orders and possible removal and may subject the
applicant to possible licensing sanctions pursuant to section 839.06.
(f) The signature of the applicant.
Licensees may relocate licensed newspaper racks by filing an application for a relocation permit
and payment of a relocation fee as set forth in Appendix B. The relocation application shall
contain the information required by subsections (c), (d), (e), and (f) of this section and will be
considered pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 839.05.
Subd. 3. Fees. The application must be accompanied by a license fee set by Appendix B.
Subd. 4. Term. Licenses expire annually on December 31.
Subd. 5. Renewal. If plans and specifications of the newspaper rack or location of the newspaper
rack are not to be changed, the application for renewal need contain only the name and address of the
applicant, and the location and number of the newspaper rack, along with the applicable fee, for which
renewal license is desired. If the location is in a residential area, consent of the owner of the adjacent land
is required. Failure to renew a license will, ten days after the license expires, be deemed abandonment of
the newspaper rack and consent to the City’s removal and forfeiture thereof at the owner’s expense.
Subd. 6. Multiple locations. If the application for licenses for more than one newspaper rack at
the same or different locations, a separate number and license will, when issued, be assigned and granted
for each newspaper rack authorized to be installed, but each license issued is valid only for the location
designated in the license.
839.04. License application verification and consideration.
(a) Verification. An application shall be submitted to the City Clerk who shall verify the
information on the application form. The City Clerk shall then route the application to
the City Engineer for review and approval. The City Engineer must review and approve
each proposed newspaper rack based upon and consistent with the regulations set forth in
this section, 510.25, subdivision 2 (f) and (g) and applicable county and state laws or
regulations relating to the use of the public streets and rights-of-way before the City
Clerk shall forward the license to the City Council for consideration.
(b) Denial. If the application is recommended for denial, in whole or in part, the City Clerk
shall notify the applicant of the determination in writing setting forth the specific reason
therefore. The notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address provided in the
application and shall inform the applicant of the applicant’s right, within 20 days after the
date the notice was mailed, to request an administrative review of the City Clerk
determination to the City Manager.
(c) City Council action. Initial applications for licenses are considered by the Council, and,
if approved by the Council, are issued by the Clerk. Licenses are not transferable.
License renewal is subject to the license provisions described in section 1005 Licensing
Procedure.
Robbinsdale City Code 839.05 (Rev. 2010)
839.05. Standards for location and operation.
(a) Location of newspaper racks. No newspaper rack shall be located in whole or in part on
private or public property without the express written consent of the property owner or
the owner’s representative and in no case shall a newspaper rack be located:
(1) within five feet of a pedestrian crosswalk, fire hydrant, standpipe, semaphore
standard, public mailbox or within five feet of the curb return of any unmarked
crosswalk, driveway or alley;
(2) within three feet of the back edge of the curb or the traveled portion of any public
street, road or highway including public parking lots;
(3) within five feet of any traffic control sign or sign marking a designated bus stop
or designated loading space, public trash receptacle, bicycle rack, tree grate,
manhole cover, meter and/or valve box cover, or vent cover for underground
utilities or other permitted right-of-way obstruction or appurtenant feature, except
as hereinafter provided;
(4) at any location where it would restrict the clear, continuous space for pedestrian
traffic to five feet or less;
(5) within the traveled portion of any street, alley, lane or passageway intended for
regular use by motor vehicle traffic;
(6) at any location so as to obstruct the clear-view triangle of street intersections or
street and driveway intersections, as defined and regulated by section 510.25,
subdivision 2 (f) or as to otherwise interfere with the clear and unobstructed
vision and cross view of motorists at street intersections, driveways or alleys;
(7) within one foot of the edge of any public sidewalk or at any location where it
would interfere with the cleaning of or snow removal from any public sidewalk
by use of mechanical equipment;
(8) at any location where it would interfere with ingress or egress from busses or the
use of transit shelters or benches;
(9) at any location where it would interfere with the ingress or egress from a vehicle
parked in a stall reserved by proper signage for handicapped person or any
handicap access ramp;
(10) at any location where it would interfere with the normal use or facilitate the
misuse of any other permitted right-of-way obstruction, or appurtenant feature; or
(11) at any other location where it would interfere with or impede the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic including access to legally parked or stopped
vehicles, or where it would interfere with the use of the property for public utility
purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use.
Robbinsdale City Code 839.05 (b) (1)
(Rev. 2010)
(b) Installation and maintenance.
(1) Installation. When a location is approved for a newspaper rack, the newspaper
rack shall be installed parallel with the street. Every newspaper rack shall be
installed so as to open toward the sidewalk or public pedestrian area, as opposed to
abutting public roadway or private property. In no case shall a newspaper rack be
attached in any manner to any lighting system, street lamp post, hydrant, tree stake
or guard, electric light or power pole, sign post, telephone pole or wire
appurtenance thereof, semaphore standard, traffic control device, tree, shrub, rock,
sidewalk or other natural feature or any other permitted right-of-way obstruction,
other than permissively to another licensed newspaper rack. A newspaper rack
may be weighted down, as long as the weight or anchor is an integral and attached
component of the main structure and not separately accessible or removable.
(2) Relocation. Once installed at an approved location, no newspaper rack may be
moved to a new location without an approved relocation permit as set forth in
section 839.03, subdivision 2 and payment of the relocation fee. Failure to obtain
an approved relocation permit will void the license upon relocation of that
newspaper rack, subjecting that structure to removal and impoundment pursuant to
section 839.06, subdivision (c).
(3) Number at one location. Newspaper racks may be clustered together in groups of
two or more so long as the units are situated side-by-side with no more than a two
foot separation between each individual unit in a line parallel to the street with that
line extending no further than 15 feet, including the separation space between units.
Each cluster must be separated by a distance of not less than 100 feet. However,
no newspaper racks shall be clustered together within 15 feet of any street
intersection or street and driveway intersection in a manner that obstructs the
visibility triangle as defined and regulated by section 510.25, subdivision 2 (f) and
(g) of the City code or otherwise interferes with the clear and unobstructed vision
and cross view of motorists at street intersections, driveways or alleys.
(4) Identification. Each newspaper rack must permanently display the name, address,
and telephone number of the licensee.
(5) Maintenance. It shall be the duty of the licensee to maintain each newspaper rack
at all times in a safe condition at its proper location. The licensee shall periodically
inspect each newspaper rack in order that it is properly maintained. Newspaper
racks shall be kept at all times in a neat, clean and usable condition. Snow and ice
shall be removed from the newspaper racks and in the vicinity thereof during the
winter so as to be accessible at all times during the year. Newspaper racks shall be
maintained in good working order at all times, freshly painted, and with unbroken
hoods free of graffiti, posted bills and debris.
(6) Location of advertising. Newspaper racks shall display no advertising except a
logo or other identification of the newspaper being dispensed on the front of the
newspaper rack. No newspaper rack shall display the words “stop,” “look,”
“danger” or any other word, phrase or symbol that might interfere with or distract
traffic.
(c) Dimension and design. No newspaper rack shall be more than four and one-half feet in
height, as measured from the surface of the sidewalk or ground upon which it is mounted,
nor more than two feet deep or two and one-half feet long. In no case shall a newspaper
rack contain an element or device designed to emanate artificial light either internally or
externally.
Robbinsdale City Code 839.06 (Rev. 2010)
839.06. Sanctions for license violations.
(a) Suspension or revocation. The City Council may suspend or revoke a license issued
pursuant to this section pursuant to section 1005.21.
(b) Notice and hearing.
(1) Notice to correct conditions relating to a specific newspaper rack. Where the
basis for a potential license revocation or suspension is a violation of section
839.05 and does not go to all of the licensee’s listed structures, the City Engineer
shall mail to the licensee at the address provided in the application by regular
mail an order to correct the conditions underlying the violation. The order to
correct conditions shall specifically describe the offending conditions, the actions
necessary to correct the conditions, establish a date for compliance and inform
the licensee of its right to demand administrative review of the order to correct
conditions. If the licensee fails to either correct conditions in the manner
directed, as verified by the City, or request a hearing within ten days of the date
the notice was mailed, such will be deemed an admission that the licensee has
substantially breached the terms of the license and consented to the City’s
removal and impoundment of the newspaper rack which is the subject of the
order to correct conditions at the owner’s expense. An impoundment fee shall be
assessed against each impounded newspaper rack. Any impounded newspaper
rack that remains unclaimed after ten days shall be considered abandoned
property and subject to destruction. If the licensee attempts to comply with the
order to correct conditions, it shall notify the City Clerk within ten days of the
date the notice was mailed.
(2) Notice of right to a hearing. In all other cases, the City Clerk shall provide at
least eight day’s notice to the licensee of the basis of the potential license
suspension or revocation by regular mail to the address provided on the license
application and of the time and place of the hearing before the City Council.
(c) Removal.
(1) Upon revocation of any license, if the licensee fails to promptly remove a
newspaper rack and restore the public right-of-way or public ground, such will be
deemed abandonment and consent to the City’s removal and forfeiture of the
newspaper rack. However, such forfeiture shall not excuse licensee from the
payment of the cost of removal and storage of said newspaper rack, as well as
restoration of the right-of-way.
(2) Upon expiration of any license issued under this section, the City Clerk shall
send written notice of its intent to remove and impound the licensee’s newspaper
racks to the licensee, by regular mail to the address provided in the application,
demanding that the licensee remove the newspaper rack and restore the public
right-of-way or public ground within ten days after mailing of the notice. The
licensee’s failure, within ten days, either to remove the newspaper rack or file an
application renewing the license will be deemed abandonment and consent to the
City’s removal and forfeiture of the newspaper rack. However, such forfeiture
shall not excuse the owner or principal in charge of the newspaper rack from
reimbursing the City for its cost of removal, storage, and restoration of the rightof-
way.
Robbinsdale City Code 839.06 (c)(3)
(Rev. 2010)
(3) Any newspaper rack may be ordered removed by the City Engineer when
necessary to accommodate a private or public construction or repair project.
Failure to comply with the order to remove within ten days will be deemed
consent to the City’s removal or forfeiture of the rack at the owner’s expense.
(4) Any newspaper rack may be summarily removed by the City where its placement
creates a danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public. All such racks or
benches shall be stored in a secure location by the City. Written notice of the
removal shall be sent to the licensee by regular mail. A reasonable time after the
danger of the emergency threat to public health, safety and welfare ceases to
exist, the City shall replace the newspaper rack in its original location at no
additional cost to the licensee where the location meets the standards and
limitations set forth in this section and other applicable laws or regulations.
Where the location does not meet applicable standards, an impoundment fee shall
be assessed against the newspaper rack. Failure to reclaim the newspaper rack
within ten days from the date of mailing of notice of removal, will be deemed
abandonment and consent to its destruction.
(5) The City Clerk shall send a written order to remove any newspaper rack that has
remained empty for a period of 30 continuous days or more. Failure to comply
with the order to remove within ten days of mailing will be deemed to consent to
the City’s removal and forfeiture of the newspaper rack at the owner’s expense.
An impoundment fee shall be assessed against each impounded newspaper rack.
Any impounded newspaper rack that remains unclaimed after ten days shall be
considered abandoned property subject to destruction.
Robbinsdale City Code 840.01 (Rev. 2002)
Section 840 - Courtesy Benches
840.01. License required. Subdivision 1. General rule. A person desiring to place and maintain one or
more courtesy benches for the convenience of persons waiting for buses upon public property of the city,
may be granted a license therefor upon compliance with this section.
Subd. 2. Application. The person desiring a license must make written application to the city
clerk, showing the requested location and detailed plans and specifications of each proposed bench, the
name and address of the applicant, and such other information as may be required by the clerk.
Subd. 3. Consent. The consent of the abutting property owners or lessees is required where the
proposed location of a bench is in an area where the abutting property is zoned residential or multiple
dwelling. In such cases each application must be accompanied by a writing signed by the owners or
lessees of the property abutting the proposed location of the bench, showing the owners' or lessees'
consent to the installation and maintenance of such bench.
Subd. 4. Fees. The application must be accompanied by a license fee set by Appendix B.
Subd. 5. Term. Licenses expire annually on December 31. Applications for licenses are
considered by the council, and, if approved by the council, are issued by the clerk. Licenses are not
transferable. License renewal is subject to the license provisions described in section 1005 Licensing
Procedure. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-05)
Subd. 6. Renewal. If plans and specifications of the bench, or advertising matter, or location of
the bench, are not to be changed, the application for renewal need contain only the name and address of
the applicant, and the location and number of the bench for which renewal license is desired. If the
original consent of the owner of the land or lessee upon the premises abutting that portion of the street
where the bench is located granted to the license holder the continuing right to maintain such bench, the
application may so state, and renewed consent will not be required.
Subd. 7. Change of ownership or control. If a bench for which a license has been issued is sold
or title or control thereof transferred or assigned, a new license is required.
Subd. 8. Multiple locations. If the application is for licenses for more than one bench at the same
or different locations, a separate number and license will, when issued, be assigned and granted for each
bench authorized to be installed, but each license issued is valid only for the location designated in the
license.
Robbinsdale City Code 840.03
(Rev. 1993)
840.03. Approval of application. A license will not be issued for the installation or maintenance of a bench
until approved by the clerk, the engineer, and the council.
840.05. Denial or revocation of license. Subdivision 1. Denial. The application for installation or
maintenance of a bench will be denied if it would tend unduly to obstruct passage along any public sidewalk
or public way or to create a hazard, or otherwise to be detrimental to the public safety, convenience, welfare,
or aesthetics, or if any alternate bench has been provided by the city. (Amended, Ord. No. 93-14)
Subd. 2. Revocation. A license may be revoked, or the application for renewal thereof denied, for
failure to comply with the provisions of this section, or for misrepresentation of any material facts in the
application, or for any reason which would have been grounds for denial of the original application, or
where in the judgment of the City Council, maintenance has become inappropriate.
Subd. 3. Consent withdrawn. If the abutting owner, or lessee, by writing filed with the city clerk
on or before the first day of April preceding the expiration of any license, withdraws consent to the renewal
thereof after such expiration, the clerk must promptly notify the licensee of the filing of such writing and the
renewal of the license will be denied unless and until such owner, or person in possession or control,
consents in writing to the renewal.
840.07. Specifications and maintenance. Subdivision 1. Set back. A courtesy bench must be installed
parallel with the curb and set back behind the far edge of the sidewalk away from the curb.
Subd. 2. Dimensions. A bench may not be more than 42 inches high nor more than 30 inches wide
or seven feet long.
Subd. 3. Display. Each bench must have the license number displayed thereon, in a conspicuous
place.
Subd. 4. Maintenance. The licensee must maintain each bench in a safe condition at its proper
location and to inspect each bench periodically in order that it may be properly maintained. Benches must
be kept in a neat, clean and usable condition. Ice and snow must be removed from the benches and the
immediate vicinity thereof so that each bench is accessible at all times.
840.09. Advertising. Subdivision 1. Location. Advertising matter or signs may not be displayed upon a
bench except only upon the front and rear surfaces of the backrest. Liquor, beer, or obscene, immoral or
indecent advertising, or political advertising is not permitted. Advertising is subject to the approval of the
City Council.
Subd. 2. Traffic. Advertising matter or signs on a bench may not display the words, "STOP",
"LOOK", "DRIVE IN", or any other word, phrase or symbol which might interfere with, mislead or distract
traffic.
Robbinsdale City Code 840.11 (Rev. 2003)
840.11. Bench removal. Upon the revocation or expiration of a license without renewal, if the licensee fails
promptly to remove a bench, the city engineer may do so within ten days after written notice given by mail
directed to the address of the licensee of file. If the licensee fails to pay the cost of removal and storage
thereof within a period of 60 days after the giving of such notice, the licensee's rights in the bench shall be
forfeited, but such forfeiture does not excuse the licensee from the payment of the cost of removal and
storage of the bench.
840.13. Insurance. Subdivision 1. Type. Before a license is issued, the applicant must post or maintain
with the clerk a policy of public liability insurance conditioned substantially as follows: that the licensee
will indemnify and save harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any and all loss, costs,
including defense costs, damages, expenses, or liability which may result from or arise out of the granting of
the license, or the installation or maintenance of the bench for which a license is issued, regardless of the
point to which such bench or benches may be moved within the city with or without the consent of the
licensee, and that the licensee will pay any and all loss or damage that may be sustained by any person as a
result of, or which may be caused by, or arise out of, the installation or maintenance. The policy of
insurance must be maintained in its original amount by the licensee during the period for which the license
is in effect. If two or more licenses are issued to one licensee, one such bond or policy of insurance may be
furnished to cover two or more benches. (Amended, Ord. No. 96-03, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 03-22)
Subd. 2. Limits. The limit of liability upon any policy of insurance may not be less than
$1,000,000 combined single limit issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of
Minnesota. (Amended, Ord. No. 96-03, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 03-22)
840.15. Council action. Applications for licenses, when approved by the city clerk and the director of
public works/engineer are presented to the council, which may grant or deny any one or more of the
applications made.
Robbinsdale City Code 841.01 (Rev. 2003)
Section 841 – Off-site Directional Sign (Religious Institutions)
(Added, Ord. No. 01-06)
841.01. License required. Subdivision 1. General rule. An organization desiring to place and maintain one
or more off-site directional signs for the convenience of visitors to religious institutions upon public or
private property of the city, may be granted a license therefor upon compliance with this section.
Subd. 2. Application. The organization desiring a license must make written application to the city
clerk, showing the requested location and detailed plans and specifications of each proposed sign, the name
and address of the applicant, and such other information as may be required by the clerk.
Subd. 3. Notice. Notice to the abutting property owners is required where the proposed location of
a sign is in an area where the abutting property is zoned R-1 or R-2. The abutting property owner will be
given notice by certified mail about the proposed sign installation and be allowed 30 days to request a
hearing prior to installation. If such request is received, the City Council will hold the hearing and consider
the adjacent property owner’s objection prior to approving the sign location. The applicant shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the sign. If the sign is not adequately maintained the city will maintain
or remove the sign. If the sign is not adequately maintained the city will maintain or remove the sign at its
discretion and the applicant shall bear all associated costs. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-23)
Subd. 4. Fees. Each application must be accompanied by a license fee as set forth in appendix B.
(Amended, Ord. No. 02-12)
Subd. 5. Term. Licenses expire annually on December 31. Applications for licenses are
considered by the council, and, if approved by the council, are issued by the clerk. Licenses are not
transferable. An annual renewal is subject to the provisions of section 1005.11. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-12)
Subd. 6. Renewal. If plans and specifications of the sign or location of the sign are not to be
changed, the application for renewal need contain only the name and address of the applicant, and the
location and number of the signs for which renewal license is desired. If the original consent of the owner
of the land or lessee upon the premises abutting that portion of the street where the sign is located granted to
the license holder the continuing right to maintain such sign, the application may so state, and renewed
consent will not be required. Otherwise renewed consent shall be required.
Subd. 7. Change of ownership or control. A new license is required for the sign if the religious
institution or its Robbinsdale real estate is sold or title or control thereof transferred or assigned.
Subd. 8. Multiple locations. Each license will, when issued, be assigned and granted for one sign
or one double-sided sign per location and valid only for the location designated in the license. A maximum
of two locations may be issued per licensee. There is a limit of two sites per institution. (Amended, Ord.
No. 02-12)
841.03. Approval of application. A license will not be issued for the installation, review or maintenance of
a sign until reviewed by the clerk, the engineer, and zoning administrator and approved by the council.
(Amended, Ord. No. 02-12)
841.05. Denial or revocation of license. Subdivision 1. Denial. The application for installation or
maintenance of a sign will be denied if it would tend unduly to obstruct passage along any public sidewalk
or public way or to create a hazard, or otherwise to be detrimental to the public safety, convenience, welfare,
or aesthetics, or if an alternate sign can be installed to accomplish the same objective.
Subd. 2. Revocation. A license may be revoked, or the application for renewal therefore denied,
for failure to comply with the provisions of this section, or for misrepresentation of any material fact in the
application, or for any reason, which would have been grounds for denial of the original application, or
where, in the judgment of the City Council, maintenance has become inappropriate.
Robbinsdale City Code 841.07 (Rev. 2003)
841.07. Specifications and maintenance. Subdivision 1. Design. All signs must be consistent with the
Minnesota Manual Uniform Traffic Control Devices except as specifically set forth in this subsection.
Subd. 2. Set back. A sign must be installed as determined by the city or other applicable
governing jurisdiction.
Subd. 3. Dimensions. All signs shall be 18 inches wide and 24 inches long (height). No part of a
sign may be less than seven or more than ten feet from the ground unless otherwise approved by the city.
All letters shall be upper case and a minimum of three inches in height.
Subd. 4. Maintenance. The city will install and maintain each sign in a safe condition at its
proper location and pass all costs onto the owner of the sign. The licensee may inspect each sign
periodically and inform the city of any maintenance needs. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-12)
841.09. Sign content. Advertising matter, logos or implication of a logo may not be displayed upon a
sign. The name of the church and directional arrows and distance to the church are permitted. The font
shall be as described in the Minnesota Manual Uniform Traffic Control Devices manual.
Subd. 2. Traffic. Signs may not display the words, "STOP", "LOOK", "DRIVE IN", or any other
word, phrase, color or symbol which might interfere with, mislead or distract traffic.
841.11. Sign removal. Upon the revocation or expiration of a license without renewal, the city shall
remove the sign within ten days after written notice given by mail directed to the address of the licensee
on file. If the licensee fails to pay the cost of removal and storage thereof within a period of 60 days after
the giving of such notice, the licensee's rights in the sign shall be forfeited, but such forfeiture does not
excuse the licensee from the payment of the costs of removal and storage of the sign. (Amended, Ord.
No. 02-12)
841.13. Insurance. Subdivision 1. Type. Before a license is issued, the applicant must post and maintain
with the clerk a policy of public liability insurance conditioned substantially as follows: that the licensee
will indemnify and save harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any and all loss, costs,
including defense costs, damages, expenses, or liability which may result from or arise out of the granting
of the license, or the installation or maintenance of the sign for which a license is issued, regardless of the
point to which sign or signs may be moved within the city with or without the consent of the licensee, and
that the licensee will pay any and all loss or damage that may be sustained by any person as a result of, or
which may be caused by, or arise out of, license granting, the installation or maintenance. The policy of
insurance must be maintained in its original amount by the licensee during the period for which the
license is in effect. If two licenses are issued to one licensee, one such policy of insurance may be
furnished to cover two signs. The city shall be named as additional insured as their interest may appear.
(Amended, Ord. No. 03-22)
Subd. 2. Limits. The limit of liability for any policy of insurance may not be less than
$1,000,000 for a loss, bodily injuries to or death occurring to one person or arising out of one accident.
841.15. Council action. Applications for licenses, after review by the city clerk, the city engineer, and
the zoning administrator shall be presented to the council, which may grant or deny any of the
applications made. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-12)
Robbinsdale City Code 845.01 (Rev. 2003)
Section 845 - Permits for Temporary Placement of Containers
(Added, Ord. No. 96-04, Sec. 1)
845.01. Definition. For purposes of this section, "container" means a dumpster, collection bin, collection
box, tub, roll-off box, roll-off container, portable storage container or any other receptacle used to store
construction, remodeling or demolition debris or any goods or materials being temporarily or permanently
stored. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-08)
845.03. Permit procedure. No person shall place a container on any public right-of-way without first
obtaining a permit from the city engineer.
845.05. Permit application. An applicant for a permit shall provide the following information:
(a) the name and address of the applicant;
(b) the location of the project to be undertaken;
(c) the length of time for which the permit is needed;
(d) the type of debris that will be deposited in the container;
(e) proof that the applicant has all necessary licenses required to perform the project; and
(f) any other information deemed necessary by the city engineer.
845.07. Insurance. A permit holder shall maintain or cause to be maintained the following insurance
with respect to the container:
(a) public liability insurance in an amount of not less than $1,000,000 for injuries including
accidental death to any one person, subject to the same limit for each occurrence; and
(b) property damage insurance in an amount of not less than $500,000 for each accident and
not less than $1,000,000 aggregate.
The insurance required by this subsection shall protect the city from defense costs and claims for damage
for bodily injury, personal injury, including accidental death, and claims for property damage.
845.09. Condition of container. Containers must be well-maintained and in good working condition,
display the name and telephone number of the owner of the container, and be suitably supported at each
contact point to prevent damage to paved surfaces. Containers must be covered when not in use if the
material inside is easily airborne, poses a hazard, gives off odors or is otherwise offensive. Debris
generated by the project must be placed inside the container and may not be placed on the public right-ofway
or in any place in which such debris interferes with use of the public right-of-way.
845.11. Warnings required. The container shall be properly reflectorized at all times. (Amended, Ord.
No. 02-07)
Robbinsdale City Code 845.13 (Rev. 2018)
845.13. Duration of permit. No permit shall be issued for a period of more than seven days.
845.15. Permit fee. The permit fee is set forth in Appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No. 2018-02)
845.17. Denied and conditional permits. The city engineer may deny a permit or place conditions upon
issuance of a permit if the denial or conditions are required due to traffic, width, public health or safety, or
other considerations.
845.19. Revocation of permits. The city engineer may revoke a permit if the permit holder violates any
provision of this section or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule, or regulation.
845.21. Applicability of other law. The owner of the container and the person placing it in the public
right-of-way shall comply with all other laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations governing its use and
maintenance.
845.23. Violation of this section. The city may remove any container placed in a public right-of-way in
violation of this section. The owner of the container or the person placing it in the public right-of-way
shall pay to the city all costs, fees, penalties, or other expenses incurred by the city in removing the
container, and storing and disposing of the container and its contents. In addition, the city shall charge
daily storage fees set forth in Appendix B. If the container is not claimed within 30 days by its owner or
the person responsible for placing it in the public right-of-way, it may be disposed of as abandoned
property, but such disposal shall not diminish the responsibility of the owner or the person responsible for
placing it in the public right-of-way to pay all amounts due under this subsection. A container shall not
be released from storage by the city until all amounts due under this subsection have been paid. The
provisions of this subsection are in addition to any other penalty provided for in this code. (Amended,
Ord. No. 2018-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01 (Rev. 2017)
Section 850 - Right-of-way Management
(Added, Ord. No. 00-11)
850.01. Right-of-way management. Subdivision 1. Findings, purpose, and intent. To provide for the
health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of
the rights-of-way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free from
unnecessary encumbrances.
This section imposes reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities and equipment
currently within the city’s rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to
complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this section persons excavating and
obstructing the rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work through the recovery of outof-
pocket and projected costs from persons using the public rights-of-way. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-06)
This section shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws, chapter 123, substantially codified
in Minnesota Statutes, sections 237.16, 237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the “Act”) and
2017 Session Laws, Chapter 94 amending the Act and the other laws governing applicable rights of the
city and users of the right-of-way. This section shall also be interpreted consistent with Minnesota Rules,
parts 7819.0050 – 7819.9950 where possible. To the extent that any provision of this section cannot be
interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, the interpretation most consistent with the Act and
other applicable statutory and case law is intended. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-06)
Subd. 2. Election to manage the public rights-of-way. Pursuant to the authority granted to the
city under state and federal statutory, administrative and common law, the city elects pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes, section 237.163, subdivision 2(b), to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.
Subd. 3. Definitions. The following definitions apply in this section of this code. References to
“subdivisions” are unless otherwise specified references to subdivisions in this section.
“Abandoned facility” means a facility no longer in service or physically disconnected from a
portion of the operating facility, or from any other facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility
is not abandoned unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
“Applicant” means any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way.
“City” means the city of Robbinsdale, Minnesota. For purposes of subdivision 26, city means its
elected officials, officers, employees and agents.
“Collocate” or “collocation” means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a
small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing wireless support structure or utility
pole that is owned privately or by the city or other governmental unit. (Added, Ord. No. 17-06)
“Commission” means the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd 3
(Rev. 2017)
“Congested right-of-way” means a crowded condition in the subsurface of the public right-of-way
that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing underground facilities does not allow for
construction of new underground facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral
facilities in conformance with Minnesota Statutes, section 216D.04, subdivision 3, over a continuous
length in excess of 500 feet.
“Construction performance bond” means any of the following forms of security provided at
permittee’s option:
(a) Individual project bond;
(b) Cash deposit;
(c) Security of a form listed or approved under Minnesota Statutes, section 15.73,
subdivision 3;
(d) Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
(e) Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city;
(f) A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of construction bond, for a time
specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
“Degradation” means a decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by excavation in or
disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would
be required if the excavation or disturbance did not occur.
“Degradation cost” subject to Minnesota Rules, part 7819.1100 means the cost to achieve a level
of restoration as determined by the city at the time the permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum
restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in Minnesota Rules, parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
“Degradation fee” means the estimated fee established at the time of permitting by the city to
recover costs associated with the decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation,
and which equals the degradation cost.
“Department” means the engineering department of the city.
“Department inspector” means any person authorized by the city to carry out inspections related
to the provisions of this section.
“Director” means the director of the department of public works of the city, or director's designee.
“Delay penalty” is the penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in right-of-way
excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as established by permit.
“Emergency” means a condition that (1) poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of
property; or (2) requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to restore service to a
customer.
“Equipment” means any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain facilities in any right-ofway.
“Excavate” means to dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any part of
a right-of-way.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd 3 (Rev. 2017)
“Excavation permit” means the permit which, pursuant to this section, must be obtained before a
person may excavate in a right-of-way. An excavation permit allows the holder to excavate that part of
the right-of-way described in such permit.
“Excavation subdivision permit fee” means money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the
costs as provided in subdivision 11.
“Facility or facilities” means tangible asset in the public right-of-way required to provide utility
service. The term does not include facilities to the extent the location and relocation of such facilities are
preempted by Minnesota Statutes, section 161.45, governing utility facility placement in state trunk
highways.
“Five-year capital improvement plan” shows projects adopted by the city for construction within
the next five years.
“High density corridor” means a designated portion of the public right-of-way within which
telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and competing facilities may be required to build
and install facilities in a common conduit system or other common structure.
“Hole” means an excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation having a length less than the
width of the pavement or adjacent pavement.
“Local representative” means a local person or persons, or designee of such person or persons,
authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters
within the scope of this section.
“Management costs” means the actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-of-way,
including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and
verifying right-of-way or small wireless facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration
projects; maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-way work;
determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately performed after
providing notice and the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right-of-way or small wireless
facility permits. Management costs do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way user
for the use of the right-of-way; unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by the city, including
fees tied to or based on customer counts, access lines, or revenues generated by the right-of-way or for the
city; the fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, chapter
123; Minnesota Statutes, sections 237.162 or 237.163 or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or
the city fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to subdivision 28 of this section. (Amended, Ord.
No. 17-06)
“Obstruct” means to place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open
passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
“Obstruction permit” means the permit which, pursuant to this section, must be obtained before a
person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to hinder free and open passage over the
specified portion of that right-of-way, for the duration specified therein, including a blanket permit for a
period of time and for types of work specified by the director, if deemed appropriate in director's
discretion.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd 3 (Rev. 2017)
“Obstruction permit fee” means money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the costs as
provided in subdivision 11.
“Patch or patching” means a method of pavement replacement that is temporary in nature. A
patch consists of (1) the compaction of the subbase and aggregate base, and (2) the replacement, in kind,
of the existing pavement for a minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions.
A patch is considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the city’s five year capital
improvement plan.
“Pavement” means any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-way and that is
paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete, aggregate, or gravel.
“Permit” has the meaning given “right-of-way permit” in Minnesota Statutes, section 237.162.
“Permittee” means any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way has been
granted by the city under this section.
“Person” means an individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state, however
organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or foreign, whether for profit or nonprofit, and
whether natural, corporate, or political.
“Probation” means the status of a person that has not complied with the conditions of this section.
“Probationary period” means one year from the date the permittee has been notified in writing
that it has been placed on probation.
“Public right-of-way or Right-of-Way” has the meaning given it in Minnesota Statutes, section
237.162, subdivision 3. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-06)
“Small wireless facility” means a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications:
(a) Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or
could fit within such an enclosure; and
(b) All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility provided such
equipment is, in aggregate, no more than 28 cubic feet in volume, not including electric
meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup
power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable,
conduit, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any
equipment concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment. (Added, Ord. No. 17-06)
“Registrant” means any person who (1) has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located in
any right-of-way, or (2) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place
its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way.
“Restore or restoration” means the process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding
area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same condition and life expectancy that
existed before excavation.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd 3 (Rev. 2017)
“Restoration cost” means the amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to achieve the level
of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota Rules, part 7819.1100, subpart 1, on file with the
director.
“Right-of-way permit” means either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit, or both,
depending on the context, required by this section.
"Right-of-way user” means (1) a telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by Minnesota
Statutes, section 237.162, subdivision 4; or (2) a person owning or controlling a facility in the right-ofway
that is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a right under law,
franchise, or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
“Service or utility service” means and includes (1) services provided by a public utility as defined
in Minnesota Statutes, section 216B.02, subdivisions 4 and 6; (2) services of a telecommunications rightof-
way user, including transporting of voice or data information; (3) services of a cable communications
system as defined in Minnesota Statutes, chapter 238.02, subdivision 3; (4) natural gas or electric energy
or telecommunications services provided by a local government unit; (5) services provided by a
cooperative electric association organized under Minnesota Statutes, chapter 308A; and (6) water, sewer,
steam, cooling or heating services.
“Supplementary application” means an application made to excavate or obstruct more of the
right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already been issued.
“Temporary surface” means the compaction of subbase and aggregate base and replacement, in
kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the excavation. It is temporary in nature except when
the replacement is of pavement included in the city’s two-year capital improvement plan, in which case it
is considered full restoration.
“Trench” means an excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation having a length equal to
or greater than the width of the pavement or adjacent pavement.
“Telecommunication right-of-way user” means a person owning or controlling a facility in the
right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be
used for providing wireless service, or transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information.
For purposes of this section, a cable communication system defined and regulated under Minnesota
Statutes, chapter 238, and telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or electric energy
services whether provided by a public utility as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 216B.02, a
municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under Minnesota Statutes, chapters 453 and
453A, or a cooperative electric association organized under Minnesota Statutes, chapter 308A, are not
telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of this section 237.163, except to the extent these
entities are offering wireless service. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-06)
“Two year capital improvement plan” shows projects adopted by the city for construction within
the next two years.
“Utility pole” means a pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate telecommunications or
electric service. (Added, Ord. No. 17-06)
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd 3 (Rev. 2017)
“Wireless facility” means equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of wireless
services between user equipment and a wireless service network, including equipment associated with
wireless service, a radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and a small wireless facility, but not including wireless support structures, wireline backhaul
facilities, or cables between utility poles or wireless support structures, or not otherwise immediately
adjacent to or directly associated with a specific antenna. (Added, Ord. No. 17-06)
“Wireless service” means any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including
the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means of a mobile device, that is provided using
wireless facilities. Wireless service does not include services regulated under Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including cable service. (Added, Ord. No. 17-06)
“Wireless support structure” means a new or existing structure in a right-of-way designated to
support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as reasonably determined by the city. (Added,
Ord. No. 17-06)
Subd. 4. Administration. The director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances related thereto. The director
may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2000)
Subd. 5. Registration and right-of-way occupancy.
(a) Registration. Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-ofway
or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-of-way, including persons with
installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease or assignment, must
register with the city. Registration will consist of providing application information and
paying a registration fee.
(b) Registration prior to work. No person may construct, install, repair, remove, relocate, or
perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any part thereof in any right-of-way
without first being registered with the city.
(c) Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions
of a city ordinance establishing the rights of and limitations placed on persons to plant or
maintain boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their
property and the street curb. Persons shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-ofway,
and shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any other requirements
under this section for the following:
(1) Planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens;
(2) Other surface landscaping works;
(3) Maintenance of driveways and parking lots unless such maintenance requires
excavation work in the right-of-way.
(4) Construction or maintenance of street furnishings, bus stop benches, shelters, or
posts and pillars;
(5) Snow removal activities.
(6) Construction and maintenance of irrigation systems provided that the system
does not connect directly to water mains in the right-of-way.
Nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the provisions of the Minnesota Statutes, chapter
216D, Gopher One Call Law.
Subd. 6. Registration information.
(a) Information required. The information provided to the city at the time of registration
shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Each registrant's name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate number, address
and e-mail address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers.
(2) The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers of a local representative. The local representative or designee shall be
accessible for consultation at all times. Current information regarding how to
contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of
registration.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 6(3)
(Rev. 2000)
(3) A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
(i) Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the registrant by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota,
or a form of self insurance acceptable to the city;
(ii) Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for personal injury,
including death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of the
(i) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers,
agents, employees and permittees, and (ii) placement and use of facilities
and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents,
employees and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection
against liability arising from completed operations, damage of
underground facilities and collapse of property;
(iii) Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the coverages
required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be
provided as to all such coverage for all actions included in Minnesota
Rules, part 7819.1250;
(iv) Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in advance of cancellation of
the policy or material modification of a coverage term;
(v) Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability
coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by
the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to
carry out the purposes and policies of this section.
(4) The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies if necessary to
ensure the director that the policy provides adequate third party claim coverage
and city indemnity and defense coverage for all actions included in the indemnity
required by Minnesota Rules, part 7819.1250.
(5) Such evidence as the director may require that the person is authorized to do
business in Minnesota.
(b) Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current at
all times by providing to the city information as to changes within 15 days following the
date on which the registrant has knowledge of any change.
Subd. 7. Reporting obligations.
(a) Operations. Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by December 1 of each
year, file a construction and major maintenance plan for underground facilities with the
city. Such plan shall be submitted using a format designated by the city and shall contain
the information determined by the city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and
reduction in the frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 7(a)
(Rev. 2000)
The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
(1) The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all projects to be
commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a “next-year project”);
and
(2) To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated beginning and ending
dates for all projects contemplated for the five years following the next calendar
year (in this section, a “five-year project”).
The term “project” in this section shall include both next-year projects and five-year
projects.
By January 1 of each year the city will have available for inspection in the city’s office a
composite list of all projects of which the city has been informed of the annual plans. All
registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of the current status of this
list. Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project in its list of nextyear
projects, and must notify the city and all other registrants of all such changes in said
list. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a next-year
project of another registrant listed by the other registrant.
(b) Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city will not deny an
application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a project in a plan submitted to
the city if the registrant has used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan
for the project.
Subd. 8. Permit requirement.
(a) Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person may obstruct or
excavate any right-of-way, or install or place facilities in the right-of-way, without first
having obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit from the city to do so. (Amended,
Ord. No. 17-06)
(1) Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a registrant to excavate
that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder free and open
passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities
described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.
(2) Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by a registrant to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing
equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the
duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if a person
already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.
(3) Small Wireless Facility Permit. A small cell wireless facility permit is required by
a registrant to erect or install a wireless support structure, to collocate a small
wireless facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless facility in the specified
portion of the right-of-way, to the extent specified therein, provided that such
permit shall remain in effect for the length of time the facility is in use, unless
lawfully revoked. (Added, Ord No. 17-06)
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 8(b)
(Rev. 2018)
(b) Permit extensions. No person may excavate obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date or
dates specified in the permit unless (i) such person makes a supplementary application for
another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit, and (ii) a new
permit or permit extension is granted.
(c) Delay penalty. In accordance with Minnesota Rules, part 7819.1000, subpart 3 and
notwithstanding subdivision 2 of this section, the city shall establish and impose a delay
penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or
restoration. The delay penalty is set forth in Appendix B. A delay penalty will not be
imposed for delays due to force majeure, including inclement weather, civil strife, acts of
God, or other circumstances beyond the control of the applicant. (Amended, Ord. No.
2018-02)
(d) Permit display. Permits issued under this section shall be conspicuously displayed or
otherwise available at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for
inspection by the city.
Subd. 9. Permit applications. Application for a permit is made to the city. Right-of-way permit
applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements
of the following provisions:
(a) Registration with the city pursuant to this section;
(b) Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments,
and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the
location of all known existing and proposed facilities.
(c) Payment of money due the city for:
(1) permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management costs;
(2) prior obstructions or excavations;
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 9(c)
(Rev. 2017)
(3) any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city because of
applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any
emergency actions taken by the city;
(4) Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or depositing in an
escrow account an amount equal to at least 100% of the amount owing.
Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for additional
facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to install additional
facilities and the city deems the existing construction performance bond
inadequate under applicable standards.
Subd. 10. Issuance of permit; conditions.
(a) Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this section, the city
shall issue a permit.
(b) Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit
and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the health, safety and welfare
or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
(c) Small Wireless Facility Conditions. In addition to 850.01, Subd. 10 (b), the erection or
installation of a wireless support structure, the collocation of a small wireless facility, or
other installation of a small wireless facility in the right-of-way, shall be subject to the
following conditions:
(1) A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular wireless
support structure, under those attachment specifications, and at the height
indicated in the applicable permit application.
(2) No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way shall exceed
50 feet in height without the city’s written authorization, provided that the city
may impose a lower height limit in the applicable permit to protect the public
health, safety and welfare or to protect the right-of-way and its current use, and
further provided that a registrant may replace an existing wireless support
structure exceeding 50 feet in height with a structure of the same height subject
to such conditions or requirements as may be imposed in the applicable permit.
(3) No wireless facility may extend more than 10 feet above its wireless support
structure.
(4) Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support structure in the
right-of-way, the city may impose separation requirements between such
structure and any existing wireless support structure or other facilities in and
around the right-of-way.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 10(c)(5)
(Rev. 2000)
(5) Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless support
structure, sign or other structure not intended to support small wireless facilities,
the city may impose reasonable requirements to accommodate the particular
design, appearance, or intended purpose of such structure.
(6) Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support structure, the city may
impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation requirements on the
replacement, or relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure.
(d) (1) Small Wireless Facility Agreement. A small wireless facility shall only be
collocated on a small wireless support structure owned or controlled by the city,
or any other city asset in the right-of-way, after the applicant has executed a
standard small wireless facility collocation agreement with the city. The standard
collocation agreement may require payment of the following:
i. Up to $150 per year for rent to collocate on the city structure;
ii. $25 per year for maintenance associated with the collocation;
iii. A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
a. $73 per radio node less than or equal to 100 maximum watts;
b. $182 per radio node over 100 maximum watts: or
c. The actual costs of electricity, if the actual cost exceed the
foregoing.
The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not it lieu of, the required small wireless
facility permit, provided, however, that the applicant shall not be additionally required to obtain a license
or franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit does not supersede, alter or
affect any then-existing agreement between the city and applicant.
(e) Deadline for Action. The city shall approve or deny a small wireless facility permit
application within 90 days after filing of such application. The small wireless facility
permit, and any associated building permit application, shall be deemed approved if the
city fails to approve or deny the application within the review periods established in this
section.
(f) Consolidated Applications. An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless facility
permit application addressing the proposed collocation of up to 15 small wireless
facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by a local government unit, provided that all
small wireless facilities in the application:
1. Are located within a two-mile radius;
2. Consist of substantially similar equipment; and
3. Are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures.
In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the city may approve some small wireless
facilities and deny others, but may not use denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small
wireless facilities applications.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 10(g)
(Rev. 2017)
(g) Tolling of Deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small wireless facility permit
application may be tolled if:
(1) The City receives applications from one or more applicants seeking approval of
permits for more than 30 small wireless facilities within a seven-day period. In
such case, the city may extend the deadline for all such application by 30 days by
informing the affected applicants in writing of each extension.
(2) The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information and the city
provides written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within 30 days of
receipt of the application. Upon submission of additional documents or
information, the city shall have ten days to notify the applicant in writing of any
still-missing information.
(3) The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing to toll the review
period. (Added, Ord. No. 17-06)
Subd. 11. Permit fees.
(a) Fee schedule and fee allocation. The city’s permit fee schedule shall be available to the
public and established in advance where reasonably possible. The permit fees shall be
designed to recover the city’s actual costs incurred in managing the right-of-way and
shall be based on an allocation among all users of the right-of-way, including the city.
(b) Excavation permit fee. The city shall establish an excavation permit fee in an amount
sufficient to recover the following costs:
(1) city management costs;
(2) degradation costs, if applicable.
(c) Obstruction permit fee. The city shall establish the obstruction permit fee and shall be in
an amount sufficient to recover the city management costs.
(d) Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit shall be issued
without payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The city may allow applicant
to pay such fees within 30 days of billing, or on some other payment plan agreed to by
the director at director's discretion.
(e) Non refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city has revoked for a
breach as stated in Subdivision 21 are not refundable.
(f) Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise, management costs
may be charged separately from and in addition to the franchise fees imposed on a rightof-
way user in the franchise.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 11(g)
(Rev. 2017)
(g) Small Wireless Facility Permit Fee. The city shall impose a small wireless facility permit
fee in an amount sufficient to recover;
(1) Management costs, and;
(2) City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated with collocation
of small wireless facilities. (Added, Ord No. 17-06)
Subd. 12. Right-of-way patching and restoration.
(a) Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the patching and
restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be completed within the dates
specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work could not be done because of
circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as
unseasonal or unreasonable under subdivision 15.
(b) Patch and restoration. Permittee must patch its own work. The city may choose either to
have the permittee restore the surface and subgrading portions of right-of-way or to
restore the surface portion of right-of-way itself.
(1) City restoration. If the city restores the surface portion of right-of-way, permittee
shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, following such
restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee's improper backfilling, the
permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs associated with
correcting the defective work.
(2) Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way itself, it shall at
the time of application for an excavation permit post a construction performance
bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rules, part 7819.3000.
(3) Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of right-of-way restoration, a rightof-
way user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However, the right-of-way user
shall remain responsible for replacing and compacting the subgrade and
aggregate based material in the excavation and the degradation fee shall not
include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
(c) Standards. The permittee shall perform patching and restoration according to the
standards and with the materials specified by the city and shall comply with Minnesota
Rules, part 7819.1100.
(d) Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects in patching, or restoration
performed by permittee or its agents. Upon notification from the city, permittee shall
correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the city.
Unless otherwise agreed to by the director, said work shall be completed within five
calendar days of receipt of the notice from the city, not including days during which work
cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work
is prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under subdivision 15.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 12(e)
(Rev. 2000)
(e) Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to
the condition required by the city, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all
restoration required by the city, the city shall notify the permittee in writing of the
specific alleged failure or failures and shall allow the permittee ten days from receipt of
said written notice to cure said failure or failures, unless otherwise extended by the
director. In the event the permittee fails to cure, the city may at its option perform the
necessary work and permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of
restoring the right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its
rights under the construction performance bond.
Subd. 13. Joint applications.
(a) Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate or obstruct the
right-of-way at the same place and time.
(b) Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or excavation,
which the city does not perform, may share in the payment of the obstruction or
excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a joint permit, registrants must agree among
themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on their applications.
(c) With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or excavation
performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by two or more registrants
or a single application, are not required to pay the excavation or obstruction and
degradation portions of the permit fee, but a permit would still be required.
Subd. 14. Supplementary applications.
(a) Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-way
specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the area specified in the
permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee which determines that an area greater
than that specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated before working in that
greater area (i) make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees
required thereby, and (ii) be granted a new permit or permit extension.
(b) Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the
permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit start date or, except as
provided herein, continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not finish the
work by the permit end date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it
needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after
the end date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted
before the permit end date.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 15
(Rev. 2000)
Subd. 15. Other obligations.
(a) Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve permittee
of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees
required by the city or other applicable rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply
with all requirements of local, state and federal laws, including Minnesota Statutes,
section 216D.01-.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System). A permittee shall
perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules
andregulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its
permit, regardless of who does the work.
(b) Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the city, no right-ofway
obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally prohibited or when
conditions are unreasonable for such work.
(c) Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the
natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be
interfered with, unless otherwise approved by the director. Private vehicles of those
doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless
parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks
must be done solely within the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the
permit.
(d) Traffic control. A permittee shall implement temporary traffic control measures in the
area of the work and shall use temporary traffic control procedures in accordance with the
most recent manuals on uniform traffic control, traffic control devices, and traffic zone
layouts published by the state of Minnesota. The permittee shall remove all temporary
traffic control measures within five days of the completion of the permitted work. If any
temporary traffic control measures are not removed, written notice shall be given to the
permittee directing them to remove such measures within two business days. Any
temporary traffic control measures not collected during such period following notice will
be removed by city staff and held at the Public Works Facility for no more than 15 days.
The fee for removal and storage of materials is set by Appendix B. Temporary traffic
control measures which are not collected within 15 days of being removed by the city
will be deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-08)
Subd. 16. Denial of permit.
(a) Reason for Denial. The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this section or if the city determines that the denial is necessary to protect
the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its
current use. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-06)
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 16(b)
(Rev. 2017)
(b) Procedural Requirements. The denial or revocation of a permit must be made in writing
and must document the basis for the denial. The city must notify the telecommunications
right-of-way user in writing within three business days of the decision to deny or revoke
a permit. If an application is denied, the right-of-way user may address the reasons for
denial identified by the city and resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted
within 30 days of receipt of the notice of of denial, no additional application fee shall be
imposed. The city must approve or deny the resubmitted application within 30 days after
submission. (Added, Ord. No. 17-06)
Subd. 17. Installation requirements. The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and
all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minnesota Rule
7819.1100 and other applicable local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the
Minnesota Statutes, sections 237.162 and 237.163.
Subd. 18. Inspection.
(a) Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the
permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance Minnesota Rule 7819.1300.
(b) Site inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to the city and to all others
as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and
upon completion of the work.
(c) Authority of director.
(1) At the time of inspection the director may order the immediate cessation of any
work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety or well-being of the
public.
(2) The director may issue an order to the permittee to correct any work that does not
conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards, conditions, or
code. If the work failure is a “substantial breach” within the meaning of
Minnesota Statutes, section 237.163, subdivision 4(c), the order shall state that
failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit after a
specified period determined by the director. The permittee shall present proof to
the director that the violation has been corrected within the time period set forth
by the director in the order. Such proof shall be provided no later than the next
business day following the day of completion. If such proof has not been
presented within the required time, the director may revoke the permit pursuant
to subdivision 21.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 1
(Rev. 2000)
Subd. 19. Work done without a permit.
(a) Emergency situations. Each registrant shall immediately notify the director of any event
regarding its facilities that the registrant considers to be an emergency. The registrant
may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Within
two business days after the occurrence of the emergency the registrant shall apply for the
necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this section for the actions it
took in response to the emergency.
If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the city will
attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant affected, or potentially
affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems
necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant
whose facilities occasioned the emergency.
(b) Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who, without first
having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a right-of-way must
subsequently obtain a permit, pay an unauthorized work permit fee in an amount
established from time to time by the City Council, deposit with the city the fees necessary
to correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the requirements of this
section.
Subd. 20. Supplementary notification. If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins
later or ends sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the city of the accurate
information as soon as this information is known.
Subd. 21. Revocation of permits.
(a) Substantial breach. The city reserves its right to revoke any right-of-way permit, without
a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute,
ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial
breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(1) The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
(2) An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit,
or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its
citizens;
(3) Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-of-way
permit;
(4) The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; unless a permit extension is
obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the
permittee’s control; or
(5) The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a
condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to subdivision 18(b).
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 19
(Rev. 2000)
(b) Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the permittee has committed a
substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any
condition of the permit the city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to
remedy such violation. The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause
for revocation of the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the breach.
(c) Response to notice of breach. Within a time established by the director following
permittee’s receipt of notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a
plan to cure the breach, acceptable to the city. Permittee's failure to submit a timely and
acceptable plan, or permittee’s failure to timely implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, permittee’s failure to contact the
city, or permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or permittee’s failure to
reasonably implement the approved plan, may result in probation for up to one full year.
(d) Cause for probation. The city may establish a list of conditions of the permit that if
breached will be grounds to place the permittee on probation. The city shall not enforce a
probation program unless and until it has established such conditions, which it may
amend from time to time.
(e) Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse
the city for the city's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of
collection and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation.
Subd. 22. Mapping data. Each registrant and permittee shall provide mapping information in a
form required by the city in accordance with Minnesota Rules, parts 7819.4000 and 7819.4100.
Subd. 23. Undergrounding.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this subdivision 23 is to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the public and is intended to foster (i) safe travel over the right-of-way, (ii)
non-travel related safety around homes and buildings where overhead feeds are
connected and (iii) orderly development in the city. Location and relocation, installation
and reinstallation of facilities in the right-of-way must be made in accordance with this
subdivision. This subdivision is intended to be enforced consistently with state and
federal law regulating right-of-way users, specifically including but not limited to
Minnesota Statutes, sections 161.45, 237.162, 237.163, 300.03, 222.37, 238.084 and
216B.36 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Title 47, U.S.C. section 253.
(b) Undergrounding of facilities. Facilities newly installed, constructed or otherwise placed
in the public right-of-way or in other public property held in common for public use must
be located and maintained underground pursuant to the terms and conditions of this
section and in accordance with applicable construction standards, subject to the
exceptions below. Above-ground installation, construction, modification, or replacement
of meters, gauges, transformers, street lighting, pad mount switches, capacitor banks, reclosers
and service connection pedestals shall be allowed. The requirements of this
subdivision shall apply equally outside of the corporate limits of the city coincident with
city jurisdiction of platting, subdivision regulation or comprehensive planning as may
now or in the future be allowed by law.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 23(c)
(Rev. 2000)
(c) Exceptions to undergrounding. The following exceptions to the strict application of this
subdivision shall be allowed upon the conditions stated:
(1) Transmission lines. Above-ground installation, construction, or placement of
those facilities commonly referred to as “high voltage transmission lines” upon
which a conductor’s normal operating voltage equals or exceeds 23,000 volts
(phase to phase) shall be allowed only by prior approval of the council; provided,
however, that 60 days prior to commencement of construction of such a project,
the city shall be furnished notice of the proposed project and, upon request, the
right-of-way user involved shall furnish all relevant information regarding such
project to the city. This provision shall not be construed as waiving the
requirements of any other ordinance or regulation of the city as the same may
apply to any such proposed project.
(2) Technical and economic feasibility. Above-ground installation, construction, or
placement of facilities shall be allowed in residential, commercial and industrial
areas where the council, following consideration and recommendation by the
planning commission, finds that:
(i) Underground placement would place an undue financial burden upon the
landowner, ratepayers, or right-of-way user or would deprive the
landowner of the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property
rights; or,
(ii) Underground placement is impractical or not technically feasible due to
topographical, subsoil or other existing conditions which adversely affect
underground facilities placement.
(3) Temporary service. Above-ground installation, construction, or placement of
temporary service lines shall only be allowed:
(i) During new construction of any project for a period not to exceed 24
months;
(ii) During an emergency in order to safeguard lives or property within the
city;
(iii) For a period of not more than seven months when soil conditions make
excavation impractical.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 23(d)
(Rev. 2000)
(d) Undergrounding of permanent replacement, relocated or reconstructed facilities. If the
city finds that one or more of the purposes set forth in subdivision 23(a) would be
promoted, the city may require a permanent replacement, relocation or reconstruction of a
facility of more than 300 feet to be located, and maintained underground, with due regard
for seasonal working conditions. For purposes of this section, reconstruction means any
substantial repair of or any improvement to existing facilities. Undergrounding may be
required whether a replacement, relocation or reconstruction is initiated by the right-ofway
user owning or operating the facilities, or by the city in connection with (1) the
present or future use by the city or other local government unit of the right-of-way or
other public ground for a public project, (2) the public health or safety, or (3) the safety
and convenience of travel over the right-of-way.
(e) Retirement of overhead facilities. The City Council may determine whether it is in the
public interest that all facilities within the city, or facilities within certain districts
designated by the city, be permanently placed and maintained underground by a date
certain or target date, independently of undergrounding required pursuant to section 23(b)
of this code (new facilities) and subdivision 23(d) (replacement facilities). The decision
to underground must be preceded by a public hearing, after published notice and written
notice to the utilities affected. (Two weeks published: 30 days written.) At the hearing
the council must consider items (1) – (4) in subdivision 23(g) of this section and make
findings. Undergrounding may not take place until City Council has, after hearing and
notice, adopted a plan containing items (1) – (6) of subdivision 23(h) of this section.
(f) Public hearings. A hearing must be open to the public and may be continued from time
to time. At each hearing any person interested must be given an opportunity to be heard.
The subject of the public hearings shall be the issue of whether facilities in the right-ofway
in the city, or located within a certain district, shall all be located underground by a
date certain. Hearings are not necessary for the undergrounding required under
subdivisions 23(b) and (d) of this section.
(g) Public hearing issues. The issues to be addressed at the public hearings include but are
not limited to:
(1) The costs and benefits to the public of requiring the undergrounding of all
facilities in the right-of-way.
(2) The feasibility and cost of undergrounding all facilities by a date certain as
determined by the city and the affected utilities.
(3) The tariff requirements, procedure and rate design for recovery or intended
recovery of incremental costs for undergrounding by the utilities from ratepayers
within the city.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 23(h)
(Rev. 2000)
(4) Alternative financing options available if the city deems it in the public interest
to require undergrounding by a date certain and deems it appropriate to
participate in the cost otherwise borne by the ratepayers.
Upon completion of the hearing or hearings, the City Council must make written
findings on whether it is in the public interest to establish a plan under which all
facilities will be underground, either citywide or within districts designated by
the city.
(h) Undergrounding plan. If the council finds that it is in the public interest to underground
all or substantially all facilities in the public right-of-way or in non-right-of-way public
ground, the council must establish a plan for such undergrounding. The plan for
undergrounding must include at least the following elements:
(1) Timetable for the undergrounding.
(2) Designation of districts for the undergrounding unless the undergrounding plan is
citywide.
(3) Exceptions to the undergrounding requirement and procedure for establishing
such exceptions.
(4) Procedures for the undergrounding process, including but not limited to
coordination with city projects and provisions to ensure compliance with nondiscrimination
requirements under the law.
(5) A financing plan for funding of the incremental costs if the city determines that it
will finance some of the undergrounding costs, and a determination and
verification of the claimed additional costs to underground incurred by the utility.
(6) Penalties or other remedies for failure to comply with the undergrounding.
(i) Facilities location.
(1) In addition to complying with the requirements of Minnesota Statutes,
sections 216D.01-.09 (One Call Excavation Notice System”), before the start
date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has facilities located in
the area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal placement of all said facilities.
To the extent its records contain such information, each registrant shall provide
information regarding the approximate vertical location of its facilities to
excavators upon request. Nothing in this subsection is meant to limit the rights,
duties, and obligations of facility owners or excavators as set forth in Minnesota
Statutes, sections 216D.01-09. Any right-of-way user whose facility is less than
20 inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with
the excavation contractor in an effort to establish and mark the exact horizontal
and vertical location of its facility and the best procedure for excavation.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 24
(Rev. 2000)
(2) All facilities shall be placed in appropriate portions of right-of-way so as to cause
minimum conflict with other underground facilities. When technically
appropriate, all utilities shall be installed, constructed or placed within the same
trench.
(j) Developer responsibility. All owners, platters, or developers are responsible for
complying with the requirements of this subdivision, and prior to final approval of any
plat or development plan, shall submit to the director written instruments from the
appropriate right-of-way users showing that all necessary arrangements with said users
for installation of such facilities have been made.
Subd. 24. Relocation of facilities. A right-of-way user shall promptly and at its own expense,
with due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate its facilities in the
right-of-way when it is necessary to prevent interference, and not merely for the convenience of the city,
in connection with: (1) a present or future city use of the right-of-way for a public project; (2) the public
health or safety; or (3) the safety and convenience of travel over the right-of-way.
Subd. 25. Interference by other facilities. When the city does work in the right-of-way in its
governmental right-of-way management function and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move a
registrant's facilities to carry out the work without damaging registrant’s facilities, the city shall notify the
local representative as early as is reasonably possible. The city costs associated therewith will be billed to
that registrant and must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damages.
Subd. 26. Right-of-way vacation – reservation of right. If the city vacates a right-of-way that
contains the facilities of a registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by
Minnesota Rules, part 7819.3200.
Subd. 27. Indemnification and liability. By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit
under this section, a registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the
provisions of Minnesota Rules, part 7819.1250.
Subd. 28. Abandoned and unusable facilities.
(a) Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to discontinue all or a portion
of its operations in the city must provide information satisfactory to the city that the
registrant's obligations for its facilities in the right-of-way under this section have been
lawfully assumed by another registrant.
(b) Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove
it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way repair,
excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is waived by the city.
Robbinsdale City Code 850.01, Subd. 30
(Rev. 2000)
Subd. 30. Appeal. A right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied registration; (2) has been denied
a permit; (3) has had permit revoked; or (4) believes that the fees imposed are not in conformity with
Minnesota Statutes, section 237.163, subdivision 6 may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition
reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council. The City Council shall act on a timely written
request at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the City Council affirming the denial,
revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the
reasonableness of the decision.
Subd. 31. Reservation of regulatory and police powers. A permittee’s or registrant’s rights are
subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
Subd. 32. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and
such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. If a regulatory body or a court
of competent jurisdiction should determine by a final, non-appealable order that any permit, right or
registration issued under this section or any portions of this section is illegal or unenforceable, then any
such permit, right or registration granted or deemed to exist hereunder shall be considered as a revocable
permit with a mutual right in either party to terminate without cause upon giving 60 days written notice to
the other. The requirements and conditions of such a revocable permit shall be the same requirements and
conditions as set forth in the permit, right or registration, respectively, except for conditions relating to the
term of the permit and the right of termination. Nothing in this section precludes the city from requiring a
franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to requirements set forth herein.
Robbinsdale City Code 900.01
CHAPTER IX
PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 900 - Civil Defense
900.01. Act adopted. The Minnesota Civil Defense Act, Minnesota Statutes, chapter 12, insofar as it relates
to cities, is adopted by reference as part of this section as fully as if set forth explicitly herein.
900.03. Civil defense agency. Subdivision 1. Agency and director. There is created and continued in the
city administration a civil defense and disaster agency under the supervision and control of the director of
civil defense, hereinafter called the director. The director is appointed by the mayor for an indefinite term
and may be removed by the mayor at any time. The director is responsible for the organization,
administration, and operation of the civil defense agency, subject to the direction and control of the mayor.
Subd. 2. Organization and functions. The civil defense agency may be organized into such
divisions and bureaus, consistent with state and local defense plans, as the director deems necessary to
provide for the efficient performance of local civil defense functions during a civil defense emergency. The
agency performs civil defense functions within the city and in addition conducts functions outside the city
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, chapter 12, or this code.
900.05. Powers and duties of director. Subdivision 1. Intergovernmental arrangements. With the consent
of the mayor, the director represents the city on any regional or state organization for civil defense. The
director must develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions within or outside
the state for reciprocal civil defense aid and assistance in a civil defense emergency too great to be dealt
with unassisted and must present such agreements to the council for action. Such agreements must be
consistent with the civil defense plan and, during a civil defense emergency, the civil defense agency and
civil defense forces must render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such agreements.
Subd. 2. Civil defense plan. The director must prepare a comprehensive general plan for the civil
defense of the city and present the plan to the city council for its approval. When the council has approved
the plan by resolution, civil defense forces of the city shall perform the duties and functions assigned by the
plan.
Subd. 3. Reports. The director must prepare and present to the council periodically a report of
activities and recommendations.
Robbinsdale City Code 905.01 (Rev. 2005)
Section 905 - Fire Department
905.01. Fire department. The fire department, consisting of a fire chief, assistant fire chief and officers
subordinate to the fire chief who shall assist in management of fire department duties and functions, and not
less than 15 nor more than 30 firefighters, is created and continued. The fire department chain of command
shall be defined in the fire department rules and regulations. (Amended, Ord. No. 05-07)
905.03. Chief. The fire chief is the head of the department. Interested and qualified candidates belonging
to the fire department shall submit an application, resume and the fire department evaluations to the city
manager. The city manager shall review the candidate qualifications and evaluations. The chief is
appointed by the city manager upon the advice and consent of the city council. The chief is appointed for a
four year term. (Amended, Ord. No. 05-07)
905.05. Duty of chief. The chief shall be responsible for general policy-making and administrative control,
directing, planning, and coordinating all activities of the fire department including, but not limited to, fire
protection and emergency response, fire prevention, and safety educational services, training and safety of
personnel and fire station facilities, vehicles, and equipment assigned to the fire department. The chief may
submit reports and recommendations at any meeting of the council. The chief is responsible for the proper
training and discipline of the members of the fire department and may recommend to the city manager the
suspension or dismissal of a member for cause. The chief and all fire department employees shall perform
such duties and functions as are prescribed in a position description approved by the city manager. The
city’s personnel policies shall apply to the fire department employees, including paid-on-call firefighters and
officers in their capacity as such. (Amended, Ord. No. 05-07)
905.07. Records. The chief must keep in convenient form a complete record of fires. The record must
include the time of the alarm, location of fire, cause of fire (if known), type of building, name of owner and
tenant, purpose for which occupied, value of building and contents, members of the department responding
to the alarm and such other information as the chief may deem advisable or as may be required from time to
time by the council or as required by the state or other outside agencies. (Amended, Ord. No. 05-07)
905.09. Practice drills. The chief must hold a practice drill not less than two times a month and of at least
two hour's duration for the fire department. The chief or persons assigned by the chief must instruct
firefighters in approved methods of fire fighting and fire prevention. (Amended, Ord. No. 05-07)
905.11. Assistant chief. The assistant chief performs the functions of the chief in the absence or disability
of the chief.
905.13. Firefighters. The members of the fire department may not be less than 18 years of age at the time
of joining the department and must be able bodied. They must pass satisfactory medical and fitness for duty
examinations and become members only after a one year probation period. Examination fees for
examinations are paid by the city. (Amended, Ord. No. 05-07)
905.15. Discipline. All members of the fire department shall be disciplined according to the city’s
personnel policy. (Amended, Ord. No. 05-07)
905.17. Compensation. The members and officers of the department receive the compensation established
annually by the council.
905.19. Relief association. The members and officers of the fire department may organize themselves into
a firefighters relief association. (Amended, Ord. No. 05-07)
Robbinsdale City Code 910.01 (Rev. 2006)
Section 910 - Fire Prevention Code
910.01. Fire code adopted. The current Minnesota State Fire Code published by the International Code
Council, together with all appendices and NFC, codes and standards, is adopted by reference subject to
deletions or modifications contained in this section. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-15)
910.03. Copies of codes. One copy of the current Minnesota State Fire Code will be marked "official copy"
and placed in the files of the city clerk. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-15; Ord. No. 06-02)
910.05. False alarms. It is unlawful to give or make or cause to be given or made an alarm of fire without
probable cause, or to neglect or refuse to obey any reasonable order of the fire chief at a fire or to interfere
with the fire department in the discharge of its duties. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-15)
910.07. Creation of fire lanes. Subdivision 1. The fire chief or fire marshal of the Robbinsdale fire
department is hereby authorized to order the establishment of fire lanes on public or private property as may
be necessary in order that the travel of fire equipment may not be interfered with and that access to fire
hydrants may not be obstructed. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-15)
Subd. 2. Size of fire lanes. The minimum width of any fire lane shall be no less than 20 feet.
(Amended, Ord. No. 03-15)
Subd. 3. Signs for fire lanes. When a fire lane has been established, a sign bearing the words “NO
PARKING OR STOPPING FIRE LANE” shall mark it. When a fire lane is on public right-of-way or
property, the city shall erect the sign. When the fire lane is on private property, the sign shall be erected by
the owner, at such owner’s expense, within 30 days after such owner has been notified of the order. All
signs shall be purchased from the Robbinsdale fire department. All signs shall be of at least 18 gauge steel,
a minimum size of 12 inches by 18 inches (12” by 18”), and colored with a white background and red
lettering reading: NO PARKING OR STOPPING FIRE LANE. Signs shall not be more than 50 feet apart
and the adjacent curb or roadway shall be striped yellow to clearly define the fire lane. Any deviations shall
be approved by the fire marshal. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-15)
Subd. 4. Parking regulations respecting fire lanes. It shall be prohibited at all times to park or stop
any vehicle of any description or place any material or obstruction within 50 feet of the entrance to any fire
station or within a designated fire lane. A violation thereof shall constitute a misdemeanor. In the event that
a member of the fire department or police department finds a vehicle or material unattended and/or
obstructing a designated fire lane, the police department is hereby authorized to provide for removal of such
vehicle or material to the nearest convenient garage or other place of safety outside the limits of the fire
lane, at the expense of the owner. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-15)
Subd. 5. Enforcement. Licensed peace officers and community service officers employed by the
Robbinsdale police department are authorized to issue citations for violations of this chapter including
Minnesota Statutes, sections 169.34, 169.346 and 169.79, which are incorporated into this chapter by
reference. (Added, Ord. No. 03-15)
910.09. (Intentionally left blank)
910.11. (Intentionally left blank)
Robbinsdale City Code 910.13 (Rev. 2006)
910.13. Public safety 800 MHz radio building amplification system. Subdivision 1. General. Except as
otherwise provided, no person shall erect, construct, change the use of or provide an addition of more than
20% to, any building or structure or any part thereof, or cause the same to be done which fails to support
adequate radio coverage for the Minnesota Regional Radio Communications System, including but not
limited to firefighters and police officers. This section shall not apply to: buildings of less than 8,500
square feet; or any building constructed of wood frame; provided none of the aforementioned buildings
make use of any metal construction or any below grade levels or parking areas. Any part of any R-3
occupancy building, including below grade levels and parking areas, are exempt from the requirements of
this section. For the purposes of this section, parking structures and stairwells are included in the definition
of "building" and stair shafts and elevators are included in the definition of "all parts of the building". For
purposes of this section, adequate radio coverage shall be an average received field strength of no less
than -93 dBm, or 1% BER, measured at 30 to 36 inches above the floor over 90% of the area of each floor
and other critical areas determined by the fire chief or the fire chief's designee such as fire command centers,
stairwells, elevators, high hazard areas, basements, and parking areas. Without an in-building radio system,
only the received signal level standard must be achieved as the talk out path is equivalent to the talk in path
in this regional radio system. (Added, Ord. No. 06-03)
Subd. 2. Amplification systems allowed. Buildings and structures which cannot support the
required level of radio coverage shall be equipped with either a radiating cable system or an internal
multiple antenna system with or without FCC type accepted bi-directional 800 MHz amplification as
needed. If amplification is used in the system, all required FCC authorizations must be obtained prior to the
use of the system. If any part of the installed system or systems contains an electrically powered
component, the system shall be capable of operating on an independent battery and/or generator system for a
period of at least 12 hours without external power input. The battery system shall automatically charge in
the presence of an external power input. (Added, Ord. No. 06-03)
Subd. 3. Testing procedures.
(a) Acceptance test procedure. With or without an in-building radio system, it will be the
building owner's responsibility to have the regional radio system performance tested to
ensure that two-way coverage on each floor of the building is a minimum of 90% of the
total floor area and the critical areas designated. (Added, Ord. No. 06-03)
(1) Talk-in from the regional radio system coverage testing. The talk-in coverage
testing process shall be the same for buildings with and without in-building
amplification systems.
During test measuring, the center of the test equipment receive antenna shall be
between 30 and 36 inches above the floor.
On each floor of a building to be tested, the floor space, except for designated
critical areas, shall be divided into square or rectangular areas of approximately the
same size and shape. Each floor shall have a least ten grid areas; however, the
maximum size of grid areas shall not exceed 2,500 square feet. In buildings with
support columns laid out in a grid, the corners of each grid may be arranged at the
columns for ease in identifying grid corners while testing is in progress. In
buildings, such as a warehouse, with large open areas, tests shall be conducted near
the center of each grid although the exact center may not be easily accessible due
to the location of large machinery, storage racks, etc. In buildings with divided
office spaces, with or without floor to ceiling patricians, tests shall be conducted in
an office at or near the center of a grid. In buildings with a large open area and an
attached two story, split level office or other area, the lower level of the two-story,
split level attachment shall be considered as an extension of the large open area.
Robbinsdale City Code 910.13, Subd. 3(a)(1)
(Rev. 2006)
In multi-story buildings and parking ramps, testing shall begin at the lowest level,
including any sub grade level(s), and continue up one floor at a time. In-building
amplification may only be required on the lowest level or levels of a multi-story
building or parking ramp.
Average radio signal field strength shall be measured and recorded in each grid,
and in each designated critical area defined above. Average field strength may be
obtained through use of an instantaneous measuring instrument and a computer that
samples the actual field strength at very short time intervals and averages the
sample values. As an alternative, a field strength measuring instrument with an
analog or digital readout of average field strength may also be used.
Measurements shall be made while the measuring instrument is moved over a
distance of four to ten feet. If the average field strength varies over the
measurement path, the lowest (most negative) value shall be recorded. The test
instrumentation used shall have been calibrated within the six-month period prior
to the testing.
The percentage of area passed shall be calculated at 100 times the result of dividing
the number of grids and critical areas that are at least at -93 dBm or 1% BER by the
total number of grids and critical areas tested.
The donor antenna in an in-building amplification system may receive up to 87
800 MHz radio frequencies of approximately equal field strength from the regional
system, plus some others of approximately equal field strength from other radio
systems. At any time, the donor antenna may be receiving at least 60 radio
frequencies of approximately equal level in the pass band ranges. For that reason,
it shall be assumed that the output level of talk-in amplifiers will be at +3.2 dBm
per channel maximum. Therefore, grid and critical areas tests shall be conducted
while the head end amplifier is disconnected and a signal of +3.2 dBm is inserted
into the connector downstream from the headend amplifier.
Any in-building talk-in amplification system shall have pass band filters before the
input to the first (headend) amplifier that shall pass 806 to 817 MHz and 821-824
MHz only. In the future, within six months after notification by the fire chief or
chief's designee, the pass band filter frequency range shall be changed in
accordance with instructions, or an additional pass band filter for 700 MHz band
frequencies shall be added. When the donor antenna is installed, the average signal
level received on the Hennepin East site control channel shall be measured at the
antenna connector. A signal at that average received signal level shall be inserted
into the cable to the headend amplifier and filter while the output level of the
headend amplifier is measured, and the output level of the amplifier shall be set at
+29+1 dBm.
Alternative in-building amplification systems that do not involve broadband pass
band filters will be accepted provided that similar testing can be demonstrated.
(Added, Ord. No. 06-03)
Robbinsdale City Code 910.13, Subd. 3(a)(2)
(Rev. 2006)
(2) Talk-out to the regional radio system testing. With an in-building amplification
system, the talk-out (to the regional 800 MHz radio system) shall be measured at
the same grid and critical area locations as the talk-in measurements were made.
The measurements shall be made using a three-watt portable radio with a wellcharged
battery to transmit into the in-building radio system while field strength is
measured out of the connector that is normally attached to the donor antenna. To
pass, the field strength at the donor antenna shall be the measured value at the
connector plus the donor antenna gain and minus a free space loss factor. The free
space loss factor shall be -93 dB for a distance of one mile to the nearest Hennepin
East base radio location, adjusted by 6 dB each time the distance is halved or
doubled. The acceptable range for passing shall be between -65 and -95 dBm.
Gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the test measurement results
shall be kept on file with the building owner so that the measurements can be
verified each year during the annual tests. In the event that the measurement
results become lost, the building owner will be required to rerun the acceptance test
to reestablish, the gain values. (Added, Ord. No. 06-03)
(b) Annual tests. When an in-building radio system is required, the building owner shall test
all active components of the system, including but not limited to amplifiers, power supplies
and backup batteries, a minimum of once every 12 months. Amplifiers shall be tested to
ensure that the gain is the same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance. Backup
batteries and power supplies shall be tested under load for a period of one hour to verify
that, they will properly operate during an actual power outage. If within the one hour test
period, in the opinion of the testing technician, the battery exhibits symptoms of failure, the
test shall be extended for additional one hour periods until the testing technician confirms
the integrity of the battery. All other active components shall be checked to determine that
they are operating within the manufacturer's specifications for the intended purpose.
(Added, Ord. No. 06-03)
(c) Five year tests. In addition to the annual test, the building owner shall perform a radio
coverage test a minimum of once every five years to ensure that the radio system continues
to meet the requirements of the original acceptance test. A radio test shall also be
performed whenever there is a change in or to the building that may have an impact on
coverage. Examples of the types of changes that may change radio coverage are interior
remodeling that adds and/or changes partitions, removal of windows, and the addition of
metalized treatment to window surfaces. The procedure described in subdivision 3 shall be
used for these tests. (Added, Ord. No. 06-03)
(d) Qualifications of testing personnel. Alt tests shall be conducted, documented, and signed
by a qualified and competent person that includes: persons in possession of a current FCC
license, or a current technician certification issued by the Associated Public-Safety
Communications Officials International (APCO) or the Personal Communications Industry
Association (PCIA), or a qualified radio engineer licensed as a registered professional
engineer by the state of Minnesota. Testing personnel shall have test equipment that is
appropriate for the testing procedure, and that test equipment shall have been calibrated
within six months prior to the testing. All test records shall be retained on the inspected
premises by the building owner and a copy shall be submitted to fire department officials.
(Added, Ord. No. 06-03)
(e) Field testing. Fire and police personnel, after providing reasonable notice to the owner or
the owner's representative, shall have the right to enter onto the property to conduct testing
to be certain that the required level of radio coverage is present. (Added, Ord. No. 06-03)
Robbinsdale City Code 910.15 (Rev. 2006)
910.15. Fires or barbecues on balconies or patios. In a structure containing two or more vertically stacked
residential units, no person may kindle, maintain or cause any fire or open flame on any balcony above
ground level, or on any ground floor patio immediately adjacent to or within 15 feet of any unit. No person
may store or use any fuel, barbecue, torch or other similar heating or lighting chemicals or devices in either
of the above places. Natural gas fired barbecue grills permanently mounted, plumbed to the building's
natural gas supply and maintaining a minimum clearance of 16 inches on the sides and back of the grill may
be installed on balconies and patios.
910.17. Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided, the fire chief and the fire marshal enforce the
provisions of this section.
910.19. Recognized standards. If this code is inapplicable to a situation involving the protection of persons
and property from the hazards of fire and explosion, the materials, methods of construction, installations,
practices or operations necessary to provide such protection will, to the extent feasible, be in accordance
with nationally recognized and accepted standards, principles and tests and generally recognized and
well-established methods of fire prevention and control as set forth in the 16 volumes of the 1982 edition of
the national fire codes, of the National Fire Protection Association, technical or scientific organizations
adopted by reference. One copy of the 1982 National Fire Code is on file in the office of the fire
department.
910.21. Christmas trees. Subdivision 1. Hospitals. The use or display of natural or resin bearing trees or
decorations in hospitals and nursing homes is prohibited.
Subd. 2. Other places. The use, display, or storage of natural or resin bearing trees without open
flames or electric light decorations is permitted in schools, churches, places of assembly, hotels and
mercantile occupancies.
Subd. 3. Retardants. The use of display of flame retardant artificial trees decorated with U.L. listed
electric lighting systems is permitted in all occupancies.
910.23. Malls, skyways, tunnels or courts. Combustible goods, merchandise, vehicles or decorations may
not be displayed or stored in an enclosed mall, skyway, tunnel, or court unless approved by the chief.
910.25. Bowling alleys. It is unlawful to conduct bowling pin refinishing and bowling alley or floor
resurfacing and refinishing operations involving the use and application of flammable liquids or materials
without a permit from the fire chief.
910.27. Fuel oil. The grade of fuel oil used in a burner must be that for which the burner is approved and as
stipulated by the manufacturer. Crank case oil or oil containing gasoline may only be used in units designed
for such use and approved and listed by a testing agency recognized by the city.
910.29. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the International Fire Code may be cited as the IFC.
When the term "municipality" or "jurisdiction" is used in the IFC, it means the city. When the term
"corporation counsel" is used in the IFC, it means the city attorney. (Amended, Ord. No. 06-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 910.31 (Rev. 2010)
910.31. Fire limits: outside storage of flammable or combustible liquids. Subdivision 1. The limits
referred to in section 3404.4 of the IFC in which storage of flammable liquids in outside above ground tanks
is prohibited are established as follows: all districts except where allowed as a permitted use by the zoning
code (Appendix A). (Amended, Ord. No. 06-02)
Subd. 2. The limits referred to in section 3406.5 of the IFC in which new bulk plants for flammable
liquids are prohibited are hereby established as follows: all districts except where allowed as a permitted
use by the zoning code. (Amended, Ord. No. 06-02)
910.33. Fire limits: bulk storage of liquified petroleum gases. The limits referred to in section 3809 of the
IFC, in which bulk storage of liquified petroleum is restricted are established as follows: all districts except
allowed as a permitted use by the zoning code. (Amended, Ord. No. 06-02)
910.35. Fire limits: storage of explosives and blasting agents. The limits referred to in section 3304 of the
IFC, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited are established as follows: all districts
except where allowed as a permitted use by the zoning code. (Amended, Ord. No. 06-02)
910.37. Interference with fire department duties. No unauthorized person may ride upon, race with, trail or
follow within 300 feet of an apparatus belonging to the fire department when the apparatus is responding to
an emergency call.
910.39. Protection of fire hoses. No person may drive a vehicle over a fire hose except upon specific orders
from a member of the police or fire departments and then only with due caution.
910.41. Parking near fire equipment. No person may park a vehicle or place material or other obstruction
within 20 feet of the entrance to a fire station or within ten feet of a fire hydrant or fire cistern nor may any
person park a vehicle within 300 feet of a place where a fire requiring fire fighting by the fire department is
in progress.
910.43. Authorized use of fire equipment. No person may use a fire apparatus or equipment except as
permitted by the chief.
910.45. Fees. License and inspection fees are set by Appendix B.
910.47. Open burning. Subdivision 1. Minnesota Statutes, Section 88.01 – 88.22 is hereby adopted by
reference. This section of the city code is administered and enforced by the fire chief. (Amended, Ord. No.
98-05)
Subd. 2. Recreational fire. A recreational fire is defined as a fire set for cooking, warming,
enjoyment, or ceremonial purposes which is not more than three feet in diameter by three feet high and has
had the ground five feet from the base of the fire cleared of all combustible material. No permit is required
for a fire contained in a charcoal grill, camp stove or other device designed for the purpose of cooking or
heating. (Added, Ord. No. 98-05)
Subd. 3. Permit required. A permit is required for a recreational fire. The recreational fire must be
burned in accordance with the conditions contained in the application. (Added, Ord. No. 98-05)
Subd. 4. Fee. The fee for the permit is set by Appendix B. (Added, Ord. No. 98-05)
Subd. 5. Applicant. The applicant must be age 18 years or older, and a resident of the city. If the
permit is approved, the applicant or other resident of the home who is 18 years or older, shall remain with
the fire at all times and before leaving the site shall completely extinguish the fire. The applicants must
have the permit on their person and shall produce the permit when requested to do so by a fire official or
other peace officer. (Added, Ord. No. 98-05; Amended, Ord. No. 10-22)
Robbinsdale City Code 910.49 (Rev. 1998)
910.49. D.C. Welders for thawing frozen waterlines. No person may use an electric welding machine
within the limits of the city for purposes of thawing frozen watermains or services. No person may make
any connection from an electric welding machine to a watermain, service, or an appurtenance thereto in the
city.
Robbinsdale City Code 910.51
910.51. Open flame heaters banned. It is unlawful for an owner or occupant of a structure containing three
or more residential dwelling units to maintain in an operable condition or operate within a garage, whether
attached or detached, used as an accessory use to such residential unit, the following: (i) an open flame type
heater or stove; (ii) welding or torch cutting equipment; and (iii) any other equipment utilizing an open
flame.
Robbinsdale City Code 915.01 (Rev. 2008)
Section 915 - Animals
915.01. Definitions. Subdivision 1. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning: (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 2. "Animal" means a dog, cat, horse, bird, including fowl and poultry, or any other
domesticated bird or animal, which is harbored, fed, or kept by any person or group of persons. (Added,
Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 3. "Animal containment facility" means the facility designated by the city as an animal
pound or temporary shelter for animals. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 4. "Animal control officer" means any community service officer, police officer, or that
person or agency designated by the city as the control agent of the city relating to the keeping of animals
within the city. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 5. "Animal hospital" means a place where the business of examination or treatment of
animals for illness, injury, or other health care purposes is conducted. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 6. "At large, pertaining to an animal", means on or about public streets, alleys, other public
places or private properties in the city, unless otherwise permitted in this chapter, when the animal is not
under restraint. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 7. "Commercial dog kennel or cat shelter" means a place where more than two dogs or two
cats over six months of age, or more than one of each, are kept and where the business of selling, boarding,
breeding, showing, treating, or grooming dogs or cats, or both, is conducted. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 8. “Electronic pet containment systems”, means a system created by the installation of
conductors on the ground or under the ground which emit or cause to be emitted an electronic signal for the
purpose of confining animals within a predetermined area. (Added, Ord. No. 08-06)
Subd. 9. "Grooming" means such activities as the cleaning or shampooing of an animal's
appearance, odor, or general palatability to the senses. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 10. "Owner" means any person possessing, harboring, keeping, repeatedly feeding, having
an interest in, or having care, custody or control of any animal. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 11. "Pet shop" means a place where the business of selling animals for pets is conducted.
(Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 12. "Private cat shelter" means a place where three cats over six months of age are kept on
premises which are zoned and occupied for residential purposes and where the keeping of such cats is
incidental to the occupancy of the premises for residential purposes. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 13. "Private dog kennel" means a place where three dogs over six months of age are kept on
premises which are zoned and occupied for residential purposes and where the keeping of such dogs is
incidental to the occupancy of the premises for residential purposes. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 14. "Proper enclosure" means secure confinement indoors or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the animal from escaping and providing protection from the
elements for the animal. A proper enclosure does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage,
or other structure that would allow the animal to exit on its own volition, or any house or structure in which
windows are open, or in which door or window screens are the only obstacles that prevent the animal from
exiting.
Robbinsdale City Code 915.01, Subd. 15
(Rev. 2018)
(a) Any such pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides.
(b) Any such enclosure must be locked with a key or combination lock when occupied by the
animal for which a proper enclosure is required.
(c) Any such pen or structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the
pen, or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet.
(d) All such structures must comply with any statutory requirements and all zoning and
building regulations of the city and must be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a
clean and sanitary condition.
(e) A porch or patio or any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit on its
own volition is not a proper enclosure. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 15. "Stray" means any animal which is not under restraint or is at large in the city. (Added,
Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 16. Under restraint and restrained mean any one or more of the following:
(a) the animal is controlled by a leash not exceeding six feet in length, by a reel type leash, or
by an electronic control collar.
(b) the animal is within a vehicle parked or being driven.
(c) the animal is within the property limits of its owner. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
(d) the animal is within a designated dog park. (Added, Ord. No. 18-14)
915.03. Dogs and cats. Subdivision 1. General rule. It is unlawful to harbor, own, or keep a dog or cat
more than six months of age within the city unless the animal is licensed and has been vaccinated against
rabies. Dogs or cats owned by non-residents of the city are not permitted to remain in the city longer than
24 hours. All dogs and cats over six months of age must have a current rabies vaccination. (Amended, Ord.
No. 07-17)
Subd. 2. Fees. Dog and cat license fees are set by appendix B. Licenses are good for two years
expiring biannually on December 31. Proof of rabies vaccination must be displayed to the licensing officer
before a license is issued. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-13)
Subd. 3. Tags. The license of a dog or cat must be evidenced by a tag provided by the clerk. The
tag must be affixed to the collar of the dog or cat by a permanent metal fastener. The owner or keeper of the
dog or cat must see that the tag is continuously worn by the dog or cat.
Subd. 4. Duplicate tags. If a dog or cat tag is lost, a duplicate may be issued by the city clerk upon
presentation of a receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year. The charge for a
duplicate tag and license fee are set forth in Appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No. 2018-02)
Subd. 5. Counterfeiting tags. It is unlawful to counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit the license tags
or take from any dog or cat a tag legally placed upon it by its owner with the intent to place the tag on
another dog or cat.
Subd. 6. Not transferable. Dog and cat tags are not transferable. No refunds will be made on a dog
or cat license fee paid because the animal leaves the city or dies before the expiration of the license period.
Robbinsdale City Code 915.03, Subd. 7
(Rev. 2008)
Subd. 7. Confinement of dogs and cats. A person having the custody or control of any dog or cat
may not permit the animal to be on an unfenced area or lot abutting upon a street, public park, public place,
or upon other private land in the city without being effectively restrained from or entering beyond such
unfenced area or lot. The use of electronic pet containment systems to confine animals is permitted as
described later in this subsection. A person having the custody or control of a dog or cat may not permit the
animal to be on a street, public park, school grounds or public place in the city without being effectively
restrained by chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length. A person having the custody or control of a
dog or animal of the dog kind must clean up any feces of the animal and to dispose of such feces in a
sanitary manner. The provisions of this section do not apply to the ownership or use of seeing eye dogs by
blind persons, dogs used in police activities of the city, such as the canine corps or tracing dogs used by or
with the permission of the police department. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-06)
Subd. 8. Impoundment. A dog or cat not restrained or controlled as provided in this section and a
dog or cat found without a license will be impounded by a law enforcement officer of the city or other
person or persons directed by the council to enforce the provisions of this section.
Subd. 9. Keeping of dogs limited. No family or group of persons may own or keep more than three
dogs exceeding six months of age on the premises where they reside. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-13; Ord. No.
07-17)
Subd. 10. Keeping of cats limited. No person or group of persons may own or keep more than four
cats exceeding eight months of age on the premises where they reside without having first obtained a multicat
residence license. Application for the multi-cat residence license shall be made to the city manager and
must be accompanied by the license fee set by Appendix B. The city manager shall administratively
approve or deny the license. Licenses issued for multi-cat residences are good for two years expiring
annually on December 31. Any resident who chooses to appeal the administrative denial of the multi-cat
residence license may appeal that decision to the City Council. The city manager or City Council may
impose conditions upon the granting of any multi-cat residence license. The maximum number of cats
allowed under a multi-cat residence license is 12. Properties holding a multi-cat residence license shall be
maintained in a clean and healthful condition at all times, and shall be open to inspection by the city
manager at all reasonable times. (Added, Ord. No. 08-06)
Subd. 11. Electronic pet containment systems. No electronic pet containment system shall be
installed which allows any animal confined by the system to occupy any area within three feet of a public
sidewalk or within three feet of the traveled portion of a public street if there is no public sidewalk.
Electronic pet containment systems installed within any public right-of-way or public easement shall be
owned and maintained by the owner of the system. The engineer may direct the removal or relocation of an
electronic pet containment system from any public right-of-way or public easement at the sole cost and
expense of the owner of the electronic pet containment system or abutting property owner if the engineer
determines the system interferes with the public’s use of the right-of-way or easement. The cost of any
repair to electronic pet containment systems which are damaged due to the public’s use of a public right-ofway
or public easement shall be borne solely by the owner of the abutting property on which the system is
installed. (Added, Ord. No. 08-06)
915.05. Enforcement officers. Any animal control officer is authorized to enforce this chapter and
Minnesota Statutes, chapter 347 and perform all duties reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of this
chapter. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
915.07. Interference with enforcement. No person shall intentionally interfere with, hinder, or molest any
animal control officer or police officer in the performance of the officer's duty in the enforcement of this
chapter. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
915.09. Strays. No stray animal shall be permitted within the confines of the city. It shall be the duty of the
animal control officer to immediately impound any stray animal and any dog or cat that is not physically
bearing a license tag as required in this chapter. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Robbinsdale City Code 915.11 (Rev. 2008)
915.11. Animals which are unlicensed or at large.
(a) The animal control officer shall immediately impound any stray or at-large animal and any
dog or cat that is not physically bearing a license tag as required in this chapter.
(b) It is unlawful for an owner to allow a dog or cat to be at large within the city. Dogs and
cats must be kept under restraint as defined in this chapter. It is no defense that the owner
took unsuccessful steps to keep the animal under restraint.
(c ) Every female dog or cat shall be kept confined at breeding times within a building or other
enclosure in such a manner that such female cannot come in contact with a male of the
species except for the specific purpose of breeding within the building or enclosure.
(Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
915.13. Impoundment generally.
(a) The animal control officer shall apprehend and impound any animal found under
circumstances that are in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or upon
reasonable belief that the animal is diseased, rabid, or exposed to rabies. Any animal
impounded by the animal control officer shall be delivered to the animal containment
facility as the agent to house and care for confined animals.
(b) Any animal control officer may enter upon private property for the purpose of impounding
an animal believed to be in violation of the terms of this chapter.
(c) Any owner, when requested, shall produce for inspection the animal, as well as the license
receipt and/or tag for a dog or cat, when required to do so by such officer.
(d) The animal control officer, upon receiving any animal, shall make a complete registry
thereof by entering the type of animal, breed, color and sex of such animal and, if required,
whether the animal is licensed. If licensed, the officer shall enter the name and address of
the owner and the number of the license tag. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
915.15. Animal containment facility location. The city may provide for an animal containment facility
either within or outside the municipal limits. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
915.17. Notice and disposition of impounded animals. Subdivision 1. Notices. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
(a) At the earliest practical time after an animal is impounded, the duly designated animal
control officer or agent shall notify the owner personally or by United States mail, if such
owner be known to animal control officer or can be ascertained with reasonable effort, of
the impoundment of the animal. The animal containment facility or police department may
mail a notice to an owner who fails to claim an impounded animal stating that, if the owner
fails to retrieve the animal within ten days from the date of mailing, the animal shall be
deemed abandoned. The owner shall be liable for fees and expenses incurred by the city in
connection with the impoundment. Such fees and expenses must be paid at the time of the
release of the animal and are due even if the owner abandons the animal. (Added, Ord. No.
07-17)
(b) If the owner is unknown, such notifying agents shall post notices at the animal containment
facility and police department, giving a reasonable description of the animal so impounded
and the approximate time when and location where the animal was picked up for
impoundment. The notice shall also state that, if the animal is not claimed within five
regular business days after the animal has come into the possession of the animal
containment facility, the facility shall dispose of the animal. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Robbinsdale City Code 915.17, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2008)
Subd. 2. Disposition of unclaimed animals. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
(a) If the animal is not claimed within the time specified and all fees and charges paid in
connection therewith, the animal containment facility is authorized to destroy the animal,
and dispose of the carcass. In disposing of dogs or cats after the five-day period, the animal
containment facility shall comply with all the requirements set forth in Minnesota Statutes,
Section 35.71. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
(b) Care of animals. Any animal in the custody of the animal containment facility shall be
housed and fed in a humane manner during its confinement in the pound. Dogs or cats
which have been impounded shall be kept in segregated pens and fed an appropriate
commercial dog or cat food. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
(c ) Fees. Impoundment fees for the impoundment of dogs, cats, or other animals, which fees
shall include charges for board and shelter for each such animal impounded, shall be in an
amount duly established by the city council from time to time. The impoundment fees
may, at the council's discretion, increase with each occasion the same animal has been
impounded by the city. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
915.19. Collection of impoundment fees. The animal control officer is authorized to accept redemption
fees and charges for impoundment as specified by the city council. The city may collect unpaid fees and
charges in any manner authorized by law. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
915.21. Nuisances. Subdivision 1. No owner shall allow any animal to commit acts defined or described in
this chapter as a nuisance. Owning, keeping, or harboring any animal which does any of the following is
hereby declared to be an act of nuisance committed by the person owning, keeping, or harboring the animal:
(a) Damages property, plantings, or structures;
(b) Deposits fecal matter on public property or on the private property of others, which fecal
matter is not removed;
(c) Scratches or bites a person;
(d) Becomes the subject of action by one or more law enforcement or animal control officers
for violating this chapter or the laws of this state more than twice in any 12-month period,
or otherwise becomes a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public; or
(e) Commits any other act constituting a nuisance as defined in this code or state statutes.
(Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 2. In addition to punishment of the owner of the animal as prescribed in this chapter, the
animal committing such act of nuisance shall be subject to impoundment. The owner shall be advised in
writing prior to release of the animal of the basis for the impoundment and the consequences of further
violations. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 3. When an animal commits an act of nuisance and the owner is convicted or the animal is
impounded, and the animal commits a subsequent act of nuisance, the animal control officer may do one or
more of the following:
(a) Direct the owner to remove the animal from the city within ten days of receipt of notice by
personal service or mail. Failure to comply is a misdemeanor.
Robbinsdale City Code 915.21, Subd. 3 (b)
(Rev. 2016)
(b) Seek a court order for the destruction of the animal.
(c) Declare the animal potentially dangerous or dangerous if it also meets the criteria of section
915.25 or 915.27. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 4. Disturbing noises.
(a) The owner or keeper of an animal shall not allow such animal to make noise so as to cause
unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to any person.
(b) It shall be a violation of this section if:
(1) The noise can be heard from a location outside of the building or property where
the animal is being kept and at a distance of at least 100 feet from such property;
and
(2) The noise occurs repeatedly over a period of time of at least five minutes, during
which the lapse of time between each animal noise is 30 seconds or less, or at least
20 minutes where the lapse of time between such noises is five minutes or less.
(c) The noise described in subsection (b) of this section is not a violation if, subject to the
owners obligation to reasonably mitigate the situation, it occurs due to harassment or injury
to the animal from someone or something other than the owner or keeper of the animal, or
due to a trespass upon the property where the animal is located. This subsection (c) shall
not be an element of the offense but rather than affirmative defense. (Added, Ord. No. 07-
17)
915.23. Animals biting human beings: rabies prevention.
(a) Duties of owner when animal has bitten human. Whenever an owner within the corporate
limits of the city shall learn that the owner's animal has bitten a human being, such person
shall immediately confine the animal in a proper enclosure where it cannot escape or have
access to any human being or other animal. The owner shall also immediately notify the
animal control officer and/or the police department.
(b) Confinement of animals biting human.
(1) Whenever the animal control officer or an officer of the police department shall
learn that a human being has been bitten by any animal, the officer shall ascertain
the identity of the animal and its owner and shall immediately direct that the owner
forthwith confine such animal as deemed appropriate by the animal control officer
or police officer.
(2) Any animal so ordered confined shall be confined as so directed for a period of at
least 10 full days at the animal containment facility, kept apart from other animals,
and under the supervision of a veterinarian until it is determined whether such
animal had or has a disease which might have been transmitted by such bite.
(Amended, Ord. No. 16-08)
(3) Upon expiration of the 10 days, if it is determined the animal did not and does not
have a disease which might have been transmitted by such bite, the animal may be
released by the animal containment facility and reclaimed from the facility as
provided in this section. (Amended, Ord. No. 16-08)
Robbinsdale City Code 915.23(c) (Rev. 2011)
(c) Disposition of animals exposed to rabies. Any animal which has been bitten by a rabid
animal or has otherwise been exposed to rabies shall be euthanized with the owner's
consent or quarantined and kept in a manner as directed by the animal control officer for a
period of six months, requiring a series of three rabies vaccinations during quarantine. If
the animal has been vaccinated at least three weeks but not more than one year before such
bite or exposure to a source of rabies and if it is again immediately vaccinated, then such
animal will be confined in the animal containment facility for a period of 40 days before it
is released. Impounded animals shall not be released prior to an examination by a licensed
veterinarian and certification that the animal does not have rabies.
(d) Redemption of confined animals.
(1) An animal impounded at the animal containment facility, pursuant to the terms of
this section, may be redeemed upon notification that any required confinement
period has expired.
(2) Such notification shall be given by the animal containment facility in the same
manner as the notice required in Section 915.17, subdivision 1(a), except that the
redemption period shall be specified pursuant to the terms of subsection (d)(3) of
this section.
(3) Any such animal may be redeemed pursuant to the terms of section 915.17 within
five regular business days after the date the notice is mailed or posted, whichever
the case may be, after which time the animal will be disposed of if not redeemed.
(e) Authority to seize animal. If the animal control officer or police officer has a reasonable
basis to believe an animal has rabies, the animal shall be seized. The animal control officer
or police officer shall notify the state board of public health and may destroy the animal and
test the carcass to confirm the existence of rabies. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
915.25. Potentially dangerous animals.
(a) The chief of police may declare an animal potentially dangerous if one of the following
criteria is met:
(1) The animal, without provocation, attacks or bites a person or a domestic animal on
public or private property;
(2) The animal, without provocation, chases or approaches a person, including a
person on a bicycle, upon the street, sidewalk, or any public or private property in
an apparent attitude of attack or in a menacing fashion;
(3) The animal has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack without
provocation, to cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the safety of any person or
domestic animal; or;
(4) The animal is owned or harbored primarily, or in part, for the purpose of fighting
or is trained for fighting.
Robbinsdale City Code 915.25(b) (Rev. 2011)
(b) The person making such declaration shall notify the animal's owner in writing of the
declaration and provide information pertaining to the regulation of potentially dangerous
and dangerous animals.
(1) The owner may appeal the declaration by delivering a written notice of appeal to
the Chief of Police within seven days after receipt of the declaration. The notice of
appeal must identify the name, address, and a telephone number of the owner and
must state the basis of the appeal. After considering all evidence submitted in the
notice of appeal, an impartial hearing officer shall issue an order setting forth
whether the animal is potentially dangerous. The order shall be made within five
business days of the receipt of the notice of appeal and shall be served by mail or
personal service upon the owner.
(2) The owner shall be responsible for all fees associated with the appeals process.
(3) Notwithstanding any appeal that may be requested by the owner, the owner shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter until and unless the declaration is
reversed by the hearing officer.
(4) The hearing officer shall be appointed by the City Manager. The decision of a
hearing officer is effective the date it is issued unless a later date is stated in the
decision. (Amended, Ord. No. 11-15)
(c) The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must have a microchip implanted in the dog for
identification pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section 374.515.
(d) The proof in the form of a receipt of the implanted microchip must be provided to the
police department within 14 days of notification. The name of the microchip manufacturer
and identification number must also be provided to the animal control authority.
(e) The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall keep the dog, while on the owner's
property, in a proper enclosure or on a substantial leash. For the purpose of this section, the
term "substantial leash" shall mean a leash that properly and completely restrains the
potentially dangerous dog's movement.
(f) The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall muzzle and restrain the dog on a substantial
leash not to extend more than six feet whenever off of its own property. The muzzle must
be made in a manner that will prevent the dog from biting any person or animal but that
will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, similar to a baskettype
muzzle.
(g) The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must post clearly visible, purchased "Beware of
Dog" signs. The signs must be at least 10 inches by 14 inches in dimension. The signs
shall be clearly visible from the street and the rear of the home if there is an alley access.
(h) The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall notify the Robbinsdale Police Department
in writing of the death, sale, or transfer of the dog within 14 days.
(i) The animal control authority shall require the circumstances of the dog's death and
disposition or the complete name, address, and telephone number of the person to whom
the dog has been transferred.
(j) A person who owns a potentially dangerous dog and who resides on rental property must
disclose to the property owner, in writing, that a potentially dangerous dog will reside on
the property. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Robbinsdale City Code 915.27 (Rev. 2011)
915.27. Dangerous animals.
(a) Compliance with state law. The owner of a dangerous dog must comply with Minnesota
Statutes, sections 347.50 – 347.565. Any violation of such statutory provisions is a
misdemeanor under this chapter. (Amended, Ord. No. 11-15)
(b) Procedure for determination that animal is dangerous. The owner of a dangerous animal
shall be advised in writing of the determination that the animal is dangerous, and shall be
provided a copy of Minnesota Statutes, sections 347.50 – 347.565. The owner may appeal
this designation according to the procedures in subsection (c)(1) of this section.
Notwithstanding any appeal that may be requested by the owner, the owner shall comply
with the provisions of this chapter until and unless the declaration is reversed by the hearing
officer or a court of law. (Amended, Ord. No. 11-15)
(c) Appeal by owner.
(1) The owner may appeal by delivering a written notice of appeal to the police
department within seven days after receipt of the notice referred to in subsection
(b) of this section. The notice of appeal must identify the name, address, and a
telephone number of the owner and must state the basis for the appeal. Upon
receipt of a valid notice of appeal, a hearing shall be held before an impartial
hearing examiner. The hearing examiner shall receive evidence whether the
animal is dangerous. Rules of evidence need not be strictly followed and the
records of the animal control officer or law enforcement officer shall be considered
without further foundation. After considering all evidence submitted, the hearing
examiner shall issue a written order setting forth whether the animal is dangerous
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section 347.50. The order shall be made within
five business days after the hearing and shall be served by mail or personal service
upon the owner. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final, but it is
appealable to a court of law according to Minnesota Statutes, section 484.01,
subdivision 1. The owner shall be responsible for all fees associated with this
appeal process.
(2) The hearing officer shall be appointed by the city manager. The decision of a
hearing officer is effective the date it is issued, unless a later date is stated in the
decision. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
915.29. Keeping dogs and cats. The keeping of dogs or cats in the city in an unsanitary place or condition
or in a manner that results in noisome odors, or in such a way as to constitute a disturbance by reason of
barking, howling, fighting or other noise or in such a way as to permit dogs or cats to annoy, injure or
endanger persons or property is declared a nuisance and is prohibited. A dog or cat may not be tied or
leashed or chained to the side of a house or to a fence, post or other structure in a side lot, that is, the area
between two houses running from the front to back of the longest principal building. (Amended, Ord. No.
07-17)
915.31. Diseased or vicious dogs. It is unlawful for an owner or occupant of premises to keep or permit to
run at large on any street, a diseased dog or any dog of a ferocious or vicious character, habit or disposition.
A police officer may destroy or cause to be destroyed any such animal if it is found at large in any street or
public place. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-17)
915.33. Training vicious animals. It is unlawful to cause, encourage, or train a dog to be of a ferocious or
vicious character, habit, or disposition or train, encourage, or attempt to instill a propensity to fight or attack
in a dog. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-17)
Robbinsdale City Code 915.35 (Rev. 2018)
915.35. Sales and gifts prohibited. It is unlawful to sell or offer for sale, barter, or give away baby chicks,
ducklings, or other fowl, or rabbits as pets or novelties, whether or not dyed, colored, or otherwise
artificially treated. Chicks, ducklings, other fowl, or rabbits under two months of age are considered baby
chicks, ducklings, or baby rabbits. This subsection is not to be construed to prohibit the advertising, display,
or sale of chicks, ducklings, other fowl, or rabbits for commercial purposes by hatcheries or stores engaged
in the business of selling them for commercial purposes and which are equipped with proper brooder
facilities to care for such animals. (Amended, Ord. No. 07-17)
915.37. Domestic animals. Subdivision 1. General rule. It is unlawful to keep or maintain roosters or bees,
without first having obtained a permit therefor. Beekeeping is regulated under section 917. It is unlawful to
keep or maintain more than two chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, pigeons, rabbits, chinchillas, minks, ferrets,
nutrias, or guinea pigs without first having obtained a permit therefor. It is not permitted to keep or maintain
large domesticated animals such as a horse, cow, pony, mule, donkey, pig, goat, or sheep. All of the
aforementioned are hereinafter referred to as "animals." (Amended, Ord. Nos. 07-17; 08-06; 15-11)
Subd. 2. Permits. A person desiring a permit required by subdivision 1 may make application to
the city council. The application must contain (i) the name and address of the applicant; (ii) the address of
the premises upon which the animal or animals are to be kept; (iii) the number, species and sex of such
animal or animals; and (iv) a statement regarding any property damage or physical injuries caused by such
animal or animals in the past. The council may also require submission of such additional information or
material as it deems necessary or convenient. The applicant must pay to the city clerk such initial permit fee
and renewal permit fee as set forth in Appendix B. Upon submission of the initial application, the city clerk
must set a date for a hearing on the application before the city council and must notify the owners of all
properties located within 200 feet of the subject premises of the date and time of the hearing. (Amended,
Ord. No. 15-11, No. 2018-02)
Subd. 3. Hearing. At the hearing the city council may take such testimony or receive such
documents or information as it deems appropriate. A permit will not be issued if the city council finds that
such animal or animals, because of their number, size, proximity to other properties, history of vicious or
destructive actions, or inherent characteristics, are or are likely to become either a nuisance or a hazard to
the public health or safety. (Amended, Ord. No. 15-11)
Subd. 4. Term. Permits are valid until December 31 of the year of issuance and may be renewed
annually by the council. The council may revoke a permit prior to its expiration if the council finds that the
terms or conditions of the permit have been violated or if the animal or animals have become either a public
nuisance or a hazard to the public health or safety. Nothing herein in this subsection is to be construed to
prohibit or constrain any action allowed by law designed to prevent the spread of disease or the imminent
damage to persons or property caused by such animal or animals.
Subd. 5. Sales. Nothing contained in this subsection is to be construed as permitting anyone to
keep or maintain animals for sale or as a part of a business, unless otherwise licensed or permitted.
Subd. 6. Exception. This subsection does not apply to pet stores or veterinary clinics. (Amended,
Ord. No. 03-13)
915.39. Non-domestic animals. (Deleted, Ord. No. 08-06)
915.39. Wild/exotic animals. (Added, Ord. No. 08-06) Subdivision 1. General rule. It is unlawful to keep
or maintain a wild/exotic animal within the city which could pose a threat of injury to persons or damage to
property. No person shall keep any exotic animal or species when kept in such numbers or in such a way as
to constitute a likelihood of harm to the animals themselves, to human beings, or to the property of human
beings, or which constitutes a public or private nuisance.
Robbinsdale City Code 915.39 Subd. 2 (Rev. 2011)
Subd. 2. Definitions.
(a) The term “wild/exotic animal” means any one of a nonhuman species of the animal
kingdom, including those born or raised in captivity, except the following:
(1) Domestic dogs (excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals) properly
vaccinated against rabies.
(2) Domestic cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays) properly vaccinated
against rabies;
(3) Rodents such as hamsters, mice, gerbils, white rats, guinea pigs, nutrias,
chinchillas, minks, or hedgehogs, capable of being maintained continuously in a
cage, subject to limitations set forth in section 915.37;
(4) Rabbits, subject to limitations set forth in section 915.37;
(5) Captive-bred species of common cage birds;
(6) Small nonpoisonous, nonconstrictive snakes;
(7) Nonpoisonous lizards, iguanas, chameleons, salamanders and turtles or other
similar small reptiles, unless prohibited by state or federal law;
(8) Fish, unless prohibited by state or federal law;
(9) Domestically raised ferrets, properly vaccinated against rabies (must be vaccinated
yearly), subject to limitations set forth in section 915.37;
(10) Domestically raised fowl such as chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, and pigeons,
subject to limitations set forth in section 915.37.
(b) Prohibited wild/exotic animals. Without limitation, the term “prohibited wild/exotic
animal” includes the following:
(1) Any member of the family Canidae, such as wolves, dingoes, coyotes and jackals,
except domesticated dogs;
(2) Any crossbreed such as the crossbreed between dogs and coyotes and dogs and
wolves;
(3) Any skunk, whether captured in the wild, domestically raised, de-scented or not descented,
vaccinated against rabies or not vaccinated against rabies;
(4) Any raccoon;
(5) Venomous snakes of the family Viperidae, such as adders, gabon vipers and pit
vipers; venomous snakes of the family Elapidae, such as cobras, coral snakes, and
sea snakes; the following three snakes of the family Colubridae: the African twig
Snake (Thelotomis Kirtland), the rear fanged boomslang (Disphoiidus typus), and
the Asian tiger snake (Rhabdophis forinus). Such snakes are wild/exotic animals
whether or not such snakes are captured in the wild or domestically raised, defanged
or not de-fanged, de-venomed or not de-venomed;
(6) Alligators, crocodiles, and caimans;
Robbinsdale City Code 915.39 Subd. 2(b)(7) (Rev. 2011)
(7) Any red-eared turtle (Pseudemys scriptae-legans) with a shell length of less than
four inches;
(8) Any animal or species prohibited by Federal or Minnesota law;
(9) All animals not specifically listed in subdivision 2a or 2c.
(c) Regulated animals. Animals regulated by Minnesota Statutes, section 346.155 including:
(1) All members of the Felidae family including, but not limited to, lions, tigers,
cougars, leopards, cheetahs, ocelots, and servals, but not including domestic cats or
cats recognized as a domestic breed, registered as a domestic breed, and shown as a
domestic breed by a national or international multibreed cat registry association;
(2) Bears;
(3) All nonhuman primates, including, but not limited to, lemurs, monkeys,
chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, marmosets, lorises, and tamarins;
(4) Any hybrid or cross between an animal listed in subsection 1, 2, or 3 above and a
domestic animal and offspring from all subsequent generations of those crosses or
hybrids.
Subd. 3. Wild/exotic animal restrictions.
(a) No person shall keep or allow to be kept any regulated animal within the city without a
permit, whether or not the keeping of such animal is licensed by the state or federal
government. Furthermore the keeping of such animals is subject to a determination by the
city that such keeping is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare.
(b) No person shall keep or allow to be kept any prohibited wild/exotic animal. Any person
keeping any prohibited animal identified above may have it seized immediately by animal
control.
(1) Exceptions:
(i) This section does not apply to animals which are temporarily brought into
the city for the purpose of participating in any circus or show; nor to any
bona fide research institution, or veterinary hospital, provided protective
devices adequate to prevent such animal from escaping or injuring the
public are provided.
(ii) In the case of regulated animals, those exemptions listed in Minnesota
Statutes, section 346.155, subdivision 7 shall apply.
(c) Permit required for regulated animals.
(1) Within 60 days after adoption of this section, a person who possesses a regulated
animal must notify in writing the city manager using a registration form prepared
by the Minnesota Animal Control Association approved by the Board of Animal
Health. The notification shall include the person’s name, address, telephone
number, and a complete inventory of each regulated animal that the person
possesses. The inventory shall include the following information: number and
species of each regulated animal; the microchip number and manufacturer for each
regulated animal if available; the exact location where each regulated animal is
Robbinsdale City Code 915.39 Subd. 3(c)(1) (Rev. 2011)
kept; and age, sex, color, weight, scars, and any distinguishing marks of each
regulated animal. A certificate of registration shall be issued to the possessor upon
payment of the registration fee, and if necessary, the site inspection fee. Fees for
registration and site inspections shall be in the amounts as set forth in Appendix B.
(2) A person who possesses a regulated animal must notify city manager in writing
within ten days of a change in address or location where the regulated animal is
kept.
(3) A person with a United States Department of Agriculture license for regulated
animals shall forward a copy of the USDA inspection report to the city manager
within 30 days of receipt of the inspection report.
(4) If a person who possesses a regulated animal has a microchip implanted in the
animal for identification, the name of the microchip manufacturer and the
identification number of the microchip must be provided to the city manager. If a
regulated animal is sedated for any reason and the animal does not have a
microchip implanted, a microchip must be implanted in the regulated animal.
Within 30 days after the microchip is implanted, the name of the microchip
manufacturer and the identification number of the microchip must be provided to
the local animal control authority. A person selling or transferring ownership of
offspring under six months of age as provided in Minnesota Statutes, section
346.155, subdivision 2, paragraph (e), is encouraged to have a microchip implanted
in the animal prior to the sale or transfer. Within 30 days of acquisition, a person
acquiring ownership of an offspring with a microchip implanted shall comply with
microchip information reporting requirements under this section.
Subd. 4. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a determination of the city manager under subsection
915.39 may appeal such determination by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk not later than
ten days from the date of the manager’s decision. The appeal shall be made to the City Council which will
hear the matter at a regularly scheduled meeting within 35 days of the date of the notice of appeal.
Robbinsdale City Code 917.01
Section 917 - Beekeeping
917.01. Definitions. Subdivision. 1. “Accredited institution” means an educational institution holding
accredited status which has been licensed or registered by the Minnesota Office of Higher Education at the
time the permitee obtained their certificate.
Subd. 2. “Apiary” means the assembly of one (1) or more colonies of bees on a single lot.
Subd. 3. “Apiary site” means the lot upon which an apiary is located.
Subd. 4. “Beekeeper” means a person who owns or has charge of one (1) or more colonies of
honey bees or a person who owns or controls a lot on which a colony is located whether or not the person is
intentionally keeping honey bees.
Subd. 5. “Beekeeping equipment” means anything used in the operation of an apiary, such as hive
bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors.
Subd. 6. “Colony” means an aggregate of honey bees consisting principally of workers, but having,
when perfect, one queen and at times drones, brood, combs and honey.
Subd. 7. “Flyway barrier” means a barrier that raises the flight path of bees above head level as
they come and go from a hive.
Subd. 8. “Hive” means the receptacle inhabited by a colony.
Subd. 9. “Honey bee” means all life stages of the common domestic honey bee, apis mellifera. This
definition does not include wasps, hornets, African subspecies or Africanized hybrids.
Subd. 10. “Nucleus colony” means a small quantity of honey bees with a queen housed in a smaller
than usual hive box designed for a particular purpose, and containing no supers.
Subd. 11. “Permitee” means any beekeeper and any person who has applied for and received a
permit from the city for beekeeping.
Subd. 12. “Rooftop” means the uppermost section of a primary or accessory structure of at least
one (1) full story and at least twelve (12) feet in height. Areas including but not limited to decks, patios and
balconies shall not be considered a rooftop.
Subd. 13. “Super” means a box that holds the frames where bees will store the honey.
Subd. 14. “Swarming” means the process where a queen bee leaves a colony with a large group of
worker bees in order to form a new honey bee colony.
Subd. 15. “Unusual aggressive behavior” means any instance in which unusual aggressive
characteristics such as stinging or attacking without provocation occurs. Provocation is an act that an adult
could reasonably expect may cause a bee to sting or attack.
Robbinsdale City Code 917.03
917.03. Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to permit and establish requirements for the
keeping of honey bee colonies, hives, and equipment within the city and to ensure compliance with the
requirements of this section. The City of Robbinsdale recognizes that honey bees are an asset to our
community, important in the pollination of plants and in the production of honey and other products.
917.05. Beekeeping Limited. No person shall keep, harbor, maintain or allow to be kept any hive or other
facility for the housing of honey bees on or in any property within the City of Robbinsdale without a permit
unless exempted by subsection 917.09 or 917.13.
917.07. Colony Location. Subdivision. 1. Hives cannot be located in the front yard or side yard and must
be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the rear or side property lines and twenty (20) feet from public
rights-of-way unless further restricted elsewhere in this code.
Subd. 2. Except as otherwise provided in this section, in each instance where any part of a hive is
kept within twenty-five (25) feet of a lot line of the apiary site, a flyway barrier of at least six (6) feet in
height, in conformance with subsection 510.25, subd. 2, must be constructed and must comply with the
following:
(a) The flyway barrier may consist of a wall, fence, dense vegetation or a combination there of,
such that honey bees will fly over rather than through the material to reach the colony.
(b) If a flyway barrier of dense vegetation is used, the initial planting may be four (4) feet in
height, so long as the vegetation reaches a height of at least six (6) feet within two (2) years
of installation. Vegetation must be maintained so that it thrives and continues to meet these
standards. If the vegetation dies or is not maintained so that it complies with this code, then
the vegetation must be replaced.
(c) If the flyway barrier consists of a wall or fence, the materials must be decay resistant and
maintained in good condition.
(d) The flyway barrier must continue parallel to the lot line of the apiary site for ten (10) feet in
both directions from the hive or contain the hive or hives in an enclosure at least six (6) feet
in height.
(e) A flyway barrier is not required if the hive is located on a rooftop.
Subd. 3. No colony shall be placed upon a rooftop until the building inspector or its designee has
determined that the location poses no health or safety risks and that the rooftop is structurally sound to hold
a hive and associated equipment and activities. If the building inspector at any time determines that the hive
or building conditions, or both, pose a risk to public health or safety or is being kept in an unsafe condition,
the deficiency must be repaired or removed by the permitee within ten (10) days of written notice from the
city. If the deficiency is not repaired or removed as required by the written notice, the hive must be removed
at the permitee's sole expense within fifteen (15) days of written notice from the building inspector.
Robbinsdale City Code 917.09
917.09. Colony Density. Subdivision. 1. Every lot or parcel of land in the city shall be limited to the
following number of colonies based on the size of the apiary site:
(a) One half (1/2) acre or smaller is allowed one (1) colony;
(b) More than one half (1/2) acre to three quarters (3/4) of an acre is allowed two (2) colonies;
(c) More than three quarters (3/4) of an acre to one (1) acre is allowed three (3) colonies;
(d) More than one (1) acre to five (5) acres is allowed four (4) colonies; and
(e) More than five (5) acres, there is no restriction on the number of colonies.
Subd. 2. If any beekeeper serves the community by removing a swarm or swarms of honey bees
from locations where they are not desired, that person shall not be considered in violation of the colony
density restrictions in this section if the following conditions are met:
(a) The person temporarily houses the honey bees at an apiary site of a beekeeper permitted by
the city;
(b) The bees are not kept for more than thirty (30) days, and
(c) The apiary site remains in compliance with the other provisions of this section.
917.11. Required Conditions. Subdivision. 1. Honey bee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable
frames that are kept in sound and usable condition.
Subd. 2. Each colony on the apiary site shall be provided with a convenient source of water that
must be located within ten (1) feet of each active colony.
Subd. 3. Materials from a hive such as wax combs or other materials that might encourage robbing
by other bees shall be promptly disposed of in a sealed container or placed within a building or other bee
and vermin proof enclosure.
Subd. 4. For each colony permitted to be maintained by this section, there may also be maintained
upon the same apiary lot, one nucleus colony in a hive structure not to exceed one (1) standard nine and
five-eighths inch (9-5/8") depth box, ten (10) frame hive body with no supers.
Subd. 5. Beekeeping equipment must be maintained in good condition, including keeping the hives
free of chipped and peeling paint if painted. Any unused equipment must be stored in an enclosed structure.
Subd. 6. Hives shall be continuously managed to provide adequate living space for their resident
honey bees in order to prevent swarming.
Subd. 7. In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusual aggressive behavior, it shall be the duty
of the beekeeper to promptly re-queen the colony.
Robbinsdale City Code 917.13
917.13. Permit Required. Subdivision. 1. The application for a permit must be on a form provided by the
city. All required information must be completed by the applicant.
Subd. 2. Each apiary site must apply for a permit and receive approval prior to bringing any honey
bees into the city.
Subd. 3. If the beekeeper relocates a hive or colony to a new apiary site, the beekeeper shall apply
for a new permit prior to the relocation on a form provided by the city.
Subd. 4. The beekeeping permit shall be valid until December 31 of each calendar year following
initial issuance and must be renewed by the permitee prior to expiration each year by submitting a form
provided by the city.
Subd. 5. At the time of application for a permit, the beekeeper must submit a certificate of
completion of a honey bee keeping course from an accredited Minnesota institution.
Subd. 6. The permit fee is set by the city council and published in the city's fee schedule (Appendix
B).
Subd. 7. The property where the apiary site is located must be in compliance with all applicable
city regulations prior to issuance or renewal of the permit.
Subd. 8. If the required conditions are not maintained subsequent to issuance of a beekeeping
permit, the city may revoke the permit.
917.15. Inspection. Subdivision. 1. Prior to the issuance or renewal of a permit pursuant to this section, the
applicant or permittee beekeeper must allow for an inspection of the apiary site by the city.
Subd. 2. Upon prior notice to the owner of the property where the apiary site is located, city staff
shall have the right to inspect any apiary site.
917.17. Hearing Procedure. Upon receipt of an application for a permit or renewal, the city will notify all
property owners within 200 feet of the apiary site identified on the permit application of the date and time of
the hearing. At the hearing, the city council may take such testimony or receive such documents or
information as it deems appropriate. The city council may also require the submission of such additional
information and material as it deems necessary or convenient. The issuance of the permit shall be
determined by the city council after a public hearing.
(Added, Ord. No. 15-11)
Robbinsdale City Code 920.01 (Rev. 1997)
Section 920 - Alarm Systems
920.01. Findings and purpose. The number of false alarms to which the police department responds has
reached a level which places an intolerable burden upon the time and resources of the city and has created
and added risks which threaten the safety of the police officers and the public. The purpose of this section is
to reduce the risks and expense associated with false alarms by reducing the frequency of false alarms.
920.03. Definitions. Subdivision 1. For purposes of this section terms defined in this subsection have the
meanings given them.
Subd. 2. Alarm business means the business of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing,
altering, replacing, moving, or installing an alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced,
repaired, altered, replaced, moved, or installed an alarm system in or on a building, structure, or facility.
Subd. 3. Alarm user means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind, including government entities, on whose premises an alarm system is maintained.
The term shall include persons occupying or leasing dwelling units for residential purposes. The term shall
not include persons maintaining alarm systems in automobiles. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-15, Sec. 1)
Subd. 4. Alarm system means an assembly of equipment devices (or a single device such as a solid
state unit) arranged to send a signal to a remote receiving station to make known the occurrence of an
attempted robbery or an unauthorized intrusion requiring urgent attention and to which the police are
expected to respond. The term does not include fire alarm systems and alarm systems to monitor
temperature, humidity, or any other condition not related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a
premises or an attempted robbery at a premises. The term does not include audible alarms affixed to an
automobile. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-15, Sec. 1)
Subd. 5. False alarm means the occurrence of an alarm in an alarm system for any reason other
than an unauthorized intrusion or attempted robbery alarm.
Subd. 6. Financial institution means a bank, savings and loan association, or credit union.
920.05. Miscellaneous rules. Subdivision 1. Local exterior alarms with audible sound may not sound for a
period exceeding 15 minutes.
Subd. 2. A person may not intentionally set off a false alarm.
Subd. 3. The use of automatic dialing devices is permitted, except that such devices may not be set
or programmed to dial the Robbinsdale police department.
Subd. 4. Alarm businesses doing business within the city must register with the police department.
The registration must include the following information:
(a) A description of the types of alarm systems sold or leased by the business.
(b) A description of the services provided by the business.
Robbinsdale City Code 920.05, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2018)
(c) A list of the names and addresses of persons in the city to whom the business has sold or
leased alarm systems or to whom the business provides the services.
(d) A list of individuals employed by the business as installers or servicers of the alarm
systems.
Subd. 5. Alarm users whose protected premises are located in the city must provide, upon the
occurrence of its first false alarm and on an ongoing basis, the following information:
(a) The names and addresses of the alarm user, alarm owner (if different than the alarm user),
and the alarm servicer.
(b) The type of alarm system being used.
(c) The person designated by the alarm user as its contact person for purposes of alarm-related
matters.
The provision of this information is an ongoing requirement. The police department must be immediately
notified of any additions or changes.
920.07. Alarm equipment specifications. Except as otherwise provided in this section, alarm equipment
may not be installed that is not listed on the burglary protection equipment list of the Underwriters
Laboratory. Non-UL listed alarm equipment may continue to be used if the equipment was installed and in
use on August 20, 1989 or if the police department has determined that the specifications of the equipment
are substantially equivalent to or exceed the UL standards. Equipment shall be installed according to UL
standards or approved equivalent. This subsection is not to be construed to require UL certification or an
alarm system. Equipment of a type or category for which no UL standards have been established are not
subject to the requirements of this section.
920.09. False alarms. Subdivision 1. General rule. Except for false alarms occurring in the first 30 days of
operation of a new alarm system, the alarm user is subject to the requirements and penalties provided below
for false alarms occurring in the user's alarm system.
Subd. 2. Signed statement. Within five days of each false alarm, the alarm user must submit a
signed statement to the police department stating the apparent cause of the false alarm and the measures
taken or to be taken to remedy the problem.
Subd. 3. Penalties. A penalty must be paid by the alarm user to the city for each false alarm in
excess of three per calendar year. The penalty is set forth in Appendix B. Payment of the penalty may be
enforced by civil action. (Amended, Ord. No. 2018-02)
Subd. 4. Exceptions. A penalty is not due and an alarm will not be credited as a false alarm if it is
shown that the false alarm was the result of damage to utility lines, tornadoes, lightning, earthquakes, or
similar severe weather conditions.
Robbinsdale City Code 920.09, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2003)
Subd. 5. Appeal. An alarm user required by the city to pay a user fee as a result of a false alarm
may appeal the false alarm charge in writing to the city manager via the chief of police. The written appeal
must be filed with the chief of police within ten days of the date of notice of the false alarm charge. The city
manager may make a final determination as to whether the alarm user must pay a false alarm user fee.
Subd. 6. False alarm permits. (Deleted, Ord. No. 03-13)
Subd. 7. Requirements and duties.
(a) Letter of contestation. After the chief of police determines that a false alarm has occurred
at an address, the alarm user at that address may submit a letter of contestation to the chief
of police to explain the cause of the alarm activation. If the chief of police determines that
the alarm was not properly designated as a false alarm caused by conditions beyond the
control of the alarm user, the alarm will not be counted as a false alarm at that address. The
second instance of faulty equipment will be deemed to be within the control of the alarm
user. (Added, Ord. No. 97-15, Sec. 2)
Subd. 8. Revocation and suspension of permit. (Deleted, Ord. No. 03-13)
920.11. Financial institutions. Subdivision 1. Annunciator. Financial institutions having an alarm system
with multiple sensors must have an in-house annunciator panel providing specific annunciation of the
sensors at a private monitoring location on the premises. When, in the judgment of the chief of police, such
a private monitoring location is not possible upon the premises, the requirements of this subsection may be
waived.
Subd. 2. Application. Alarm systems installed in financial institutions after August 20, 1989 must
have such annunciator panels when installed. Alarm systems in use by financial institutions on August 20,
1989 must have the annunciator panels by August 20, 1990.
Robbinsdale City Code 925.01 (Rev. 2003)
Section 925 – Firearms and Weapons
(Added, Ord. No. 03-31)
925.01. Firearms and weapons. Subdivision 1. Definitions. For the purposes of this section the terms
defined in this subsection have the meanings given them.
Subd. 2. Firearm means any weapon, by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a
projectile or projectiles by means of an explosive, a gas or compressed air.
Subd. 3. Weapon means (i) any firearm, whether loaded or unloaded; and (ii) any other device
designed, used or intended to be used in a manner capable of producing death or great bodily harm.
925.03. General rules. Subdivision 1. Discharge. It is unlawful for a person to discharge or use any
firearm or other weapon in the city except as provided in this subsection.
Subd. 2. Archery. It is unlawful to discharge an arrow from a bow except on private property
with the consent of the owner of the property and on public property designated for such activity.
Subd. 3. Hunting. Hunting with dogs, weapons, or both is prohibited in the city.
Subd. 4. Prohibited acts; prohibited weapons. Prohibited acts include:
(a) Recklessly handling or using a firearm, bow and arrow, dangerous weapon or explosive
so as to endanger the safety of another.
(b) Subject to the exceptions contained in subdivision 5 below, intentionally pointing a firearm
of any kind, whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another person.
(c) Possessing, on the person or on or about the person’s clothes, or in any portable container
such as a purse or briefcase in the person’s immediate control any device known as a sling
shot, sand club, metal knuckles, switchblade, dagger, stiletto, dirk, blackjack, chain club,
pipe club, Molotov cocktail, grenade, throwing star or similar star or any similar weapon.
(d) Possessing, on the person or on or about the person’s clothes, or in any portable container
such as a purse or briefcase in the person’s immediate control, any other dangerous article
or substance for the purpose of being used unlawfully as a weapon against another.
Subd. 5. Exceptions. A weapon of any type may be discharged in the city by:
(a) Peace officers in carrying out their official duty.
(b) Persons engaged in target shooting at inanimate objects within an enclosed structure that is
soundproofed to prevent the sound to be heard by persons on adjoining property and in a
manner such that the projectiles are contained within the enclosed structure.
(c) Persons acting in self-defense as permitted by law.
(d) Members of the armed services of either the United States or the state of Minnesota for use
in the course of their duties.
Robbinsdale City Code 927.01
(Revised 2015)
Section 927 – Repeat Nuisance Service Call Fee
(Added, Ord. No. 07-14, Sec. 1)
927.01. Repeat nuisance call service fee. Subdivision 1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect
the public safety, health and welfare and to prevent and abate repeat service response calls by the city to the
same property or location for nuisance service calls, as defined herein, which prevent police or public safety
services to other residents of the city. It is the intent of the city by the adoption of this section to impose and
collect service call fees from the owner or occupant, or both, of property to which city officials must
repeatedly respond for any repeat nuisance event or activity that generates extraordinary costs to the city.
The repeat nuisance service call fee is intended to cover that cost over and above the cost of providing
normal law or code enforcement services and police protection city-wide.
Subd. 2. Scope and application. This section applies to all owners and occupants of private
property which is the subject or location of the repeat nuisance service call by the city. This section
applies to any repeat nuisance service call made by a city of Robbinsdale peace officer; part-time peace
officer; community service, animal control and/or code enforcement officers.
927.03. Definition of nuisance conduct. For purposes of this section, the term “nuisance conduct” means
any activity, conduct, or condition occurring upon private property within the city that unreasonably
annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any member of the public; or
will, or tend to, alarm, anger or disturb others or provoke breach of the peace, to which the city is required
to respond, including, but not limited to the following:
(a) Any activity, conduct, or condition deemed as a public nuisance under any
provision of the city code;
(b) Any activity, conduct, or condition in violation of any provision of chapter IX of
the city code;
(c) Any conduct, activity or condition constituting a violation of any Minnesota state
law prohibiting or regulating prostitution, gambling, controlled substances, use of
firearms; and
(d) Any conduct, activity, or condition constituting disorderly conduct under chapter
609 of Minnesota Statutes.
927.05. Repeat nuisance service call fee. Subdivision 1. The city may impose a repeat nuisance service
call fee upon the owner or the occupant, or both, of private property if the city has rendered services or
responded to the property on three or more occasions within a period of 365 days in response to or for the
abatement of nuisance conduct. The city may impose an administrative penalty pursuant to city code
section 117 upon the owner or the occupant, or both, of private property if the city has rendered services or
responded to the property on five or more occasions within a period of 730 days in response to or for the
abatement of nuisance conduct. (Amended, Ord. No. 15-05)
Subd. 2. The repeat nuisance service call fee will be as set forth in the city’s fee schedule
(appendix B of the city code, as amended). An additional amount may be imposed to reflect the salaries
of police officers while responding to or remaining at the nuisance event, the pro rata cost of equipment,
the cost of repairing city equipment and property damaged as a result of the nuisance call, and the cost of
any medical treatment of injured officers.
Robbinsdale City Code 927.05, Subd. 3
(Revised 2013)
Subd. 3. A repeat nuisance service call fee imposed under this section will be deemed delinquent
if it is not paid within ten calendar days after the city mails the billing statement for the fee. If said fee, or
any portion thereof, is unpaid, then a late payment fee will also be charged per the schedule of fees as set
forth on Appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No. 13-01)
927.07. Notice. Subdivision 1. No repeat nuisance service call fee may be imposed against an owner or
occupant of property without first providing the owner or occupant with written notice of the two
previous nuisance service calls which are the basis for the fee. The written notice must:
Subd. 2. Identify the nuisance conduct that previously occurred on the property, and the dates of
the previous nuisance conduct; and
Subd. 3. State that the owner or occupant may be subject to a nuisance call service fee if a third
nuisance service call is rendered to the property for the same nuisance conduct; and
Subd. 4. State that the city has the right to seek other legal remedies or actions for abatement of
the nuisance or compliance with the law; and
Subd. 5. Be served personally in the manner required by the Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure
or be served by U.S. Mail upon the owner or occupant at the last known address.
927.09. Right to appeal. Subdivision 1. When the city mails the billing statement for the repeat nuisance
service call fee, the city will inform the owner or occupant of their right to request a hearing.
Subd. 2. The owner or occupant upon whom the fee is imposed must request a hearing within ten
business days of the mailing of the billing statement, excluding the day the statement is mailed. The
request for a hearing must be in writing and delivered to the city clerk. The hearing will occur within
14 calendar days of the date of the request. If the owner or occupant fails to request a hearing within the
time and in the manner required under this section, the right to a hearing is waived. (Amended, Ord.
No. 13-01)
Subd. 3. The hearing will be conducted by the city manager in an informal manner. The
Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure and Rules of Evidence will not be strictly applied. After considering
all evidence submitted, the city manager will make written Findings of Fact and Conclusions regarding
the nuisance conduct and the imposition of the repeat nuisance service fee. The city manager will serve
the Findings of Fact and Conclusions upon the owner or occupant by U.S. Mail within five calendar days
of the hearing. (Amended, Ord. No. 13-01)
Subd. 4. If the owner or occupants fail to appear at the scheduled hearing date, the right to a
hearing is waived.
Subd. 5. Upon waiver of the right to hearing under subdivision 2 or 4 or upon service of the
hearing officer’s Findings of Fact and Conclusions that the repeat nuisance call service fee is warranted,
the owner or occupant must pay the fee imposed within ten calendar days of service in the manner
required by Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure or be served by U.S. Mail upon the owner or occupant at
the last known address. (Amended, Ord. No. 13-01)
Robbinsdale City Code 927.11
(Revised 2013)
927.11. Legal remedies nonexclusive. Nothing in this section will be construed to limit the city’s other
available legal remedies, including criminal, civil, injunctive or others, for any violation of the law which
may constitute nuisance conduct.
927.13. Applicability of repeat nuisance service call fee. The city may not impose a repeat nuisance
service call fee against an owner or occupant for a police response relating to emergency assistance,
including, but not limited to, domestic, spousal and child abuse.
927.15. Recovery of fee. Subdivision 1. If a repeat nuisance service fee is not paid within 30 calendar
days after the billing statement is sent by the city, it will constitute: (Amended, Ord. No. 13-01)
(a) a lien on the real property where the violation occurred; or
(b) a personal obligation of the owner or occupant in all other situations.
Subd. 2. A lien may be assessed against the property and collected in the same manner as taxes.
Subd. 3. A personal obligation may be collected by appropriate legal means.
Robbinsdale City Code 1000.01 (Rev. 2018)
CHAPTER X
LICENSES AND PERMITS; PROCEDURES AND FEES
PART A
Section 1000 - General Provisions
1000.01. Policy and purpose of chapter. By the enactment of this chapter, the city council intends to
establish to the maximum degree possible a uniform system for the issuance, revocation, suspension and
renewal of licenses and permits for activities for which licenses and permits are required by this code. The
fees for licenses and permits are set forth in Appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No. 18-02)
1000.03. Application of chapter. Subdivision 1. General. Where a provision of this code requiring a
license or a permit contains no procedure for issuance, revocation, suspension, renewal or fee, the provisions
of this chapter apply.
Subd. 2. Other provisions. Where a provision of this code requiring a license or a permit contains
procedures for its term, issuance, revocation, suspension, renewal or the procedure for a pro rata payment or
refund of a fee, that provision prevails over this chapter.
Subd. 3. Conflicts. Where a direct conflict exists between the amount of a license or permit fee set
by any provision of this code and a fee set by Appendix B, the fee set by Appendix B applies.
1000.05. Notice and hearing. Subdivision 1. Vending machines. Prior to the increase of a license fee for
vending machines as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 471.707, the council must hold a public hearing
on the question of the increase. The clerk must mail written notice of the time and date of the hearing to
vending machine licensees at least 30 days prior to the hearing.
Subd. 2. Liquor and beer. Prior to the increase of the license fees for intoxicating liquor and
non-intoxicating liquor both on sale and off sale, the council must hold a public hearing on the question of
the increase. The clerk must mail written notice of the time and date of the hearing to holders of such
licenses at least 30 days prior to the hearing.
Robbinsdale City Code 1005.01 (Rev. 2011)
PART A
Section 1005 - Licensing Procedures
1005.01. Licenses required. It is unlawful for a person to engage in a trade, profession, business or
privilege in the City for which a license is required by a provision of this code without first obtaining a
license from the City in the manner provided in this section.
1005.03. Application. Application for a license is made to the Clerk on forms provided by the City. The
applicant must state the location of the proposed activity and such other facts as are required for or
applicable to the granting of the license.
1005.05. Payment of fee. The fees required for a license must be paid at the office of the Clerk before the
granting of the license. Except as otherwise provided in this code, a license fee once paid will not be
refunded.
1005.07. Bond and insurance. Required bonds must be in form satisfactory to the City Attorney, be
executed by two sureties, or a surety company, and be subject to the approval of the Manager and the
Council. Where policies of insurance are required, the policies must be approved as to substance and form
by the City Attorney. Satisfactory evidence of coverage by bond or insurance must be filed with the Clerk
before the license is issued.
Unless specified otherwise the applicant must provide a certificate of insurance with the City with public
liability insurance of not less than $1,500,000 combined single limit issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota. The policy must provide that it may not be cancelled by
the issuer except upon ten days’ written notice to the City. The policy of insurance must be maintained in
its original amount by the licensee during the period for which the license is in effect. If the insurance is
cancelled the license or permit will be automatically suspended until the insurance is replaced. The City
must be named as a certificate holder, or additional insured, on the insurance policy depending upon the
provisions of the contract. Any requests for lesser amounts of insurance require prior Council approval.
(Added, Ord. No. 03-22; Amended, Ord. No. 11-06)
1005.09. Approval or denial of licenses. Where the approval of a City or state officer or the Council is
required prior to the issuance of a license, the approval must be presented to the Clerk before the license is
issued. A license may not be approved by a city officer or issued by the Clerk if it appears that the conduct
of the activity for which a license is sought will be contrary to the health, safety or welfare of the public or
any regulation, law or ordinance applicable to such activity. Unless otherwise provided, every license shall
be approved by the Council before issuance or may be ratified by the Council at its next regular meeting
following its issuance by the City Clerk. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-05; Ord. No. 09-05)
1005.11. License term. The term of a license is January 1 to December 31. Where the issuance of licenses
for periods of less than one year is permitted, the effective date of the license is the date of its issuance.
Subd. 1. Renewal. License renewals are issued subject to the same conditions imposed in the
original license. Where City code requirements for renewal of licenses are referred to this section, the City
Clerk may issue the license renewal once the City Clerk determines that conditions have been met.
Otherwise license renewals are issued in the same manner as the original license. Licensees must make
application to renew their licenses before December 15 of the preceding year. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-05;
Ord. No. 09-05)
Robbinsdale City Code 1005.11, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2013)
Subd. 2. Late fees. A licensee who fails to submit a completed renewal application before
December 15 of the preceding year, but submits it prior to January 1, shall be subject to an administrative
service fee of $50.00, in addition to the license fee. As an alternative, the licensed business may pay the
regular license fee and remain closed from January 1 until the City Council approves the license.
Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. (Added, Ord. No. 02-05, Amended, Ord. 13-01)
1005.13. License certificates. License certificates must show the date of issue, the activity licensed and the
term of the license. Licenses must be signed by the Mayor and Clerk and impressed with the city seal.
1005.15. Exhibition of license certificate. A licensee must carry the license certificate upon the licensee's
person at all times when engaged in the activity for which the license was granted. Where the licensed
activity is conducted at a fixed place of business or establishment, the certificate must be displayed in some
conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee must present the license certificate when applying for a
renewal and upon demand of any police officer or authorized representative of the city.
Robbinsdale City Code 1005.17 (Rev. 2005)
1005.17. Transfer of license. Unless otherwise provided in this code, licenses are not transferable without
the authorization of the council.
1005.19. Renewal of license. License renewals are issued in the same manner and subject to the same
conditions as original licenses.
1005.21. Revocation; denial; suspension. A license issued or to be issued by the city may be denied,
suspended or revoked by the council for any of the following causes:
a) fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement contained in the application for license, or
made in carrying on the licensed activity;
b) conviction of any crime, or misdemeanor, pertaining to license held or applied for, subject
to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, chapter 364;
c) conducting such licensed activity in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, or a
menace to the health, safety and welfare of the public, or a disturbance of the peace or
comfort of the residents of the city, upon recommendation of the city health authorities or
other appropriate city officials;
d) expiration or cancellation of any required bond or insurance, or failure to notify the city
within a reasonable time of changes in the terms of the insurance or the carriers;
e) actions unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license granted;
f) violation of a regulation or provision of this code applicable to the activity for which the
license has been granted, or any regulation or law of the state so applicable;
g) failure to continuously comply with the conditions required as precedent to the approval of
the license.
1005.23. Hearing. A license may not be suspended or revoked until after a hearing is granted to the
licensee. The hearing is held before the city council upon due notice to the licensee stating the time and
place of such hearing, together with a statement of the violation alleged to be the cause for the revocation or
suspension of the license.
1005.25. Temporary suspensions. The city council may temporarily suspend a license pending a hearing on
revocation or suspension when in its judgment the public health, safety and welfare is endangered by the
continuance of the licensed activity.
1005.27. Inspections. The city health authorities and other appropriate city officials may enter upon the
premises where a licensed activity is being conducted for the purpose of inspection at reasonable hours.
1005.29. Pro rata fees. On an initial application for a license, the fee, except as otherwise provided by law
or this code, will not be pro rated based upon the remaining license period. (Amended, Ord. 05-01)
Robbinsdale City Code 1005.31 (Rev. 2006)
1005.31. Payment of fees. Subdivision 1. Payment. The permit fee and other fees and charges set forth in
Appendix B must be collected by the city before the issuance of a license. The city clerk, building
inspector, or other person authorized to issue a permit for which the payment of a fee is required under the
provisions of this code may not issue a license until the fee has been paid.
Subd. 2. Double fees. If a person begins work for which a license from the city is required without
having secured the necessary license, either previous to or on the date of commencement of the work, that
person must, when subsequently securing the license, pay: (a) if the application is made within ten business
days after beginning the permitted activity 1.5 times the required fee; and (b) double the fee thereafter. The
applicant is subject to the penalty provisions of this code.
Subd. 3. Refunds. Application fees may not be refunded unless the application is withdrawn five
days prior to its referral to the (a) planning commission or (b) the council. Refunds are subject to a 20%
service charge and costs related to public hearing notification. (Amended, Ord. No. 06-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 1010.01 (Rev. 2011)
PART A
Section 1010 - Permit Procedures
1010.01. Permits required. It is unlawful to conduct an activity in the city for which a permit is required by
a provision of this code without first obtaining the permit from the city in the manner provided in this
section.
1010.03. Application for permit. Application for a permit is made to the city manager on forms furnished
by the city. The application must contain information as to location, nature, extent and costs of the proposed
structure, work, installation, activity, or other purpose, and other information that a duly authorized person
may require under this code. The application must contain a declaration that the facts and representations
therein made are true and correct, subscribed to by the person or persons, or officers or agents of a
corporation, applying for the permit.
1010.05. Granting of permits. Upon payment to the city by the applicant of the required fee, and upon
approval of the appropriate inspector, the permit will be issued, except where council approval is required,
in which case the appropriate officer may issue the permit only after approval is granted by the council.
1010.07. Payment of fees. Subdivision 1. Payment. The permit fee and other fees and charges set forth in
Appendix B must be collected by the city before the issuance of any permit. The city clerk, building
inspector, or other person authorized to issue a permit for which the payment of a fee is required under the
provisions of this code may not issue a permit until the fee has been paid.
Subd. 2. Double fees. If a person begins work for which a permit from the city is required without
having secured the necessary permit, either previous to or on the date of commencement of the work, that
person must, when subsequently securing such permit, pay: (a) if the application is made within ten
business days after beginning the permitted activity 1.5 times the required fee; and (b) double the fee
thereafter. The applicant is subject to the penalty provisions of this code. Building permit fees are not
subject to this subdivision.
Subd. 3. Refunds. Application fees may not be refunded unless the application is withdrawn prior
to the necessary reviews and being ready for issuance. Refunds are subject to a 20% service charge.
(Amended, Ord. No. 06-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 1015.01 (Rev. 2011)
PART B
Section 1015 – Domestic Partnership Registry
(Added, Ord. No. 11-08)
1015.01. Domestic partnerships. Subdivision 1. Purpose and finding. The City of Robbinsdale hereby
authorizes and establishes a voluntary program of registration of domestic partnerships. The domestic
partnership registry is a means by which committed couples who reside in Robbinsdale and who share a life
and home together may document their relationship, and enjoy recognition of and respect for their human
rights. Establishing this registry may provide convenience for domestic partners seeking to provide
documentation of their domestic partnership.
Subd. 2. Definitions. The following terms used in this Code have the meanings given in this
section:
"Domestic partners." Two adults who meet all the following:
(a) are not related by blood closer than permitted under marriage laws of the state;
(b) are competent to enter into a contract;
(c) are jointly responsible to each other for the necessities of life;
(d) are committed to one another to the same extent as married persons are to each other,
except for the traditional marital status and solemnities;
(e) do not have any other domestic partner(s);
(f) are both at least 18 years of age; and
(g) reside in a shared residence in the City of Robbinsdale.
"Domestic Partnership." The relationship of two persons who are currently-registered as domestic
partners.
Subd. 3. Registration. The City Clerk shall accept an application in a form provided by the City to
register domestic partners who assert in such application that they meet the definition of domestic partners.
The application shall contain the following statement: "The City does not provide legal advice concerning
domestic partnerships. Applicants and registrants may wish to consult with an attorney for such advice
including but not limited to: wills, medical matters, finances, powers of attorney, children and dependents,
medical, health care and employment benefits." The application must be accompanied by the license fee set
by Appendix B. Each partner shall also be required to provide a current state issued identification card
identifying legal name, address, and birth date. The fees for providing certified copies of registrations and
terminations of partnerships shall be set by Appendix B. The City Clerk shall provide the registration
certificate to the partners along with a requested number of certified copies. The registration certificate may
be used as evidence of the existence of a domestic partnership. The City Clerk shall keep a record of all
registrations of domestic partnership and notices of termination. The records shall be maintained so that
notices of termination are filed with the registration of domestic partnership to which they pertain. The
application, the registration certificate and termination notices shall constitute government data and will be
subject to disclosure pursuant to the terms of the Minnesota Government Data Practices Act.
Robbinsdale City Code 1015.01, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2011)
Subd. 4. Termination.
(a) A domestic partnership terminates when the earliest of the following occurs:
(1) either partner dies; or
(2) 45 days after one partner:
(i) sends the other partner written notice of termination of the partnership; and
(ii) files the notice of termination and an affidavit of service of the notice on
the other partner with the City Clerk by sending the documents by certified
mail.
(b) Upon death of a partner or receipt of a qualifying notice of termination, the City Clerk will
notify on the face of the registration certificate that the domestic partnership has been
terminated.
Robbinsdale City Code 1100.01 (Rev. 2002)
CHAPTER XI
BUSINESS AND TRADE REGULATIONS
Section 1100 - Amusements
1100.01. Mini golf. Subdivision 1. Definition. For purposes of this subsection the term "public miniature
golf course" or "practice golf course" means a building, enclosure, or place or premises where the public is
directly or indirectly charged a fee or admission for the use of the premises or the equipment to practice or
play golf, miniature golf or similar activities related to golf.
Subd. 2. License. It is unlawful to install, conduct, maintain or operate a public miniature or
practice golf course without a license.
Subd. 3. Application. Application for a license is made to the council, and filed with the clerk on
forms furnished by the clerk. The application must be accompanied by the license fee set by Appendix B.
Subd. 4. Conditions of license. Licenses for miniature or practice golf courses expire annually on
December 31. Applications for licenses are considered by the city council, and, if approved by the council,
a license shall be issued by the clerk. Licenses are not transferable. License renewal is subject to the license
provisions described in section 1005 Licensing Procedures. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-05)
Subd. 5. License restrictions. A license will not be issued to operate a public miniature golf course
or practice golf course on a block adjacent to a block where another golf course is operating. Traffic and the
parking of automobiles on public streets are subject to reasonable rules and orders of the police department.
Subd. 6. Display. The license must be in a suitable frame, having a clear glass face and a
substantial wood or metal back, so that the whole of the license may be seen. The license must be posted
and displayed in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. It is unlawful to post a license or permit it to
be posted upon premises other than those for which the license was issued or to knowingly deface or destroy
the license.
Subd. 7. Other conditions. It is unlawful for a licensee or for any employee of a licensee to:
(a) permit dice to be thrown for money or for anything of value, or permit playing of cards,
raffles or other games of chance, or any form of gambling, in the licensed premises or in
any booth, yard, garden, or other place adjacent to the licensed premises or connected with
it;
(b) permit any person upon the premises to become disorderly; or
Robbinsdale City Code 1100.01, Subd. 8
(Rev. 1997)
(c) keep the licensed premises open or to operate the same between the hours of 12:30 a.m. and
8 a.m. of any weekday, or between the hours of 12:30 a.m. Sunday and 12:00 noon Sunday.
Subd. 8. Sanitary rest rooms. The licensed premises must be equipped with and provide adequate
sanitary, separate toilet facilities for male and female patrons.
1100.03. (Repealed, Ord. No. 97-07)
1100.05. Theatres. Subdivision 1. License required. It is unlawful to engage in the business of keeping,
maintaining, conducting, or operating a theatre, moving picture house, vaudeville house, or place for
theatrical performances in the city without a license.
Subd. 2. Application. Application for a license is filed with the city clerk in writing, designating
the place where the business is to be carried on, the name of the applicant, and other information required by
the city clerk. The license must be authorized by the council.
Robbinsdale City Code 1100.05, Subd. 3
(Rev. 2003)
Subd. 3. Terms. The annual license fee is set by Appendix B. Licenses expire annually on
December 31. Applications for licenses are considered by the city council and issued by the clerk. Licenses
are not transferable. License renewal is subject to the license provisions described in section 1005
Licensing Procedures. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-05)
Subd. 4. Revocation. Theatre licenses may be revoked by the council for cause after hearing.
1100.07. Carnivals, shows, public entertainments. Subdivision 1. License required. It is unlawful to give
or maintain a show or public entertainment, circus, carnival, game or concert to which an admission is
charged or for which private profit is expected, either directly or indirectly, without a license. Licenses are
not required for an entertainment, other than a circus or outdoor carnival, given by amateurs, or in which the
performers receive no pay, or which is given for the benefit of any school, church, or benevolent institution
for a charitable purpose. The council may waive the license fee in the case of circus or outdoor carnival
given for the benefit of a school, church or benevolent institution or for a charitable purpose.
Subd. 2. Application. Application for a license is made to the city clerk. The application must
contain: (i) the name and address of the applicant; (ii) the nature of the entertainment; (iii) the place, time
and duration thereof; (iv) method of advertising; (v) references as to financial responsibility of applicant,
and (vi) such other information as the city council may require. The application must be made at least 30
days before the beginning of the proposed entertainment.
Subd. 3. Fees: bond and insurance. The application must be accompanied by the fee set by
Appendix B. The application for a street entertainment, tent show, carnival or circus must be accompanied
by a $1,000,000 combined single limit insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the state of Minnesota. Additionally, a cash or corporate surety bond to be approved by the
council in the amount of $1,000, conditioned that the licensee will not damage streets or public property and
will promptly and fully pay for or repair any damages so done, that all provisions of this code and conditions
imposed by the council in the issuance of the license are fully complied with by the licensee, and for the
benefit of persons injured or damaged by the licensed activity. (Amended, Ord. 03-22)
Subd. 4. Advertising. A licensed entertainment may not be advertised by shouting or calling out or
by the playing of music or a musical instrument or other device upon the street or other public grounds. A
licensee may not distribute handbills by putting them in automobiles or by handing them to persons in the
streets.
Subd. 5. Prohibitions. Exhibition of immoral, vulgar or obscene character may not be given. The
presenting of such a performance is grounds for revocation of the license and is a violation of this
subsection.
Robbinsdale City Code 1100.07, Subd. 6
(Rev. 1997)
Subd. 6. Hours. A licensed entertainment may not be operated between the hours of 11:00 o'clock
p.m. and 8:00 o'clock a.m.
Subd. 7. Cleaning. The licensee must keep and maintain the licensed premises in a clean, sanitary
and orderly condition while the entertainment is in operation. Upon the termination of the entertainment the
licensee must promptly remove any temporary facilities, clean up all papers and other debris which have
accumulated, and restore the property used and adjoining property to the same condition as existed prior to
the commencement of the entertainment. The cleanup work must be done quietly and at reasonable hours.
Subd. 8. Conditions. The council may impose reasonable conditions in a license. In connection
with outdoor carnivals and circuses, the council will consider the following matters and impose restrictions
to protect the general public and the residents of property adjacent to the property where the licensed
activity is conducted:
(a) sanitation facilities for employees and patrons;
(b) size of the parcel of property in relation to the amount of property which will be occupied
by tents or other structures;
(c) adequacy of off-street parking facilities;
(d) compliance by the applicant with other applicable provisions of this code; and
(e) other factors deemed necessary by the council.
Subd. 9. Exceptions. This subsection does not apply to entertainment regulated by other provisions
of this code.
1100.09. Mechanical amusement devices. Subdivision 1. Findings. The council finds that excessive use of
mechanical amusement devices, including video games, has the potential to cause adverse health effects and
further that such devices pose a greater threat to the health and well being of children than of adults. The
council further finds that such devices tend to encourage crowds, noise, loitering, and gambling, as well as
other violations of state law and local ordinances wherever they are located and that as such they pose
special law enforcement problems, which problems can be lessened by permitting use of mechanical
amusement devices only in arcades. It is the purpose of this subsection to lessen the health threat to minors,
not accompanied by their parent or guardian, of excessive video game use and to reduce the nuisance and
law enforcement problems caused by mechanical amusement devices. The provisions of this subsection are
in furtherance of those objectives. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-07)
Subd. 2. Definitions. For purposes of this subsection the terms defined in this subdivision have the
meanings given them.
a) "Mechanical amusement device" means, but is not limited to, any of the following types of
equipment available for public use:
Robbinsdale City Code 1100.09, Subd 3
(Rev. 1997)
(1) Any variety of pool, billiard, foosball, or ping-pong table and any machine or
electronic device including, but not limited to, any pinball machine, electronic
video game, mechanical miniature pool table, bowling machine, shuffle board,
electric rifle or gun range, miniature mechanical electronic device and game or
amusement patterned after baseball, basketball, hockey, similar games and any like
device, machine, or game which may be played, which table, device or game is
commonly, but not necessarily, played by the insertion of a coin or coins or at a fee
fixed and charged by the establishment in which any such table, device, or machine
is located.
(2) A coin-operated ride that is manually, mechanically, or electrically operated and
customarily placed in a public location and that does not normally require the
supervision or services of an operator, and any device designed for and used
exclusively as a ride by children including, but not limited to, any kiddie car,
miniature airplane ride, mechanical horse, and other miniature mechanical device,
not operated as part of or in connection with any separately licensed carnival,
circus, show or other entertainment or exhibition.
(3) A coin operated juke box defined as any music vending machine, contrivance or
device upon which the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, key or credit into
any slot, crevice, or other opening or by the payment of any price, operates or may
be operated for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
(b) "Minor" means any person less than 18 years of age: "unaccompanied minor" means a
minor without the minor's parent or legal guardian present.
(c) "Mechanical amusement center" means a business at one location used primarily for the
operation of mechanical amusement devices consisting in the operation of ten or more
machines and open for public use and participation; the term does not include a licensed
premises or business which, by law or ordinance, a minor may not enter unless
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-07)
Subd. 3. License required. It is unlawful to maintain, keep, or sell within the city a mechanical
amusement device in a business open for public use without a license. This subsection does not apply to
mechanical amusement devices held or kept in storage or for sale and not actually in use or displayed for
use. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-07)
Subd. 4. Types. In the license application, the applicant must disclose the type of establishment for
which licenses are sought. There are three types of establishments:
(a) those in which unaccompanied minors are not normally permitted;
Robbinsdale City Code 1100.09, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2002)
(b) those where both adults and unaccompanied minors are permitted, not including
mechanical amusement arcades, (referred to in this subsection as "mixed locations"); and
(c) mechanical amusement centers. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-07)
Subd. 5. Fees. The annual license fee for mechanical amusement devices or mechanical
amusement centers are set by Appendix B. Licenses expire annually on December 31. Applications for
licenses are considered by the city council and issued by the clerk. Licenses are not transferable. License
renewal is subject to the license provisions described in section 1005 Licensing Procedures. (Amended,
Ord. No. 97-07; Ord. No. 02-05)
Subd. 6. Form and display. The license must describe the device and show the name of the owner,
address where the device is located, the license fee and the period for which license is granted. The license
must be conspicuously displayed where the machine is operated.
Subd. 7. Gambling prohibited. It is unlawful to permit the operation of a licensed machine or
device for the making of side bets or gambling. A prize, award, merchandise, gift, money or thing of value
may not be given to a player.
Subd. 8. Operation by minors.
(a) An unaccompanied minor may not operate a mechanical amusement device in a location in
which unaccompanied minors are not normally permitted. Mechanical amusement devices
in such locations must be clearly posted "Minors Prohibited from Operation". A location in
which an unaccompanied minor is found operating a machine will have all its licenses
immediately suspended pending a hearing by the city council. During the suspension the
machine or machines in the location must be rendered inoperable.
(b) An unaccompanied minor may not operate a mechanical amusement device in a mixed
location. Mechanical amusement devices in such locations must be clearly posted "Minors
Not Accompanied by a Parent or Guardian are Prohibited from Operation". A mixed
location in which an unaccompanied minor is found operating a machine will have all its
licenses immediately suspended pending a hearing by the city council. During the
suspension the machine or machines in the location must be rendered inoperable.
Subd. 9. Prohibited activities. The following activities are prohibited on a licensed premises or in
connection with an amusement device:
(a) gambling or wagering of any type;
(b) horseplay, profane language, or abuse of a mechanical amusement device;
(c) loitering in the room where a mechanical amusement device is located;
Robbinsdale City Code 1100.09, Subd. 10
(Rev. 1997)
(d) operation of a mechanical amusement device by anyone under the age of 16 during school
hours.
These regulations must be posted by the licensee in an easily readable form, provided by the city clerk, in a
conspicuous place in the room in which a mechanical amusement device is located. (Amended, Ord. No.
97-07)
Subd. 10. Mechancial amusement center restrictions. In addition to the prohibited activities
described in subdivisions 7 and 9 of this subsection, the following restrictions apply to mechanical
amusement centers:
(a) no amusement center shall be operated so as to constitute a public nuisance;
(b) the licensee shall maintain order on the licensed premises at all times. This duty includes,
but is not limited to, prevention of the following:
(1) harassment of any person in or adjacent to the licensed premises by any person on
the licensed premises;
(2) the frequenting or use of licensed premises by any loud, boisterous, or disruptive
person;
(3) the frequenting or use of licensed premises by any person who engages in an act of
vandalism or destruction of property in or about or adjacent to the licensed
premises; or
(4) conduct by a person on the licensed premises, which conduct has an adverse effect
on adjacent property;
(c) the licensee shall see that the licensed premises does not become overcrowded so as to
constitute a hazard for health or safety of persons therein. The fire marshal shall designate
and post the maximum number of persons to be permitted on the licensed premises;
(d) the licensee shall provide an on-duty attendant at least 21 years of age upon the licensed
premises during business hours. The licensed premises shall be locked and closed to the
public whenever such attendant is not present thereon;
(e) it is unlawful for the licensee or any person operating an amusement center to sell, offer for
sale, knowingly permit to be sold or offered for sale, or to be dispensed or consumed, or
knowingly brought in the amusement center, any alcoholic beverage or prohibited drug, or
to knowingly allow any illegal activity upon the licensed premises including, but not
limited to, gambling;
(f) amusement centers shall be closed by 12:00 a.m. and may not open until 9:00 a.m. or until
12:00 noon on Sundays. At all other such times the licensed premises shall be locked and
closed to the public;
Robbinsdale City Code 1100.09, Subd. 11
(Rev. 2003)
(g) the interior of an amusement center shall be illuminated as to insure proper and complete
observation of patrons at all times. The building official may require conformance with
recommended standards for lighting levels to carry out the intent of this subdivision;
(h) the sale of smoke materials shall be prohibited on the site; and
(i) the premises in which an amusement center is located shall have adequate access as
required by the Uniform Building Code, but may have no entrances to or exit from
adjoining buildings, uses, or premises. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-07)
Subd. 11. Exceptions. No license is required for any juke box, mechanical amusement device, or
kiddie ride that is contained within the confines of a temporary carnival or fair which has been granted a
license pursuant to section 100.07 of this Code. Subdivisions 8, 9 and 10 do not apply to jukeboxes or
kiddie ride machines. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-07)
Subd. 12. Revocation. The council may for cause and on such reasonable hearing as it may
prescribe, revoke a license and the revocation is final for that location. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-07)
1100.11. Rebound tumbling equipment. (Deleted, Ord. No. 03-13)
Robbinsdale City Code 1105.01
(Rev. 2019)
Section 1105 - Lawful Gambling
1105.01. Lawful gambling. Subdivision 1. Adoption by reference. Minnesota Statutes, chapter 349
relating to charitable gambling and Minnesota Rules, chapter 7861 are hereby adopted by reference,
including definitions. (Amended, Ord. No. 19-17)
1105.03. (Deleted, Ord. No. 19-17)
1105.05. License or permit required. Lawful gambling shall be permitted only by organizations that have
either a currently valid gambling license issued by the Minnesota gambling control board, or a permit issued
by the city to conduct gambling which is exempt from licensing under Minnesota Statutes, section 349.166.
(Amended, Ord. No. 19-17)
1105.07. Investigation. Subdivision 1. State license. Upon receipt of notification from the Minnesota
gambling control board of the pendency of an application for issuance of a premises permit, the city
manager must transmit the notification to the police department for its review and recommendation. The
police department must investigate the matter and make its review and recommendation to the city council
as soon as possible, but in no event later than 25 days following receipt of the notification by the city. The
applicant must be notified in writing of the date on which the recommendation will be considered by the
council. (Amended, Ord. No. 19-17)
Subd. 2. Investigation fee. The applicant for an organization premises permit related to state
gambling license must pay, at the time of application to the city, an investigation fee as provided by
Appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No. 19-17)
Subd. 3. Council action. The council must consider the premises permit application not later than
60 days after written notification of the application has been received by the city. The council must consider
the report of the police department, statements from the applicant, and any other information which the
council believes to be relevant to the application. Thereafter the council may, by resolution, approve or
disapprove of the premises permit. If the investigation fee provided in subdivision 2 of this section has not
been paid within the time limit provided in such subdivision 2, the council may disapprove the license on
that basis. (Amended, Ord. No. 19-17)
Subd. 4. Criteria for council determination. In determining whether to approve or disapprove of the
premises permit, the city will disapprove of any application whereby the applicant seeks to be permitted to
conduct gambling: (Amended, Ord. No. 19-17)
(a) On premises which are not:
(1) owned or leased by the applicant, and
(2) located within the property which constitutes the principal place of business of the
applicant.
Robbinsdale City Code 1105.07, Subd. 4(b)
(Rev. 2019)
(b) Within a facility that is, in the case of bingo, already the location of licensed bingo unless:
(1) the applied for license, together with bingo licenses previously issued, will not
result in more than three bingo occasions per week; and (Amended Ord. No. 93-16,
Sec. 1)
(2) the proceeds from the conduct of applicant’s bingo activity will, in the opinion of
the council, be used to support or further the non-bingo related activities or
programs of the other individuals, corporations or partnerships licensed to conduct
bingo within the facility.
(c) If such activity is not, on the date of application, a lawful use for the premises in
accordance with the land use regulations of the city.
(d) If there are delinquent real estate taxes or special assessments payable with respect to the
premises on which the gambling is proposed to be conducted.
Subd. 5. Reports. As a further condition to approval of the premises permit, the council may
require that the applicant agree to promptly furnish the city with copies of all records, reports, accounts and
other data which applicant will be required to submit to the Minnesota gambling control board during the
term of the premises permit. Failure of the applicant to fulfill such requirement shall be reported to the
Minnesota gambling control board. (Amended, Ord. No. 19-17)
Subd. 6. Notification to Minnesota Gambling Control Board. The city clerk must transmit a
certified copy of the council resolution of approval or denial of the premises permit to the Minnesota
gambling control board. The city clerk shall take such actions as are reasonably necessary to deliver a copy
of such resolution to the board within 60 days from the date that the city received notice of the license
application. A copy of the resolution will also be provided to the applicant upon request. (Amended, Ord.
No. 19-17)
Subd. 7. Distribution of proceeds. Each state licensed with premises permit organization to
conduct gambling within the city shall contribute to a fund administered and regulated by the city,
without cost to such fund, for distribution by the city for purposes authorized under Minn. Stat. §
349.213, subd. 1, an amount equal to ten percent of the organization's net profits derived from lawful
gambling at all premises within the city. Payments to the fund shall be made annually on or before March
1 for the prior calendar year, and shall be submitted together with verifiable supporting documentation.
(Amended, Ord. No. 19-17)
Robbinsdale City Code 1105.07, Subd. 7
(Rev. 2019)
Each organization conducting lawful gambling within the city must expend at least 15 percent of its
lawful purpose expenditures on lawful purposes conducted or located within the trade area of the city. For
the purposes of this subsection, the term "trade area" means the area within the boundaries of the city and
within the boundaries of the cities of Crystal, Golden Valley, Brooklyn Center, Minneapolis and
Robbinsdale; provided that a contribution to Independent School District 281 is deemed to have been
made in the trade area of the city. This subsection applies only to lawful purpose expenditures of gross
profits derived from lawful gambling conducted at premises within the city. In addition to reporting
requirements in 1105.07 subd. 5, on or before each March 1, each organization must file with the city (a)
a report listing all lawful purpose expenditures in the prior calendar year, the name of the entity to which
each check was written, and the city location of the recipient; and (b) a report prepared by an independent
certified public accountant documenting compliance with this subdivision. (Amended, Ord. No. 19-17)
1105.09. Permit for lawful gambling exempt from state licensure. Subdivision 1. Application.
Organizations desiring to conduct lawful gambling within the city which is exempt from state licensure
under Minnesota Statutes, section 349.166, must apply to the city for a permit to conduct lawful gambling.
The application must be on forms prepared by the city clerk for that purpose and must be accompanied by
the required permit fee. The permit fee is contained in Appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No. 19-17)
Subd. 2. Issuance. The city clerk will issue the permit if the following conditions have been met:
(Amended, Ord. No. 19-17)
(a) Neither the designated gambling manager nor any of the organization’s officers have been
convicted of any offense which would indicate lack of suitability of the designated manager
or the organization to engage in the type of gambling activity for which the permit is
sought.
(b) The organization has existed in the city for at least three years prior to the date of
application or has been recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as exempt from income
taxation for the most recent three years.
(c) On the date of application, the organization has at least 15 active members.
(d) The organization will either own or lease the premises where the gambling activity would
be conducted.
(e) If the gambling activity is to occur on leased premises, the lease will be for a term at least
equal in length to the term of the permit being sought.
Subd. 3. (Deleted, Ord. No. 19-17)
Subd. 4. Fee: waiver. The permit fee may be waived in whole or in part by the city manager. The
portion of the fee waived shall be returned to the permittee upon issuance of the permit. If the permit is
denied, the city manager must retain $50 of the fee to reimburse the city for its administrative and
investigative expenses in connection with consideration of the permit application.
Robbinsdale City Code 1105.11
(Rev. 2019)
1105.11. Inspections. A peace officer or any properly designated employee of the city or the state of
Minnesota may enter, inspect and search business premises licensed under this section, during business
hours, without a warrant.
Robbinsdale City Code 1110.01
Section 1110 - Public Dances
1110.01. Definitions. Subdivision 1. For purposes of this subsection the terms "beer", "liquor", "furnish",
and "minor" have the meanings given by chapter XII of this code. The term "teenage club" means a place to
which minors are admitted whether on a membership basis or on an admission fee for each time of
admittance or free of charge.
1110.03. Exceptions. This subsection does not apply to dances or social affairs or gatherings (i) in a private
residence exclusively used as a private residence, or (ii) sponsored and under the auspices and under the
direction and control of:
(a) churches or religious organizations;
(b) bona fide clubs in existence for 20 years;
(c) bona fide clubs of congressionally chartered veterans organizations;
(d) non-profit corporations organized under the laws of the state for civic, fraternal, social or
business purposes or intellectual improvement on the promotion of sports, which have at
least 50 members, and which have for more than a year, owned, hired, or leased a suitable
and adequate building or space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable
and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable accommodation of its members, and
whose affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee
or similar body chosen by members at a meeting held for that purpose, none of whose
members, officers, or agents are paid any compensation or profit;
(e) hospitals or affiliated organization;
(f) public school boards;
(g) organizations supported in whole or part by state or federal funds.
1110.05. Permits. Subdivision 1. General rule. It is unlawful to give, hold, conduct or operate a dance
hall, public dance or private dance to which minors are admitted or teenage clubs without a permit from the
city. The permit may be for one or more dances or for a period not exceeding one year.
Subd. 2. Posting. The permit must be posted in a prominent place on the premises and show the
names and addresses of the persons to whom issued, the fee paid and the time and places covered by the
permit.
Robbinsdale City Code 1110.05, Subd. 3
Subd. 3. Application. Application for a permit must show (i) the name and address of applicant,
(ii) the time and place for which permit is desired (iii) and the area of the premises for which application is
made. The application must show that the applicant is of good moral character and supported by affidavits
of two residents of the city. The application must be investigated by the chief of police and reported to the
council before permit is granted.
1110.07. Restrictions. A permit may not be issued to:
(a) a person who is not a resident of Hennepin County;
(b) a person who is not of good character and reputation;
(c) a person who is not a citizen of the United States;
(d) a person who has been convicted of a felony;
(e) a person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill-fame;
(f) a person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to
decency and morality;
(g) a person whose permit under this subsection has been revoked for cause;
(h) a person who at the time of application for renewal of any permit issued hereunder would
not be eligible for such permit upon a first application;
(i) a partnership, unless all of the members of the partnership shall be qualified to obtain a
permit;
(j) a corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any stockholder or
stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such
corporation, would not be eligible to receive a permit hereunder for any reason other than
citizenship and residence within the political subdivision;
(k) a person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless said manager
or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the permit holder;
(l) a person who has been convicted of a violation of a federal or state law concerning the
manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who has forfeited a bond to appear in
court to answer charges for any such violation;
(m) a person who does not own the premises for which a permit is sought, or does not have a
lease thereof for the full period for which the permit is issued.
Robbinsdale City Code 1110.09
1110.09. Required conditions. The permitted premises:
(a) must be zoned commercial;
(b) may not be within 300 feet of a church or school;
(c) must have sinks and other suitable equipment and hot and cold running water for the
maintenance of sanitary conditions for persons on the premises;
(d) must have adequate separate toilets (i) conveniently located so that they can be reached
from the inside without having to go outside or through other building areas, (ii) equipped
with hot and cold running water, individual towels and soap, and (iii) readily cleanable and
are adequately heated, lighted and ventilated;
(e) must be so located that no unusual safety hazards are presented to persons going to or from
or being on the premises by reason of lighting or the design or location of stairways,
windows, steps, doors, sidewalks, streets or parking facilities;
(f) must have adequate emergency fire exit facilities and no unusual fire hazards; and
(g) must have parking facilities.
1110.11. Restrictions. Subdivision 1. It is unlawful to permit dancing in a permitted premises in an
indecent or immoral manner nor in a manner that is characterized by immodest motions of the body. It is
unlawful to act or speak or permit acting or speaking in rude, boisterous, obscene, or indecent manner at
premises holding a permit under this section.
Subd. 2. Light. Permitted premises must be brightly illuminated while in use and dancing therein
while the lights are extinguished, dimmed, or turned low, so as to give imperfect illuminations is prohibited.
Subd. 3. Persons prohibited. No person to whom a permit is issued may allow in permitted
premises (i) an intoxicated person (ii) a prostitute, (iii) a person of known immorality, (iv) an unmarried
person under the age of 16 years, unless such person is accompanied by parent or guardian, or (v) any
unmarried person more than 16, and under the age of 18 years, unless that person is accompanied by a
parent or guardian or presents the written consent of parent or guardian to the officer in charge of the dance,
and the written permit must be retained by such officer.
Robbinsdale City Code 1110.11, Subd. 4
Subd. 4. Hours. Permitted activities may not be conducted between the hours of 1:00 and 6:00 a.m.
of any day and on Sunday, before 12:00 noon.
Subd. 5. Liquor and beer. It is unlawful to bring, possess or furnish beer or liquor to a permitted
premises.
Subd. 6. Inspection. A permitted premises must be kept open for inspection by the law
enforcement officers of the city.
Subd. 7. Fee. The permit fee is set by Appendix B.
Robbinsdale City Code 1115.01
Section 1115 - Pet Shops
1115.01. Definition. For purposes of this section the term "pet shop" means a building, structure, enclosure,
premises, tract of land or place where animals, birds, fish or other living creatures are sold to the
public, offered for sale or kept for sale.
1115.03. License. Subdivision 1. General rule. It is unlawful to maintain, operate or engage in the
business of operating a pet shop without a license.
Subd. 2. Application. A person desiring to operate a pet shop must apply for a license to the city
clerk. The application must (i) contain the name of the applicant, (ii) the address at which the business is to
be conducted, (iii) the types of animals, birds, fish or other living creatures which the applicant proposes to
offer for sale and (iv) such other information as the council may require.
Subd. 3. Fee. The license fee is set by Appendix B.
1115.05. Inspection. Upon receipt of the application, the city manager must inspect the premises at which
the business is proposed to be operated and report to the council what facilities have been provided for the
keeping of the animals, birds, fish or other living creatures; what plumbing has been provided, whether the
facilities provided are such as will prevent obnoxious odors spreading to other properties or public streets,
and are adequate for sanitary operation of said business and the keeping of such animals, birds and fish and
a suitable enclosure and free from disease.
1115.07. Granting of license. Upon receipt of the foregoing report and such further investigation or
inspection as the manager may require, the council may grant a license. Licenses expire annually
December 31.
1115.09. Revocation. If a licensee fails to keep the licensed premises in a clean and sanitary manner and
free from obnoxious odors or from becoming a nuisance to the owners, occupants or other persons in
possession of other property within the immediate vicinity of the business or to the public generally, the city
council may revoke the license after giving ten days' notice to the licensee at the place of business for which
license was granted.
Robbinsdale City Code 1120.01 (Rev. 2019)
Section 1120 - Transient Sales; Transient Merchant
(Deleted and replaced in its entirety, Ord. No. 19-02)
1120.01. Transient sales. Subdivision 1. Peddler/solicitor. A person who goes from house-to-house, doorto-
door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose of
advertising, selling or attempting to sell items that the person is carrying or otherwise transporting, or
obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for products or services of which the person may be carrying or
transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by other means, and for which delivery or
performance shall occur at a later time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from
the scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain
orders as discussed above.
Subd. 2. License required. No peddler or solicitor shall sell or offer for sale any goods, wares,
merchandise, or services for immediate delivery within the City unless a license therefor shall be secured
as provided in this section.
Subd. 3. License exemptions.
(a) For the purpose of applying the requirements of this section, the terms peddler and
solicitor do not apply to any person selling or attempting at wholesale any goods,
wares, products, merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being
sold by the wholesaler. The terms also do not apply to any person who makes initial
contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to establish a
regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food and dairy products
such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any person making deliveries of
perishable food and dairy products to the customers on the person’s established regular
delivery route.
(b) No license shall be required for the following:
(1) No license is required for any person to sell the products of the farm or garden
occupied and cultivated by that person.
(2) No license is required of any person going from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street-to- street, or other type of place-to-place when such
activity is for the purpose of exercising that person's state or Federal Constitutional
rights such as the freedom of speech, press, religion and the like, except that this
exemption may be lost if the person's exercise of Constitutional rights is merely
incidental to a commercial activity.
(3) Professional fundraisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt person or
group are exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter.
Robbinsdale City Code 1120.01, Subd. 4 (Rev. 2019)
Subd. 4. License application and issuance. Application for such license shall be made to the
City Clerk on a form supplied by the City. All applications shall be made to the city at least 30 business
days before the applicant desires to begin conducting business. The application shall include:
(a) Applicant’s full legal name.
(b) All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to which
applicant officially answers.
(c) Full address of applicant.
(d) Telephone number of applicant’s permanent residence.
(e) Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed, or operated
by applicant, for which the applicant is an employee or agent.
(f) Full address of applicant’s regular place of business (if any).
(g) Any and all business-related telephone numbers of the applicant.
(h) The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a license.
(i) Any and all addresses, telephone numbers, and email addresses where the
applicant can be reached while conducting business within the city.
(j) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted within the last
five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for violation of any
state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than traffic offenses.
(k) A list of all cities where the applicant has conducted business as a
peddler/solicitor in the past two years.
(l) A general description of the items to be sold or services to be provided.
(m) All additional information deemed necessary by the city.
(n) The applicant’s valid government-issued identification or driver’s license or
other acceptable form of identification.
(o) The license plate number, registration information, and vehicle identification
number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the licensed business and a
description of the vehicle.
Subd. 5. License ineligibility. The following are grounds for denying a license under this
section:
Robbinsdale City Code 1120.01, Subd. 5(a) (Rev. 2019)
(a) The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the information requested
by the city as part of the application, or the failure to sign the application, or the
failure to pay the required application fee at the time of the application.
(b) The conviction of the applicant who has not shown sufficient evidence of
rehabilitation pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section 364.03 for any violation of
any federal or state statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which
adversely reflects on the person's ability to conduct the business for which the
license is being sought in an honest and legal manner or that will not adversely
affect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. Such violations
include but are not limited to burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful
business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against
another person.
(c) The revocation within the past five years of any license issued to the applicant for
the purpose of conducting business as a peddler or solicitor.
(d) The applicant or company that the applicant is representing is determined to have
a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad business reputation includes, but is
not limited to, the existence of more than three complaints against the applicant
with the Better Business Bureau, the Attorney General's Office, or other similar
business or consumer rights office or agency, within the preceding 12 months.
(e) Prior violations of this section.
(f) Conducting business without the required license.
(g) A determination of previous fraudulent acts or conduct.
(h) A record of continual breaches of solicited contracts.
(i) Any prior revocations or suspensions of peddler or solicitor licenses in any other
city within the past five years.
Subd. 6. Police investigation. Every application shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police and a
background check shall be conducted to determine whether the merchant has a valid driver’s license (if
applicable) and assure that there are no active warrants.
Subd. 7. License fees. Fees for licenses shall be set forth in Appendix B. Fees shall include an
application fee, which includes the cost of initial investigation. The City Council may waive fees at its
discretion.
Subd. 8. Duration of license. No license may extend beyond the 31st day of December of the year
in which it is granted.
Robbinsdale City Code 1120.01, Subd. 9 (Rev. 2019)
Subd. 9. License not transferable. All licenses shall be nontransferable. No refunds shall be made
on unused portions of licenses except by resolution of the City Council. Each peddler shall secure a
separate license.
Subd. 10. License to be carried. All licenses shall be carried by the licensee and the license
shall be exhibited to any officer or citizen upon such officer’s or citizen’s request.
Subd. 11. License revocation.
(a) Any license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked for any of the
following:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statements on the application form.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made during the course of the
licensed activity.
(3) Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could have been denied
pursuant to this section.
(4) Violation of any provision of this section.
(b) Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this section, the city
must provide the license holder with written notice of the alleged violations and inform
the licensee of the licensee’s right to a hearing on the alleged violation. Notice must be
delivered in person or by mail to the permanent residential address listed on the license
application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the
license application.
(c) Administrative hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided herein, the licensee has the
right to request an administrative hearing. If no request for a hearing is received by the
city within 14 regular business days following the service of the notice, the city may
proceed with the suspension or revocation summarily. For the purpose of mailed notices,
service is considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a hearing
is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing must be scheduled within 30 days
from the date of the request. If the Hearing Officer determines that a violation of this
chapter did occur, that decision, along with the Hearing Officer's reasons for finding a
violation and the penalty to be imposed, must be recorded in writing, a copy of which
must be provided to the licensee. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation
occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, the findings must be in writing
and a copy provided to the licensee.
(d) Emergency. If, in the discretion of the city, imminent harm to the health or safety of the
public may occur because of the actions of a peddler or solicitor licensed under this
section, the city may immediately revoke the person's license and provide notice of the
right to hold a subsequent administrative hearing as required herein.
Robbinsdale City Code 1120.01, Subd. 11(e) (Rev. 2019)
(e) Appeals. The final decision of the administrative Hearing Officer is appealable by
petitioning the Minnesota court of appeals for a Writ of Certiorari.
Subd. 12. Practices prohibited. It is unlawful for a peddler or solicitor to conduct business in
any of the following manners:
(a) Calling attention to the person’s business or items to be sold by means of blowing any
horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other noise, so as to be
unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.
(b) Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public right-of-way.
(c) Conducting business in such a way as to create a threat to the health, safety, and welfare
of any individual or to the general public.
(d) Conducting business before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.
(e) Failing to properly display approved license identification in plain view attached to the
outer clothing and provide proof of license and identification, when requested.
(f) Using the license of another person.
(g) Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service being sold,
including untrue statements of endorsement. It is unlawful for a peddler or solicitor to
claim to have the endorsements of the city solely based on the city having issued a license
or certificate of registration to that person.
(h) Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to otherwise conduct
business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating,
or abusive.
Subd. 13. Exclusion by placard. It is unlawful for a peddler or solicitor, unless expressly invited
to do so by the property owner or tenant, to enter the property of another for the purpose of conducting
business as a peddler or solicitor when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches
long and four inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating “No Peddlers, Solicitors or
Transient Merchants,” or “Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited,” or other
comparable statement. It is unlawful for a person other than the property owner or tenant to remove,
deface or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section.
Subd. 14. Canvasser.
(a) A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-tostreet,
or from place-to-place when such activity is for the purpose of exercising that
person's constitutional rights such as freedom of speech, press, or religion is a canvasser
except when the person's exercise of these constitutional rights is merely incidental to a
commercial activity.
Robbinsdale City Code 1120.01, Subd. 14(b) (Rev. 2019)
(b) A canvasser is exempt from the licensing requirements of this subsection, but all other
requirements of subsection 1120.01 shall apply.
(c) Before engaging in any of the activities of a canvasser, a canvasser is required to register
with the city on a form provided by the City. Immediately upon completion of the
registration form, the City shall issue the registrant proof of the registration.
(d) No fee is required for registration under this subdivision.
Subd. 15. Hours. A peddler, solicitor or canvasser may not undertake such person's activities
except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
1120.03. Transient merchant. Subdivision 1. License required. The owner or operator of a vehicle that is
used to dispense or vend confections or other goods directly from the vehicle may not do so without a
license. This subsection does not apply to persons using vehicles for the delivery of goods or services
directly to homes or establishments where the goods are taken by the operator of the vehicle onto private
property for delivery, or to the operations of political subdivision. The term "vehicle" means a mobile
unit, portable tent, portable trailer, or any similar type unit being used on the public streets for the purpose
of vending or dispensing. Exterior sales are also limited by zoning code.
Subd. 2. Application. Application for a license is made to the Clerk. The application must
describe the vehicle or vehicles from which the vending operations will be carried on, the requested
duration of the vending operations, and give the names of the persons interested in the business. The
applicant must describe the type of confections or other goods which will be sold from the vehicle.
Licenses expire annually on December 31. The license fee is set by Appendix B.
Subd. 3. Hours, routes and noise. A transient merchant may not carry on the vending operations
except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. More than ten days before commencement of
operations the transient merchant must file with the Chief of Police a proposed route or routes or location
over which the vehicles will travel or be located each day. The transient merchant must follow such route
or location while operating in the City. Proposed changes must be filed with the Chief of Police at least
ten days in advance. If the Chief disapproves of the proposed routes or location, the transient merchant
may appeal the ruling to the City Council. Approved routes or locations must minimize the hazard to
customers of the vehicle and which minimize traffic difficulties which may arise out of such operations.
The use of a radio device, mechanical device, loudspeaker or device casting sound upon the public streets
in conjunction with such vending or dispensing requires a permit under this code.
Subd. 4. Safety requirement. Vehicles must be parked at the curbside or other approved location
while engaged in vending operations. Vending may be done only at the curbside of the vehicle. The
applicant must provide a certificate of insurance with the City with public liability insurance of not less
than $2,000,000 combined single limit issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the
state of Minnesota. The policy must provide that it may not be cancelled by the issuer except upon ten
days’ written notice to the City. If the insurance is cancelled the license or permit will be automatically
suspended until the insurance is replaced. No transient merchant shall use a motor vehicle for such
person's activities unless such person maintains a valid driver's license.
Robbinsdale City Code 1120.04 (Rev. 2019)
1120.05 Certain Transient Merchants. Subdivision 1. A state-licensed mobile food unit dispensing and
vending at a temporary fixed location is subject to the requirements of this subdivision. A mobile food
unit can be a motorized vehicle or trailer-mounted food establishment.
(a) License required. The owner or operator of a mobile food unit may not dispense food to
the public without a license. Mobile food unit sales which meet the definition of a food truck are also
regulated by city’s zoning code. Each license is valid for only the specified dates. The license fee is set
by Appendix B.
(b) Application. Application for a license is made to the Clerk. The license application must
also include the dates, description of vehicles used, description of food items, location and site plan for
set up, a copy of the state license(s), a safety plan, and written authorization from the property owner
where the mobile food unit will be located.
(c) Noise. The use of a radio device, mechanical device, loudspeaker or device casting sound
upon the public streets in conjunction with such vending or dispensing requires a permit under this code.
(d) Hours and Locations. The city establishes the hours of operation and the duration of
occupancy. Exterior sales are allowed at locations permitted by the zoning code. City council approval is
required for dispensing and vending in a city park.
(e) Insurance. No transient merchant shall use a motor vehicle unless such person maintains
a valid driver’s license. A mobile food unit proposed to be located on city property must provide a valid
certificate of insurance to the City with public liability insurance of not less than $2,000,000 combined
single limit issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota.
1120.07. Going out of business sales. Subdivision 1. For purposes of this subsection the terms defined in
this subdivision have the meanings given them.
(a) "Advertise" means the use of any means, whether oral, written, lettered or by picture,
used to give notice of intention to conduct a sale or to advertise merchandise for sale at
such sale; the term includes, but is not limited to, oral announcement made at the place
of sale, or oral announcement by sound truck or by radio or television, by written,
printed or pictured notice, by newspaper advertisement, magazine advertisement,
handbill, printed display, poster, label, price tag, circular, pamphlet or book.
(b) "Merchandise" means goods, wares and merchandise usually sold for consumption.
(c) "Sale" or "regulated sale" means a sale or offer to sell to the public merchandise on hand
and in stock, in connection with a declared purpose, as set forth by advertising on the
part of the seller that such sale is:
Robbinsdale City Code 1120.05(c)(1) (Rev. 2019)
(1) anticipatory to the termination, closing, liquidation, windup-discontinuance,
conclusion or abandonment of the business and advertised in the following
phrases or in any other phrase or phrases of like or similar language which
reasonably convey to the public that the sale is being conducted for such
purpose: "going out of business sale", "trustee's sale", "liquidation sale",
"executor's sale", "administrator's sale", "adjustment sale", "reorganization sale",
"creditor's sale", "creditor's committee sale", "assignee's sale", "receiver's sale",
"loss of lease sale", "forced out of business sale", "removal sale". A "removal
sale" is a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to
believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at
the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then
move to and resume business at a new location in the City or will then continue
business from other existing locations in the City.
(2) a result of damage or alteration to the merchandise being offered for sale by
disaster or other fortuitous occurrence, and advertised in the following phrases
and in any other phrases or phrases of like or similar language which reasonably
convey to the public that the sale is being conducted as a result of such
occurrence: "fire sale", "insurance salvage sale", "damaged goods sale", "smoke
sale", "water damage sale".
Subd. 2. Exception: actual disaster sale. This subsection does not apply to a sale held by a
regularly established retail or wholesale merchant at a regular place of business, provided that such sale is
held for not over ten days during the period of 45 days immediately following actual damage to the
merchant's stock or goods by fire, water, smoke or other chance circumstance. A permit issued by the
clerk is required for such a sale. The permit fee is set by Appendix B.
Subd. 3. Exception: regular sale of damaged goods consigned from insurance companies. This
subsection does not apply to a person who has and maintains a permanently established place of business
solely confined to the sale or property damaged by fire, water, smoke, or other chance circumstance,
which property is taken on consignment directly from insurance companies who have taken such property
as settlements of losses, and who does not advertise in the terms used in the definition of "sale" in
subdivision 1.
Subd. 4. License required. It is unlawful to advertise or conduct a regulated sale without a
license.
Subd. 5. Application for license. A person desiring to advertise and conduct a regulated sale must
apply to the clerk. The application must be in writing and in the name of the true owner of the
merchandise to be sold. The application must state:
(a) the name and address of the applicant, together with the names and addresses of all
individuals who are members of the partnership, association or firm making such
application and of all officers of any corporation making the application;
(b) the type of sale to be conducted and the reason for conducting the sale;
Robbinsdale City Code 1120.05, Subd. 5(c) (Rev. 2019)
(c) the address at which the sale will be held;
(d) the nature of the occupancy of the premises where the sale is to be held, whether by lease
or sublease, and the date of termination of such occupancy;
(e) whether or not the applicant has held a regulated sale at the premises referred to in the
application in the one year period preceding the date of the application;
(f) the date of acquisition by the applicant of the business with respect to which the sale is
to be held;
(g) the names and addresses of the individuals who will have charge of the sale;
(h) an inventory containing:
(1) A legible, orderly, detailed, complete and accurate descriptive list of the
merchandise to be offered for sale which inventory shall include only
merchandise owned by the applicant which applicant expects to include in such
sale located on the premises where the sale is to be held and in warehouses. The
inventory may include all goods which have been purchased by the applicant for
resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and may not comprise
goods purchased on consignment. The inventory may not include goods
ordered in contemplation of conducting a regulated sale. Any purchase or
additions made within 90 days immediately prior to the filing of an application
which increases the inventory beyond the average inventory for 12 full and
successive months next preceding the application is deemed an unusual purchase
or addition and made in contemplation of having a sale as regulated by the terms
of this chapter; provided, however, that in determining the average monthly
inventory seasonable purchases and inventories will be considered and adjusted.
(2) Insofar as reasonably possible on the basis of available record data regularly kept
by the applicant, the dates of acquisition of the merchandise, the names and
addresses of the persons from whom obtained, and the manner of acquisition.
The inventory must contain the cost price of the merchandise to be sold, and the
regular price at which the merchandise was sold prior to the making of the
application. The application and the inventory must be verified in duplicate
under oath by the individual making the application or by a member of the
partnership making the application or by the general managing officer or agent
of the association, joint enterprise, firm or corporation, making the application,
and must be filed in duplicate with the clerk.
Robbinsdale City Code 1120.05, Subd. 6 (Rev. 2019)
Subd. 6. Limitations. A person who has not been the owner of a business described in the
application for a period of at least six months prior to the date of application may not be granted a
license. A person who has held a regulated sale at the location designated in the application within one
year last past from the date of the application may not be granted a license. If a person applying for a
license operates more than one place of business the license issued applies to only the one store or branch
specified in the application, and no other store or branch may advertise or represent that it is cooperating
with it, or in any way participating in the licensed sale, nor may the store or branch conducting the
licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in
the regulated sale.
Subd. 7. License fee: term: renewals. The license fee is set by Appendix B. The license is
granted by the council. Licenses are for a period of not to exceed 30 days. Upon proof that all of the
merchandise listed in the inventory attached to the original application has not been disposed of and that
no items of merchandise not listed in the inventory have been or are to be sold at the sale, the clerk must
investigate the truthfulness of the application and the supporting data, and recommend to the council the
granting or denial or a renewal, and the renewal may be for no more than 30 days. The fee for a renewal
is set by Appendix B. If a second renewal for 30 days is applied for, the fee for such renewal is set by
Appendix B for each day of such sale to defray the cost of daily supervision by the clerk during the
period of the sale.
Subd. 8. Proof required. Renewal applications are made to the clerk and must be accompanied by
an inventory containing a legible, orderly, detailed, complete and accurate descriptive list of the
merchandise then on hand unsold. The renewal application and accompanying inventory must be
executed and verified under oath by the individual making the application, or by a member of the
partnership making the application, or by the general managing officer or agent of the association, joint
enterprise, firm or corporation making the application.
Subd. 9. Renewals. Applications for renewals must be made not less than ten days prior to the
expiration of the existing license. No more than two renewals may be granted for a regulated sale at the
same location.
Subd. 10. Conditions of license. The license is subject to the following conditions:
(a) the sale shall be conducted on the premises specified in the application, during the period
of the license and any renewals thereof, and no longer;
(b) merchandise not described in the inventory may be added to or included with that
specified in the inventory furnished with the application and offered for sale at the sale:
each sale of merchandise not included in the inventory constitutes a separate violation of
this condition;
(c) the sale must be advertised and conducted in the name of the licensee only and no
reference to the reasons for the sale may be advertised unless the reasons must be in
conformity with those stated in the application and will be applicable to the licensee at
the time of such advertisement;
Robbinsdale City Code 1120.05, Subd. 10(d) (Rev. 2019)
(d) the license must be conspicuously displayed during the duration of the sale near the
entrance to the premises where the sale is being held;
(e) a duplicate original of the application and inventory pursuant to which the license was
granted, must be available at the premises where the sale is being held to the officers
and agents of the city and the licensee must permit city officials to examine all
merchandise on the premises for comparison with the inventory;
(f) at the close of business each day there must be noted on the inventory attached to such
duplicate original application the items disposed of during that day;
(g) suitable books and records must be kept by the licensee and available at all times to the
officers and agents of the city;
(h) an advertisement may not contain any assertion, representation or statement of fact which
is untrue, deceptive or misleading as to the ownership of the merchandise, the source
from which it was obtained, the quantity, nature, condition or quality thereof, or the
value or price thereof, or the savings or discounts offered with respect thereto, and, if any
price comparisons or percentages of savings or discounts are quoted in any
advertisement, such savings or discounts must be computed upon the prices stated in the
inventory with respect to the items referred to in such advertisement; provided, however,
that no comparison in either general or specific terms may be made in any such
advertisement with respect to either the regular wholesale or regular retail prices of any
merchandise unless the regular wholesale or regular retail price of such merchandise so
referred to is stated in the inventory attached to such application;
(i) the licensee must promptly at the conclusion of a regulated sale file with the clerk's
office a true inventory of all merchandise, if any, then remaining unsold.
Subd. 11. License to refrain for six months. A person who has conducted a regulated sale may
not engage in the same type of business at a location within a distance of one-half mile measured from
front entrance of previous place of business within a period of six months after the termination date of
the regulated sale.
Subd. 12. Sheriff's sales, etc., excepted. This subsection does not apply to the advertisement or
conduct of sales by sheriffs, constables, marshals or other public or court officers in the performance of
their official duties as such, or to trustees in bankruptcy, or any other person or persons acting under the
direction or authority of any court, state or federal, selling merchandise in the course of their official
duties.
Subd. 13. Each day a separate offense. Each day of conduct of a regulated sale without a license
is a separate offense.
Robbinsdale City Code 1125.01 (Rev. 2000)
Section 1125 - Taxis
1125.01. Definitions. Subdivision 1. For purposes of this section the terms defined in this subsection have
the meanings given them.
Subd. 2. "Taxicab" means and includes a motor vehicle engaged in the carrying of persons for hire,
whether over a fixed route or not, and whether the same be operated from a street stand or subject to calls
from a garage, or otherwise operated for hire, except private auto liveries; the term does not include vehicles
subject to control and regulation by the state public utilities commission or vehicles regularly used by
undertakers in carrying on their business.
Subd. 3. "Taxicab driver" means and includes a person who drives a taxicab, whether such person
is the owner of the taxicab or is employed by a taxicab owner or operator.
Subd. 4. "Operator" means and includes a person owning or having control of the use of one or
more taxicabs used for hire upon the streets or engaged in the business of operating a taxicab in the city.
Subd. 5. "Taxicab stand" means and includes a place along a curb or street or elsewhere that is
exclusively reserved by the city for the use of taxicabs.
Subd. 6. "Taximeter" means and includes a mechanical instrument or device by which the charge
for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated, by distance traveled or waiting time, or by both, and upon
which the charge is indicated.
Subd. 7. "Private auto livery" means an automobile used to carry persons for hire other than by
solicitation of business by cruising about the streets.
1125.03. (Repealed, Ord. No. 2000-01)
1125.05. (Repealed, Ord. No. 2000-01)
1125.07. Identification of vehicle. A taxicab that solicits or accepts business or stands, or waits for hire,
must have some suitable designation of the character of the vehicle painted in plain visible letters on each
side thereof.
1125.09. Rates, meters. A licensed taxicab must be equipped with a meter to record fares to be charged.
The meter must be kept accurate and in good working condition and in plain view of passengers. The rate
or rates to be charged for conveyance in taxicabs must be conspicuously posted in or on the vehicle.
(Amended, Ord. No. 2000-01)
1125.11. (Repealed, Ord. No. 2000-01)
1125.13. (Repealed, Ord. No. 2000-01)
1125.15. (Repealed, Ord. No. 2000-01)
Robbinsdale City Code 1125.17 (Rev. 2000)
1125.17. Miscellaneous regulations. Subdivision 1. Taxicab drivers must be clean and courteous at all
times.
Subd. 2. A driver of a taxicab may not carry any other than the passenger first employing a taxicab
without the consent of such passenger. (Amended, Ord. No. 2000-01)
Subd. 3. An operator may not charge or attempt to charge any passenger a greater rate of fare than
that which is posted in the vehicle. (Amended, Ord. No. 2000-01)
Subd. 4. A taxicab driver may not deceive an actual or prospective passenger, as to the driver's
destination or distance traveled or to be traveled.
Subd. 5. Taxicabs must be provided with windows in the rear seating compartment sufficient in
number and of such size and dimensions that at all times persons may be readily seen through the windows
with sufficient distinctness to identify the person.
Subd. 6. The taxicab drivers or any taxicab operator on duty must maintain clean apparel.
(Amended, Ord. No. 2000-01)
Subd. 7. There must be displayed in a taxicab in full view of any passenger a clearly lettered
identification card which will include the name of the taxicab driver, the name of the taxicab operator, the
taxicab number and a picture of the taxicab driver.
1125.19. Passenger pick-up. Subdivision 1. Licensed by other cities. A taxicab licensed to operate in
another political subdivision of this state including the Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport may carry
passengers to any place or point, within the city and may solicit or pick up business within the city.
(Amended, Ord. No. 2000-01)
Subd. 2. Soliciting passengers. A taxicab driver licensed to operate in another political subdivision
in this state, including the Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport may carry passengers from that
political subdivision into the city and may freely enter and travel upon its streets and thoroughfares for that
purpose, and it is not necessary for the driver to obtain a Robbinsdale taxicab driver's license. While in the
city the driver must observe the operating regulations and conditions of this subsection. (Amended, Ord.
No. 2000-01)
Robbinsdale City Code 1130.01 (Rev. 2003)
Section 1130 - Miscellaneous Activities
1130.01. Car washes. Subdivision 1. Definition. The term "car wash" or "car washes" means an
establishment operated for profit where cars are washed either mechanically or manually: the term includes
establishments in which coin- operated facilities are available for washing cars.
Subd. 2. License required. It is unlawful to operate a car wash without a license. The license is
in addition to all other licenses required by this code.
Subd. 3. Application. Application for a license is made to the clerk. The application must be
accompanied by the license fee and by the certificate of insurance as required by this subsection.
Subd. 4. Insurance. The applicant must provide a certificate of insurance with the city with
public liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota. The policy must provide for the giving of ten days' prior
written notice to the city of the termination or cancellation of the policy. The license fee is set by Appendix
B. Licenses expire annually on December 31. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-22)
Subd. 5. General regulations.
(a) The licensee must keep the premises of the car wash free from debris and waste materials.
The licensee must remove debris and waste materials to be removed during each 24 hour
period and as often as may be necessary to prevent debris or waste materials from being
blown to nearby streets and premises.
(b) It is unlawful to place or leave debris or waste materials upon the premises of a car wash
unless the debris or waste materials be placed in a waste receptacle provided on the
premises for such purposes.
(c) Loudspeakers may not be used on the premises for communications with customers or
employees and juke boxes, radios, or other musical devices are not permitted on the
premises. This provision does not prohibit the use, on the premises, of radios installed in
motor vehicles of customers, but no person may use such a vehicle radio upon the
licensed premises if the volume of sound from such radio is audible more than ten feet
from the vehicle in which the radio is installed.
Robbinsdale City Code 1130.01, Subd. 6
(Rev. 1996)
(d) It is unlawful to race the engine of a motor vehicle, cause any horn to be blown except as
a traffic warning, or cause any disturbance or loud noise on or nearby the licensed
premises.
(e) It is unlawful on the licensed premises for a person to drink, have in possession or under
control, or offer or give to another person to drink any alcoholic beverage as defined in
chapter XII.
(f) The premises of a car wash must be kept adequately lighted when open to the public.
Lights must be kept adequately shaded or otherwise regulated so as to prevent them from
shining upon adjacent premises.
(g) It is unlawful to loiter and the licensee may not permit persons to loiter upon the premises if
such persons are not engaged in washing cars.
(h) The licensee must maintain quiet and order upon the premises. The licensee must see that
entrances and exits and abutting alleys are kept free from congestion.
(i) It is unlawful to keep a car wash open for business between the hours of midnight and 7:00
a.m.
Subd. 6. Suspension and revocation of licenses. Violation of this subsection is grounds for
revocation or suspension up to 60 days after notice and hearing.
1130.03. (Deleted, Ord. No. 96-08, Sec. 1)
1130.05. Christmas tree sales. Subdivision 1. Licenses required. It is unlawful to give away, or trade,
barter or sell at retail, any cut evergreen, fir, spruce, pine, or other tree of like kind, for use as what is
generally known and described as a Christmas tree, without a license. This subsection does not apply to the
use of ornamental trees having a height of less than 36 inches which are fireproofed and sprayed with
coloring and used by florists in their decorative schemes.
Subd. 2. Application. An applicant for a license must file with the city clerk a written application
therefor, stating a correct name, address and place of intended sale of such Christmas trees. If the operation
of the business requires electrical work or construction of any kind, the applicant must arrange for the
simultaneous filing of an application for a building, electrical or other required permit, including payment to
the city clerk of the required fee or fees therefor; in such case the license may not be granted until the
application has been approved by the building inspector.
Subd. 3. License fee. The license fee is set by Appendix B. Licenses expire annually on
December 31. The license fee may not be prorated.
Robbinsdale City Code 1130.07 (Rev. 2017)
1130.07. (Deleted, Ord. No. 17-09)
1130.09. Auto dealer (new or used): state licensing law. Subdivision 1. Adopted by reference. Minnesota
Statutes, chapter 168 is adopted by reference and made a part of this code as if fully set forth herein. A
violation of the provisions of the statutes adopted by reference herein is a violation of this code.
Subd. 2. State license required. It is unlawful to engage in the business of:
(a) new motor vehicle dealer,
(b) used motor vehicle dealer,
(c) motor vehicle broker,
(d) motor vehicle wholesaler, or
(e) motor vehicle auctioneer,
as those terms are defined by state law, without a current state license therefor. A person holding the license
must file a copy of the current state certificate of license with the city clerk who must maintain a register of
the licenses. Failure of a licensee to supply the city clerk with a copy of a current state license is a violation
of this code.
1130.11. Gasoline service stations. Subdivision 1. General rule. It is unlawful to operate a gasoline
service station without a license or contrary to the provisions of this subsection.
Subd. 2. Defined. For purposes of this subsection the term "gasoline service station" means a
premises where the business of furnishing and selling gasoline and lubricating oils and accessories for motor
vehicles is conducted.
Subd. 3. Application: fee. Applications for a gasoline service station license are made to the
clerk. The license fee is set by Appendix B. Licenses expire annually on December 31. Licenses are not
transferable. License renewal is subject to the license provisions described in section 1005 Licensing
Procedures. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-05)
Subd. 4. Other conditions. Underground storage tanks at a gasoline service station must be
installed in accordance with section 910 of this code. Gasoline or other flammable liquids may not be
dispensed in open containers. Open flames are prohibited in the licensed premises. Gasoline may not be
dispensed to a motor vehicle whose motor is running.
Robbinsdale City Code 1132.01 (Rev. 2019)
Section 1132 - Tobacco and Related Products
(Added, Ord. No. 96-08)
1132.01. Definitions. Where used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings:
(a) “Child-resistant packaging” means packaging that meets the definition set forth in Code
of Federal Regulations, title 16, section 1700.15(b), as in effect on January 1, 2015, and
was tested in accordance with the method described in Code of Federal Regulations, title
16, section 1700.20, as in effect on January 1, 2015. (Added, Ord. No. 17-14)
(b) “Cigar” means any roll of tobacco that is wrapped in tobacco leaf or in any other
substance containing tobacco, with or without a tip or mouthpiece, which is not a
cigarette as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 297F.01, subdivision 3, as may be
amended from time to time. (Added, Ord. No. 17-14)
(c) “Compliance checks” means the system the city uses to investigate and ensure that those
authorized to sell licensed products are following and complying with the requirements of
this section. Compliance checks involve the use of persons under the age of 21 who
purchase or attempt to purchase licensed products. Compliance checks may also be
conducted by the city or other units of government for educational, research, or training
purposes or for investigating or enforcing federal, state, or local laws and regulations
relating to licensed products. (Added, Ord. No. 17-14; Amended, Ord. No. 19-03)
(d) “Electronic delivery device” means any product containing or delivering nicotine, lobelia,
or any other substance, whether natural or synthetic, intended for human consumption
through the inhalation of aerosol or vapor from the product. Electronic delivery device
includes, but is not limited to, devices manufactured, marketed, or sold as e-cigarettes, ecigars,
e-pipes, vape pens, mods, tank systems, or under any other product name or
descriptor. Electronic delivery device includes any component part of a product, whether
or not marketed or sold separately. Electronic delivery device does not include any
product that has been approved or certified by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco-cessation product, as a tobacco-dependence product,
or for other medical purposes, and is marketed and sold for such an approved purpose.
(Added, Ord. No. 17-14; Amended Ord. No. 19-03)
(e) “Flavored product” means any licensed product that contains a taste or aroma, other than
the taste or aroma of tobacco, menthol, mint or wintergreen, that is distinguishable by an
ordinary consumer either prior to or during consumption of the licensed product,
including, but not limited to, tastes or aromas of chocolate, vanilla, honey, cocoa, or any
candy, dessert, alcoholic beverage, fruit, herb, or any spice. A public statement or claim
made or disseminated by the manufacturer of a licensed product, or by any person
authorized or permitted by the manufacturer to make or disseminate such statements or
claims concerning such products, that a product has or produces a taste or aroma other
than tobacco may be one of the methods used to determine that the product is a flavored
tobacco product and creates a rebuttable presumption that the product is a flavored
product. (Added, Ord. No. 17-14; Amended Ord. No. 19-03)
Robbinsdale City Code 1132.01(f) (Rev. 2019)
(f) “Licensed products” collectively refers to any tobacco product, tobacco-related device,
electronic delivery device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery product. (Added, Ord. No. 17-
14)
(g) “Movable place of business” means any form of business operated out of a kiosk, truck,
van, automobile, or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address
store front or other permanent type of structure authorized for sales transactions. (Added,
Ord. No. 17-14)
(h) “Nicotine or lobelia delivery product” means any product containing or delivering
nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any part of such a product, that is
not tobacco or an electronic delivery device as defined in this section. Nicotine or lobelia
delivery product does not include any product that has been approved or otherwise
certified for legal sale by the United States Food and Drug Administration for tobacco
use cessation or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that
approved purpose. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-14)
(i) “Retail establishment” means any place of business where licensed products are available
for sale to the general public. The phrase includes but is not limited to grocery stores,
tobacco products shops, convenience stores, gasoline service stations, bars, and
restaurants. (Added, Ord. No. 19-03)
(j) “Self-service merchandising” means a method of displaying licensed products so that they
are accessible to the public without the intervention of an employee. (Amended, Ord.
No. 17-14)
(k). “Tobacco dealer” means a retail establishment that has a tobacco department or section
of an individual business establishment where smokeless tobacco, hookah, loose
tobacco, cigarettes and/or cigars are available for sale over the counter. (Added, Ord.
No. 19-11)
(l) “Tobacco product” means any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved,
inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, or any component, part, or
accessory of a tobacco product, including, but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, cheroots,
stogies, perique, granulated, plug-cut, crimp-out, ready-rubbed, and other smoking
tobacco; snuff, snuff flower, cavendish, plug and twist tobacco; fine cut or other
chewing tobaccos; shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco;
and other kinds and forms of tobacco. Tobacco product does not include any product
that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a
tobacco-cessation product, as a tobacco-dependence product, or for other medical
purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.
(Amended, Ord. No. 98-07; Amended, Ord. No. 17-14)
Robbinsdale City Code 1132.01(m)(Rev. 2019)
(m) “Tobacco products shop” means a retail establishment that
(1) Prohibits persons under 21 from entering at all times;
(2) Derives at least 90 percent of its gross revenues from the sale of licensed
products; and
(3) Meets all of the following building or structural criteria:
a. Shares no wall with, and has no part of its structure adjoined to any other
business or retailer, unless the wall is permanent, completely opaque, and
without doors, windows, or pass-throughs to the other business or retailer;
b. Shares no wall with and has no part of its structure directly adjoined to
another license tobacco retailer; and
c. Is accessible by the public only by an exterior door.
(Added, Ord. 19-11)
(n) “Tobacco-related device” means any pipe, rolling papers, wraps, or other device
intentionally designed or intended to be used with tobacco products. Tobacco-related
device includes components of tobacco-related devices which may be marketed or sold
separately. Tobacco-related devices may or may not contain tobacco. (Added, Ord.
No. 17-14; Amended Ord. No. 19-03)
o) “Vending machine” means any mechanical, electrical or electronic, or other type of
device which, upon inserting money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
licensed products. (Amended, Ord. No. 98-07; Amended, Ord. No. 17-14).
1132.03. License required. No person shall directly, by coin machine, or otherwise, keep for retail sale, sell
at retail, or otherwise furnishing, any licensed products at any place in the city unless they have obtained a
license therefore as provided herein. (Amended, Ord. No. 13-08; Amended, Ord. No. 17-14)
The total number of Tobacco Products Shop licenses issued by the city shall be limited two (2). The total
number of Tobacco Dealer licenses shall be limited of eleven (11). Establishments or locations holding
licenses on the effective date of this ordinance shall not be affected by these limitations subject to conditions
under which a license would be revoked. (Added, Ord. No. 19-11)
1132.05. Application and issuance. Application for such license shall be made to the city clerk and shall
state the full name and address of the applicant, the location of the building to be occupied by the applicant
in the conduct of the business, the kind of business to be conducted, and such other information as the city
clerk may require. The application shall be presented to the city council for its consideration, and if granted
by the council, a license will be issued by the city clerk upon payment of the required fee.
Robbinsdale City Code 1132.06 (Rev. 2019)
1132.06. Basis for denial of license. (Added, Ord. No. 17-14)
(a) Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license include, but are not limited to,
the following: (Added, Ord. No. 17-14)
(1) The applicant is under 21 years of age. (Added, Ord. No. 17-14)
(2) The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any violation of a
federal, state, or local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation relating to
licensed products. (Added, Ord. No. 17-14)
(3) The applicant has had a license to sell licensed products suspended or revoked
within the preceding 12 months of the date of application. (Added, Ord. No. 17-
14)
(4) The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application, or
provides false or misleading information. (Added, Ord. No. 17-14)
(5) The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law, ordinance, or
other regulation from holding a license. (Added, Ord. No. 17-14)
(6) Applicant is acting as an agent or pass through for another person or entity whose
prior acts violated subsections (a) 1, 2, 3, or 4 above or who is otherwise
prohibited from holding a license under any applicable rule or law. (Added, Ord.
No. 17-14)
(b) However, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular
ground for denial does not mean that the city must deny the license.
(c) If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it may be revoked upon the
discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under this ordinance. Notice of the
revocation will be given to the person along with information on the right to appeal.
1132.07. License fee. The fee for a license is set by Appendix B.
1132.09. Term. The issuance of license is a privilege and does not entitle the holder to an automatic
renewal of the license. Licenses expire annually on December 31. Licenses are not transferable. License
renewal is subject to the license provisions described in section 1005 Licensing Procedures. (Amended,
Ord. No. 02-05; Amended Ord. No. 17-14)
1132.11. License displayed. The license must be kept conspicuously posted on the premises for which the
license is issued and must be exhibited to any person upon request.
1132.13. Location. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-14; Amended, Ord. No. 19-11)
(a) A license will not be issued to a movable place of business. Only fixed-location businesses
are eligible to be licensed and separate licenses are required for each location.
Robbinsdale City Code 1132.13(b) (Revised 2019)
(b) Zoning: Tobacco Products Shops must be located in a B4 Community Business Zoning
District. Tobacco Dealers must be located in B3 Highway Commercial or B4 Community
Business Zoning Districts. (Added, Ord. 19-11)
(c) Proximity to other tobacco products shops. No license shall be granted to any person for a
tobacco products shop that is within one half mile of any other tobacco products shop as
measured by the shortest distance measured from the front entrance to front entrance along
normal pedestrian routes along sidewalks and streets. This restriction does not apply to an
applicant who has been licensed to sell licensed products in the same location for at least
one year before the date this section was enacted into law. (Added, Ord. 19-11)
1132.15. Prohibited acts.
(a) In general. No person shall sell or offer to sell any licensed product:
(1) Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna, strychnia, cocaine,
marijuana, or any other controlled substance or deleterious or poisonous drug,
except nicotine. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-14)
(2) By means of any type of vending machine. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-14)
(3) By means of any type of self-service merchandising whereby the customer may
have access to those items without having to request the item from the licensee or
licensees employee and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the licensed
product between the licensee or licensee’s employee and the customer. All licensed
products must be stored behind the sales counter or other area not freely accessible
to customers, or in a case or other storage unit not left open and accessible to the
general public. Any retailer selling licensed products at the time this subsection is
adopted must comply with this subsection within 90 days of its effective date.
(Added, Ord. No. 17-14)
(4) By any other means, to any other person, or in any other manner or form prohibited
by federal, state, or other local law, ordinance provision, or other regulation.
(Added, Ord. No. 17-14)
(b) Legal age. No person shall sell any licensed product to any person under the age of 21.
(Added, Ord. No. 17-14; Amended Ord. No. 19-03)
(1) Age verification. Licensees must verify by means of proof of age described in
Minnesota Statues, section 340A.503, subdivision 6, paragraph (a) that the
purchaser is at least 21 years of age. That the person appeared to be 30 years of
age or older does not constitute a defense to a violation of this ordinance. (Added,
Ord. No. 17-14; Amended Ord. No. 19-03)
Robbinsdale City Code 1132.15(b)(2) (Revised 2019)
(2) Signage. Notice of the legal sales age and age verification requirement must be
posted prominently and in plain view at all times at each location where licensed
products are offered for sale. The required signage, which will be provided to
the licensee by the city, must be posted in a manner that is clearly visible to
anyone who is or is considering making a purchase. (Added, Ord. No. 17-14;
Amended, Ord. No. 19-03)
(c) Flavored products. No person shall sell or offer for sale any flavored products. This
restriction does not apply to Tobacco Products Shops. (Amended, Ord. No. 19-11)
Any retailer that sells flavored products must provide upon request such financial records
that document annual total sales and sales of licensed products. (Added, Ord. No. 17-14)
(d) Electronic Delivery Device Sales. No person shall sell or offer for sale any electronic
delivery device or e-liquid to any person unless the sale is on the premises of
Tobacco Products Shops. (Amended, Ord. No. 19-11)
Any retailer that sells electronic delivery products must provide upon request such financial
records that document annual total sales and sales of licensed products. (Added, Ord. No. 19-
03)
(e) Cigars. No person shall sell, offer for sale, or otherwise distribute cigars in original
packages containing three or fewer cigars for a sale price, after any coupons, multipack or
buy-one-get-one promotions, or any other discounts are applied prior to applicable sales
taxes being imposed of less than $2.60 per cigar contained within. In addition, no person
shall sell, offer for sale or otherwise distribute cigars in original packages of four or more
cigars for a sale price, after any coupons, multipack or buy-one-get-one promotions, or any
other discounts are applied prior to applicable sales taxes being imposed, of less than
$10.40 per package. (Added, Ord. No. 17-14)
(f) Liquid packaging. No person shall sell or offer for sale any liquid, whether or not such
liquid contains nicotine, which is intended for human consumption and use in an electronic
delivery device, that is not contained in child-resistant packaging. Upon request, a licensee
must provide a copy of the certificate of compliance or full laboratory testing report for the
packing used. (Added, Ord. No. 17-14)
(g) Responsibility. All licensees are responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to
the sale, offer to sell, and furnishing of licensed products on the licensed premises. The
sale, offer to sell, or furnishing of any licensed product by an employee shall be considered
an act of the licensee. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city from
also subjecting the employee to any civil penalties that the city deems to be appropriate
under this ordinance, state or federal law, or other applicable law or regulation. (Added,
Ord. No. 19-03)
Robbinsdale City Code 1132.17 (Rev. 2019)
1132.17. Other illegal acts. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-14)
(a) Illegal procurement. It shall be a violation of this section for any person 21 years of age or
older to purchase or otherwise obtain licensed products on behalf of a person under the age
of 21. (Amended, Ord. No. 13-08; Amended Ord. No. 17-14; Amended Ord. No. 19-03)
(b) Use of false identification. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to attempt to
disguise their true age by the use of a false form of identification, whether the identification
is that of another person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or
tampered with to represent an age older than the actual age of the person. (Amended Ord.
No. 19-03)
1132.19. Violations.
(a) Misdemeanors. Any person aged 21 years or older, who violates this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor. (Amended Ord. No. 19-03)
(b) Administrative civil penalties; individuals. Any person, other than individuals regulated by
paragraph (c) of this subsection, found to be in violation of this section is subject to an
administrative penalty. No penalty shall be imposed until the individual has received
notice, served personally or by mail, of the alleged violation and an opportunity for a
hearing before the city manager or the city manager’s designee. Notice is deemed received
when sent to last known address. A decision that a violation has occurred shall be in
writing. The city council may impose administrative penalties as follows: (Amended, Ord.
No. 17-14)
First violation: The city council may impose a civil fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $500.
Second violation within 12 months: The city council may impose a civil fine of
not less than $50 nor more than $750.
Third violation within 12 months: The city council may impose a civil fine of not
less than $50 nor more than $1,000. (Amended, Ord. No. 98-07, Amended, Ord.
No. 13-08)
(c) Persons under the age of 21. Persons under 21 years of age who use false identification to
purchase or attempt to purchase licensed products may be subject to tobacco-related
education classes, diversion programs, community services, or another penalty that the city
believes will be appropriate and effective. The city council will consult with the courts,
educators, parents, addicted youth, and other interested parties to determine an appropriate
penalty for underage violations. The penalty may be established by resolution and
amended from time to time. (Added, Ord. No. 17-14; Amended Ord. No. 19-03)
Robbinsdale City Code 1132.19(d) (Rev. 2019)
(d) Administrative civil penalties; licensee. If a licensee or an employee of a licensee is found
to have violated this section, the licensee shall be subject to an administrative penalty as
follows: (Amended, Ord. No. 17-14)
First violation: The city council shall impose a civil fine of not less than $75 nor
more than $500. The licensee’s license may also be suspended for a period of not
more than ten days.
Second violation within 24 months: The city council shall impose a civil fine of
not less than $200 nor more than $750. The licensee’s license shall also be
suspended for a period of not more than 20 days.
Third violation within 24 months: The city council shall impose a civil fine of not
less than $250 nor more than $1,000. The licensee’s license shall also be
suspended for a period of not less than seven nor more than 30 days.
No suspension or penalty shall take effect until the licensee has received notice,
served personally or by mail, of the alleged violation and an opportunity for a
hearing before the city manager or the city manager’s designee. A decision that a
violation has occurred shall be in writing. (Amended, Ord. No. 98-07, Ord. No.
13-08)
(e) Defense. It is a defense to an alleged violation of this section, that the licensee or
individual reasonably and in good faith relied upon representation of proof of age as shown
on one of the acceptable forms of identification as described in Minnesota Statutes, section
340A.503, subdivision 6, paragraph(a). (Amended, Ord. No. 13-08; Amended Ord. No.
17-14)
(f) Compliance Checks. All licensed premises must be open to inspection by law enforcement
or other authorized city officials during regular business hours. From time to time, but at
least twice per year, the city will conduct compliance checks. In accordance with state law,
the city will conduct at least one compliance check that involves the participation of a
person between the ages of 15 and 17 and at least one compliance check that involves the
participation of a person between the ages of 18 and 20 to enter licensed premises to
attempt to purchase licensed products. Prior written consent from a parent or guardian is
required for any person under the age of 18 to participate in a compliance check. Persons
used for the purpose of compliance checks will be supervised by law enforcement or other
designated personnel. (Amended Ord. No. 13-08; Amended Ord. No. 17-14; Deleted and
replaced, Ord. No. 19-03)
(g) Revocation. A license may be revoked or suspended by the city council for a violation of
the provisions of this subsection after notice and hearing.
1132.21 Severability. If any subsection or provision of this section is held invalid, such invalidity will not
affect other subsections or provisions that can be given force and effect without the invalidated subsection or
provision. (Added, Ord. No. 17-14)
Robbinsdale City Code 1135.01 (Rev. 2012)
Section 1135 - Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Goods Dealers,
Consignment Dealers, Auction House Dealers, and Traders
1135.01. Definitions. Subdivision 1. For purposes of this section the terms defined in this subsection have
the meanings given them.
Subd. 2. "Pawnbroker" means a person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal
property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable thing
on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel
mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged.
Subd. 3. "Secondhand goods dealer" means a person whose regular business includes purchasing
and selling, purchasing and/or receiving donations, tangible personal property (excluding motor vehicles)
previously used, rented, owned or leased. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07; Ord. No. 05-02)
Subd. 4. "Consignment house dealer" means a person whose regular business includes receiving,
but not purchasing, tangible property with the intention to sell the property and divide the proceeds with the
owner. (Added, Ord. No. 95-07)
Subd. 5. "Auction house dealer" means a person whose regular business includes auctioning used
goods. The auction house dealer may receive used goods to auction, but may not purchase said items for
auction. (Added, Ord. No. 95-07)
Subd. 6. "Traders" means a person(s) whose regular business primarily consists of receiving
tangible property in trade for other tangible property in stock. (Added, Ord. No. 95-07)
Subd. 7. "Minor dealer" means a consignment house dealer or trader whose business occupies no
greater than 2,250 square feet of gross floor area. (Added, Ord. No. 95-07; Amended, Ord. No. 98-18; Ord.
No. 05-02)
Subd. 8. “Automated Pawn System” means a database created and administered by the
Minneapolis Police Department, used by communities to share pawn/secondhand transaction information
electronically. (Added, Ord. No. 11-16)
1135.03. Exemptions. This section does not apply to or include the following:
(a) The sale of secondhand goods where all of the following conditions are present:
(1) the sale is held on property principally occupied as a dwelling by the seller, or
owned, rented or leased by a charitable or political organization;
(2) the items offered for sale are owned by the occupant;
(3) the sale does not exceed a period of 72 consecutive hours;
(4) not more than two sales are held either by the same person or on the same property
in any 12 month period; and
(5) none of the items offered for sale have been purchased for resale or received on
consignment for purpose of resale.
Robbinsdale City Code 1135.05 (Rev. 2005)
(b) sales by a person licensed under section 1130 as a motor vehicle dealer;
(c) the sale of secondhand books, magazines, or films or bona fide antiques or collectibles;
(Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
(d) the sale of goods at an auction held by a licensed auctioneer if occurring not more than
twice in a 12 month period; (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
(e) the business of buying or selling secondhand goods where such business is incidental to and
not the primary business of a person. Incidental in this case shall mean less than 20% of the
total gross sales; at the specific business location on the application; (Amended, Ord. No.
95-07; Ord. No. 98-18; Ord. No. 05-02)
(f) a bulk sale of property from a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler having an established
place of business or of goods sold at open sale from bankrupt stock;
(g) Firearms, including antique firearms, sold by firearms dealers holding currently valid
federal firearms dealer licenses permitting them to deal in such sales;
(h) sales of precious metals made by precious metal dealers holding currently valid county
license issued pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section 325.F.733 permitting them to engage
in such sales;
(i) sales made by the sheriff or other public officials in discharge of their official duties; or
(j) sales made by assignees or receivers appointed in this state to make sales for the benefit of
creditors.
1135.05. License required. Subdivision 1. Pawnbroker. No person may conduct, operate or engage in the
business of a pawnbroker without first obtaining a pawnbrokers license. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
Subd. 2. Secondhand goods dealer. No person may conduct, operate or engage in the business of
secondhand goods dealer without having first obtained a secondhand goods dealer license. (Amended, Ord.
No. 95-07)
Subd. 3. Consignment house dealer. No person may conduct, operate, or engage in the business of
a consignment house dealer without first obtaining a consignment house license. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-
07)
Subd. 4. Auction house dealer. No person may conduct, operate, or engage in the business of an
auction house dealer without first obtaining an auction house license. (Added, Ord. No. 95-07)
Subd. 5. Traders license. No person may conduct, operate, or engage in the business of trading
without first obtaining a trading license. (Added, Ord. No. 95-07)
Robbinsdale City Code 1135.05, Subd. 6
(Rev. 2005)
Subd. 6. Separate licenses required. A person must obtain a separate license for each of the above
activities for which they engage. (Added, Ord. No. 95-07)
1135.07. Multiple dealers. Subdivision 1. Multiple sales locations. The owner of a business, at which two
or more secondhand goods dealers are engaged in business by maintaining separate sales space and
identifying themselves to the public as individual dealers, may obtain a multiple secondhand goods dealer
license for that location. A multiple license may not be issued unless the following requirements are met:
(a) the businesses must have a single name and address;
(b) the businesses must operate in a compact and contiguous space;
Robbinsdale City Code 1135.07, Subd. 2
(Rev. 1995)
(c) the businesses must be under the unified control and supervision of the one person who
holds the license; and
(d) sales must be consummated at a central point or register operated by the owner of the
business, and the owner must maintain a comprehensive account of all sales.
Subd. 2. Compliance. The holder of a secondhand goods dealer license under this section for a
business with more than one dealer at the same location must comply with all of the requirements of this
section, including the responsibility for police reporting and record keeping in the same manner as any other
dealer licensed under this section. A dealer licensed under this subsection is responsible to its customers for
stolen or misrepresented goods sold at its place of business in the same manner as any other dealer licensed
under this section.
1135.09. License fee. Subdivision 1. Pawnbroker. The annual license fee for a pawnbroker is set by
appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
Subd. 2. Secondhand goods. The annual license fee for a secondhand goods dealer is set by
appendix B (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
Subd. 3. Multiple sales. The annual license fee for a secondhand goods dealer for a location where
more than one secondhand goods dealer is engaged in business, is set by appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No.
95-07)
Subd. 4. Consignment house. The annual license fee for a consignment house dealer is set in
appendix B. (Added, Ord. No. 95-07)
Subd. 5. Auction house. The annual license fee for an auction house dealer is est in appendix B.
(Added, Ord. No. 95-07)
Subd. 6. Trader. The annual license fee for a trader is set in appendix B. (Added, Ord. No. 95-07)
1135.11. Application. Subdivision 1. Contents. A license applicant must complete an application form
provided by the city clerk. The application must be in a form and request information of the applicant as
determined by the city council.
Subd. 2. Execution. If the applicant is a natural person, the application must be signed and sworn
to by the person; if a corporation, by an agent authorized to sign; if a partnership, by a partner.
Subd. 3. Fees. The application must be accompanied by the required license fee. The fee will be
returned to the applicant if the application is rejected.
Subd. 4. False statements. It is unlawful to knowingly make a false statement in the license
application. In addition to all other penalties, the license may be subsequently revoked by the city council
for a violation of this subsection.
Robbinsdale City Code 1135.13 (Rev. 1995)
1135.13. Bond. A pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license will not be issued unless the applicant files with the
clerk a bond with corporate surety, cash, or a United States government bond in the amount of $5,000 for a pawnbroker
license or $3,000 for a secondhand goods dealer license. The bond must be conditioned on the licensee obeying the
laws and ordinances governing the licensed business and paying all fees, taxes, penalties and other charges associated
with the business. The bond must provide that it is forfeited to the city upon a violation of law or ordinance.
1135.15. Site plan. The application for a pawnbroker or secondhand goods, or an auction house dealer license must be
accompanied by the following: (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
(a) a legal description of the property upon which the proposed licensed premises is situated;
(b) as "as built" survey showing existing and proposed buildings, if any, street curbs, parking areas, etc.;
(Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
(c) the exact location of the licensed premises on the property, customer and employee parking areas,
accesses onto the property, and entrances into the premises; and (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
(d) a current floor plan of the licensed premises. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
1135.17. Investigations. Subdivision 1. Conduct. The city, prior to the granting of an initial or renewed pawnbroker
or secondhand goods dealer, consignment dealer, auction house dealer, or trader license, must conduct a preliminary
background and financial investigation of the applicant. Any person having a beneficial interest in the license must be
investigated. The investigation shall be conducted by the chief of police and the results reported to the city council.
The chief of police must verify that facts stated in the application, and must report all convicted violations of state law,
federal law or municipal ordinances involving the applicant, interested persons, or the license premises while under that
applicant's proprietorship. A full background investigation is required for pawn and secondhand goods dealer.
(Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
Subd. 2. Fee. The fee charged by the clerk to an applicant for the costs of investigation is set by appendix B.
The applicant will be notified of the investigation fee prior to the city council's final action on the license application.
The investigation fee is payable upon terms established by the clerk.
1135.19. Public hearing. A pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer, consignment house dealer, auction house dealer
or trader license will not be issued or renewed without a public hearing. No public hearing is required for a minor
dealers license unless deemed necessary by the city council. Any person having an interest in or who will be affected
by the proposed license will be permitted to testify at the hearing. The public hearing must be preceded by at least ten
days' published notice specifying the location of the proposed licensed business premises.
1135.21. Granting of license. After review of the license application, investigation report, and public hearing, if
required, the city council may grant or refuse the application for a new or renewed pawnbroker, or secondhand goods
dealer, consignment house dealer, auction house dealer, or trader license. A license will not be effective unless the
application fee and bind, if applicable, have been filed with the city clerk. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
Robbinsdale City Code 1135.23 (Rev. 1995)
1135.23. Persons ineligible for license. A pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment house
dealer, auction house dealer, or trader will not be issued to:
(a) a person not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;
(b) a person under 18 years of age;
(c) subject to the provisions of law, a person who within five years of the license application
date has been convicted of receiving stolen property, sale of stolen property or controlled
substance, burglary, robbery, theft, damage or trespass to property, or any law or ordinance
regulating the business of pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment house
dealer, auction house dealer, or trader;
(d) a person who within five years of the license application date had a pawnbroker,
secondhand goods dealer, consignment house dealer, auction house dealer, or trader license
revoked;
(e) a person whom the city council determines not to be of sufficient good moral character and
repute; or
when the city council determines, after investigation and public hearing, that issuance or renewal of the
license would adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
1135.24. County license. Pawnbrokers and secondhand goods dealers dealing in precious metals and gems
must be licensed by Hennepin County. (Added, Ord. No. 95-07)
1135.25. Places ineligible for license. A license will not be issued or renewed under this section for any of
the following reason:
(a) if taxes, assessment or other financial claims of the city or the state of Minnesota on the
licensee's business premises are delinquent and unpaid;
(b) where operation of a licensed premises would violate zoning ordinances; or
(c) where the applicant's present license was issued conditioned upon the applicant making
specified improvements to the licensed premises or the property of the licensed premises
which improvements have not been completed. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
1135.26. Physical features of the site. Licensed pawnbrokers, secondhand goods dealers, and auction house
dealers shall:
(a) have no exterior loudspeaker, nor any public address system that is audible from any
residential parcel.
(b) completely contain their operation within an enclosed building. No storage, display, or sale
of merchandise outside of the enclosed building shall be permitted.
Robbinsdale City Code 1135.26(c) (Rev. 2012)
(c) install and maintain burglar alarms for the business establishment and for all locations
where goods are stored. (Added, Ord. No. 95-07)
1135.27. Conditional licenses. The council may grant an application for a new or renewed pawnbroker,
secondhand goods dealer, consignment dealer, auction house dealer, or trader license conditioned upon the
applicant making reasonable improvements to the proposed business premises or the property upon which
the business premises is situated. The council, in granting a conditional license, will specify when the
modifications must be completed. Failure to comply with the conditions of the license is grounds for the
city council to refuse to renew the license. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
1135.28. Hours of operation. Pawnbrokers, secondhand goods dealers, consignment dealers, auction house
dealers, or traders shall not be open for business between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day. A
minor dealer shall not be open for business between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day. (Added,
Ord. No. 95-07; Amended, Ord. No. 98-18)
1135.29. License limitations. A license will be issued to the applicant only and only for the business
premises as described in the application. The license is effective only for the premises and person specified
in the approved license application. Amendments to this section occurring during any license year shall be
applicable to all licenses then in force and the licensee shall comply with such amendments within 30 days
of the effective dates or as otherwise provided by the council. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
1135.31. Term; expiration; pro-rata fee. The license is issued for a period of one year beginning on January
1. If the application is made during the license year, a license may be issued for the remainder of the
licensed year for a monthly pro rate fee. An unexpired fraction of a month will be counted as a complete
month. The license expires on December 31. The investigation fee may not be pro-rated. (Amended, Ord.
No. 95-07; Ord. No. 02-05)
1135.33. (Repealed, Ord. No. 95-07)
1135.35. (Repealed, Ord. No. 95-07)
1135.37. Records. In addition to any other records required in this section, a licensed secondhand goods
dealer, pawnbroker, consignment house dealer, auction house dealer, or trader at the time of receipt of an
item, must immediately record, in ink or other indelible medium in a book or word processing unit, the
information listed below. For those items needing entry into the Automated Pawn System, an employee
who fails to accurately record the required information in this section shall be subject to administrative
penalties for violation of city code along with the licensed business as set forth in section 1135.52.
(Amended, Ord. No. 11-16)
(a) an accurate description of the item including, but not limited to, any trademark,
identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark
on such item;
(b) the purchase price;
Robbinsdale City Code 1135.37(c) (Rev. 1998)
(c) date, time and place of receipt;
(d) full name, address, telephone number, and date of birth of the person from whom the item
was received;
(e) no forms of identification shall be accepted other than the identification number from any
of the following forms of identification of the person from whom the item was received:
(1) valid photo Minnesota driver's license;
(2) valid photo Minnesota identification card;
(3) valid photo identification issued by the state of residency of the person from whom
the item was received;
(4) photo military identification; or
(5) current passport.
(f) the books as well as the goods received must be open for inspection by the police
department at reasonable times. Records required by this subsection must be stored and
maintained by the licensee for a period of at least three years. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
Robbinsdale City Code 1135.38 (Rev. 1998)
1135.38. (Added, Ord. No. 95-07) Prohibited items:
(a) Unless a serial number is recorded for an item to be pawned or sold, or the amount of the
pawn is less than $25, a pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment house, auction
house dealer or trader are prohibited from pawning, receiving or taking any of the items
listed below without acceptable proof of ownership. A photocopy of any document(s)
presented to the licensee shall be retained by the licensee until the item is redeemed or
following the expiration of the redemption period. Such proof must be provided to the
Robbinsdale police department upon request and must be disclosed on the daily report:
(1) sound or video equipment;
(2) automotive electronic equipment;
(3) cameras. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-01, Sec. 1)
(b) A pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment house dealer, auction house dealer
or trader are prohibited from pawning, receiving or taking any items with a serial number
identification or "operation identification" symbol which have been obliterated or defaced.
(c) Consignment house dealer, auction house dealer or trader may not deal with precious
jewelry or gems, and precious metals.
(d) Weapons: A licensed pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment dealer, auction
house dealer, or trader may not receive as a pledge or otherwise accept for consignment,
sale or trade any firearms or weapons, including but not limited to revolvers, pistols, sawedoff
shotguns, automatic rifles, blackjack, switchblade knives, or other similar weapons or
firearms. Ordinary kitchen utensils or cutlery are not prohibited.
1135.39. Daily reports. A pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, or auction house dealer shall complete a
daily computerized report of transactions. The daily reports shall be provided to the Robbinsdale Police
Department upon request. Licensee(s) shall provide, at its sole cost and expense, all equipment necessary
for the generation, transmission and storage of such reports. The format and delivery method of the
information will be determined by a resolution that shall be adopted by the city council from time to time
following input from the licensee(s) and Robbinsdale police department. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07; Ord.
No. 98-3)
Robbinsdale City Code 1135.40 (Rev. 2006)
1135.40. Billable transaction. Licensee(s) shall also pay a monthly billable transaction fee as set in
Appendix B. The billable transaction fee shall reflect the cost of processing transactions and other related
regulatory expenses as determined by the city council, and shall be reviewed and adjusted, if necessary,
annually. Licensees shall be notified in writing 30 days before any adjustment is implemented. Such fee
shall be paid no later than 15 days following the date on which the fee statement is mailed to the licensee(s).
Failure to pay the monthly billable transaction fee within such time shall be grounds for license denial,
suspension or revocation as required under Section 1135.53. (Added, Ord. No. 98-3; Amended, Ord. No.
06-07)
1135.41. Stolen goods. A licensed pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment dealer, auction
house dealer, or trader must report to the police any article pledged or received, or sought to be pledged or
received, if the licensee has reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
1135.42. Videotaping and signage. Subdivision 1. Videotaping. A licensed pawnbroker and secondhand
goods dealer must videotape all transactions and have the ability to make a still photo of each customer.
The camera must be situated in such a manner as to record a clear view of the customer and items being
transacted. The video tape must be in color and electronically record the date and time. The video tape
records and still photos must be retained for a minimum of 120 days. Specific video tape records or video
tapes shall be provided to the Robbinsdale Police Department upon request. The format and delivery
method of the video tape will be determined by the Robbinsdale police department. (Added, Ord. No. 95-
07)
Robbinsdale City Code 1135.42, Subd. 2
(Rev. 1997)
Subd. 2. Signage. The licensee must display a sign, in a conspicuous place in the premises and of sufficient
size, which informs all patrons that all transactions are reported to the Robbinsdale police department. (Added, Ord.
No. 95-07)
1135.43. Purchased goods holding period. Any secondhand goods items purchased (other than reconditioned items or
items purchased at wholesale) by a pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer may not be sold or otherwise transferred
for a period of 30 days after the date of purchase. The holding period may not be waived by any person. This section
does not prohibit the immediate sale by licensed secondhand goods dealers of items acquired from pawnbrokers
following the expiration of the redemption period. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07, Ord. No. 97-01, Sec. 2)
1135.45. Receipt for goods received. A licensed pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, pawnbroker consignment
dealer, auction house dealer, or trader must provide a receipt to the seller, pawner, or consignor of any items which
includes:
(a) the address and phone number of the business;
(b) the date on which the item was received by the business;
(c) a description of the item received, consigned or taken in pawn and the amount paid to the pledger or
the seller in exchange for the item pawned or sold;
(d) the seller's, pawner's or co-signer's signature. The pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer,
consignment dealer, auction house dealer, or trader must retain a copy of this receipt.
(e) the last regular business day by which the item must be redeemed by the pledger without risk that the
item will be sold and the amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date;
(f) the annual rate of interest charged on pawned items received; and
(g) the name and address of the seller, pawner, or pledger. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
1135.46. Record of goods sold or redeemed. A licensed pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment dealer,
or auction house dealer must keep a record showing date of sale and sale price for all items. A pawnbroker or
consignment shop shall redeem to persons entitled to redeem under Minnesota Statutes 325J.09, or, in the event of
death of the person who pawned an item, by a person presenting a pawn ticket, proper identification as required by
Robbinsdale City Code section 1135.37(e), and a certified copy of such person's death certificate. (Added, Ord. No.
95-07, Amended, Ord. No. 97-1, Sec. 3)
1135.47. Police orders. The licensee shall retain possession of any item when ordered to do so by a city police officer.
If the order is oral, it shall terminate within 72 hours after having been given, unless during such period a written order
is delivered to the licensee directing that the item continue to be held and stating the reason therefore. The requirement
of this section shall terminate if the item ordered to be held has not been seized or released by the city police within 120
days following the date of the written order. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
Robbinsdale City Code 1135.49 (Rev. 2012)
1135.49. (Deleted, Ord. No. 95-07)
1135.51. Prohibited acts. Subdivision 1. Minors. A minor may not sell or consign, or attempt to sell or
consign, goods with a pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment dealer, auction house dealer or
trader. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
Subd. 2. Others. A pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment house dealer, auction
house dealer or trader may not receive any goods, unless the person from whom the item is received
presents identification as required by Robbinsdale City Code, section 1135.37(e). (Amended, Ord. No. 95-
07)
Subd. 3. Identification. A pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment house dealer,
auction house dealer or trader may not receive any goods, unless the person from whom the item is received
presents identification as required by Robbinsdale City Code, section 1135.37(e). (Amended, Ord. No. 95-
07)
Subd. 4. Restrictions on sale. (Added, Ord. No. 95-07; Repealed, Ord. No. 97-01, Sec. 4; Added,
Ord. No. 00-13)
(a) No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign or deposit any article or property with a pawn
broker if the article belongs to another or if another person has security interest in the article
that the person knows of or should know of, whether or not the person has permission from
any other person. (Added, Ord. No. 00-13)
(b) No person shall give a false or fictitious name, false date of birth, false or out-of-date
address of residence or telephone number, or false or altered identification, or the
identification of another, or any false material information to any pawn broker in
connection with pawning, pledging, selling, consigning or depositing any article of property
with a pawn broker. (Added, Ord. No. 00-13)
1135.52. Violations. (Added, Ord. No. 11-16)
(a) Administrative civil penalties; individuals. Any employee who erroneously enters required
information on personal property or other valuable things into the Automated Pawn System
(APS) is subject to an administrative penalty.
(b) Administrative civil penalties; Licensee. If a licensee or an employee of the licensee is
found to have erroneously entered required information on personal property or other
valuable things into the Automated Pawn System (APS), the licensee shall also be subject
to an administrative penalty.
1135.53. License denial, suspension or revocation. A license under this section may be denied, suspended
or revoked by the council after a public hearing where the licensee is granted the opportunity to be heard, for
one or more of the following reasons:
(a) the operating of the business is in conflict with any provision of this code;
Robbinsdale City Code 1135.53(b) (Rev. 2011)
(b) the operation of the business is in conflict with any health, building, building maintenance,
zoning, or any other provision of this code or law;
(c) the licensee or the business premises fails to conform with the standards for license
application contained in this section;
(d) the licensee has failed to comply with one or more provisions of this section or any statute,
rule or ordinance pertaining to the businesses of pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer;
(e) fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing a license;
(f) fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of the applicant's business;
(g) subject to the provisions of law, violation within the proceeding five years of any state or
federal law relating to receiving stolen property, burglary, robbery, theft, damage or
trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance or stolen good, or operation of a
business. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
1135.55. Pawn redemption period. A person who pawns an item shall have 60 days to redeem the item
before it may be sold. A pawnbroker is permitted to return pledged goods to the borrower at any time
during the redemption period. The final redemption date must appear on the pawn ticket. This section does
not prohibit the immediate sale by licensed secondhand goods dealers of items acquired from pawnbrokers
following the expiration of the redemption period. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07; Ord. No. 11-13))
1135.57. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07; Deleted, Ord. No. 11-13)
1135.59. Inspections. A peace officer or any properly designated employee of the City or the state of
Minnesota may enter, inspect and search business premises licensed under this section, during business
hours, without a warrant. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07, Ord. No. 97-01, Sec. 5)
1135.61. Application for existing licensee(s). Notwithstanding any provision in this section or Section 530
of the Robbinsdale Zoning Code to the contrary, any licensee who possesses a valid license on the effective
date of this ordinance shall be entitled to continue operation under such license and to obtain licenses from
year to year thereafter for such premises subject to the provisions of this section but not subject to the
provisions of Section 530. (Amended, Ord. No. 95-07)
Robbinsdale City Code 1140.01 (Rev. 2003)
Section 1140 - Adult Establishments
(Added, Ord. No. 95-09, Sec. 1)
1140.01. Findings and purpose. Studies conducted by the Minnesota attorney general, the American
Planning Association and cities such as St. Paul; Indianapolis; Alexandria, Minnesota; Rochester,
Minnesota; Phoenix, Arizona; Los Angeles, California; Seattle, Washington; have studied the impacts that
adult establishments have in those communities. These studies have concluded that adult establishments
have adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhoods. Those impacts include increased crime rates, lower
property values, increased transiency, neighborhood blight and potential health risks. Based on these studies
and findings, the city council concludes:
(a) Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts of the types set forth above.
(b) The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments tend to diminish if adult establishments
are governed by locational requirements, licensing requirements and health requirements.
(c) It is not the intent of the city council to prohibit adult establishments from having a
reasonable opportunity to locate in the city.
(d) Minnesota Statutes, section 462.357, allows the city to adopt regulations to promote the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
(e) The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be promoted by the city adopting
regulations governing adult establishments.
1140.03. Definitions. Subdivision 1. The following terms have the meanings given them below.
Subd. 2. Adult establishment. A business engaged in any of the following activities or which
utilizes any of the following business procedures or practices:
(a) a business that is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors
are specifically excluded from patronage, either by operation of law or by the owners of
such business, except any business licensed under Chapter XII of the Robbinsdale city
code;
(b) any business that has (1) at least one-third of its inventory, stock and trade or publicly
displayed merchandise, or (2) at least one-third of the floor area of the business (not
including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business not
open to the public) devoted to items, merchandise or other materials distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or (3) at least one-third
of any month's gross sales is derived from the sale or rental of items, merchandise or
material distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas"; or
(c) any adult use as defined in subdivision 3 of this section.
Subd. 3. Adult use. An adult use is any of the activities and businesses described below:
Robbinsdale City Code 1140.03, Subd. 3 (a)
(Rev. 2003)
(a) Adult body painting studio: An establishment or business which provides the service of
applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to the body of a
patron when such person is nude.
(b) Adult bookstore: An establishment or business used for the barter, rental or sale of items
consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape, or motion
picture film if such business is not open to the public generally but only to one or more
classes of the public, excluding all minors from patronage, or if (1) at least one-third of the
inventory, stock and trade or publicly displayed merchandise, or (2) at least one-third of the
floor area of the business (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or
any portion of the business not open to the public) is devoted to items, merchandise or other
material distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," or (3) if at least one-third of
any month's gross sales is derived from the sale or rental of items, merchandise or material
distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas."
(c) Adult cabaret: A business or establishment that provides dancing or other live entertainment
to patrons if the dancing and live entertainment is distinguished and characterized
by an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction of matter that seeks to evoke, arouse
or excite the patrons' sexual or erotic feelings or desire.
(d) Adult companionship establishment: A business or establishment which excludes all
minors from patronage, and which provides the service of engaging in or listening to
conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer,
if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(e) Adult conversation/rap parlor: A business or establishment which excludes all minors from
patronage, and which provides the services of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk,
or discussion, if such service is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(f) Adult health/sport club: A health/sport club which excludes all minors from patronage, if
such club is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas."
(g) Adult hotel or motel: A hotel or motel from which excludes all minors from patronage and
where material is presented which is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas."
(h) Adult massage parlor, health club: A massage parlor or health club which excludes all
minors from patronage, and which provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished
and characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas."
Robbinsdale City Code 1140.03, Subd. 3 (i)
(Rev. 2003)
(i) Adult mini-motion picture theater: A business or establishment with a capacity for less
than 50 persons used for presenting material if such material is distinguished and characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(j) Adult modeling studio: A business or establishment that provides customers figure models
who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification
to such customers and who engage in "specified sexual activities" or display "specified
anatomical areas" while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn,
sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers.
(k) Adult motion picture arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited where
coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated
still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and
where the images so displayed are distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(l) Adult motion picture theater: A motion picture theater with a capacity of 50 or more
persons used for presenting material if such theater as a prevailing practice excludes all
minors from patronage or if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons.
(m) Adult novelty business: A business which has as a principal activity the sale of materials or
devices which stimulate human genitals, which are designed for sexual stimulation, or
which depict or relate to "specified anatomical areas” or "specified sexual activities".
(n) Adult sauna: A sauna which excludes all minors from patronage, and which provides a
steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing,
utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided
by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(o) Adult steam room/bathhouse facility: A building or portion of a building used for
providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing,
relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if
such building or portion of a building excludes all minors from patronage and if the service
provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished and characterized by an
emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(p) “Personal escort service,” or “model service,” “dancing service” and “hostess service”
mean any person, establishment or business advertising, offering, selling, trading or
bartering the services of itself or its employees or agents as hostesses, models, dancers,
escorts, dates or companions whether or not goods or services are simultaneously
advertised, offered, sold, traded or bartered and regardless of whether said goods or
services are also required to be licensed. (Added, Ord. No. 03-11)
Robbinsdale City Code 1140.03, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2003)
(q) “Adult encounter group” and “adult sensitivity group” mean any person, establishment or
business advertising, offering, selling, trading or bartering the services of itself, or its
employees or agents as nonprofessional counselors, or teachers or therapists who may talk
to, discuss or have conversation with patrons or who deal in any way with a patron’s
physical senses, whether or not other goods or services are simultaneously advertised,
offered, sold, traded or bartered and regardless of whether said goods or services are also
required to be licensed. (Added, Ord. No. 03-11)
(r) Similar “adult-oriented services” is meant to include all other services, which fall within the
definitions of subsection 1140.03 but are operated under different names. (Added, Ord. No.
03-11)
Subd. 4. Nude or specified anatomical areas.
(a) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or
female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
(b) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
Subd. 5. Specified sexual activities.
(a) Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal
copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or
torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the
context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct:
anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty,
pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerastia; or
(b) Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
or
(c) Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or
(d) Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast(s); or
(e) Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or
in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation,
torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such persons; or
(f) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a
human being; or
(g) Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
Robbinsdale City Code 1140.05 (Rev. 2003)
1140.05. Location. No adult establishment may be located within 1,000 feet of a residential zoning district
or within another adult establishment. Distances shall be measured from the nearest point of the property
where the adult establishment is located to the nearest boundary of the residential zoning district or of the
property containing another adult establishment.
1140.07. Hours of operation. No adult establishment may be open to the public between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
1140.09. Additional conditions for adult cabarets. The following additional conditions apply to adult
cabarets:
(a) No owner, operator or manager of an adult cabaret shall permit or allow any dancer or other
live entertainer to perform nude.
(b) No dancer, live entertainer, performer, patron or any other person shall be nude in an adult
cabaret.
(c) The owner, operator or manager of an adult cabaret shall provide the following information
to the city concerning any persons who dance or perform live entertainment at the adult
cabaret: The person's full name including all previously used legal names, home address,
home telephone number, date of birth and any presently or previously used aliases.
(d) No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall be under 18 years old.
(e) All dancing or live entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose and
which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor.
(f) No dancer or performer shall perform any dance or live entertainment closer than ten feet to
any patron.
(g) No dancer or performer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or
caress any dancer or performer.
(h) No patron shall pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or performer.
(i) No dancer or performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
1140.11. License required. Subdivision 1. No person shall own or operate an adult establishment without
having first secured a license as provided for in this subsection. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
code to the contrary, including Chapters X and XI, the procedures set forth in this subsection establish the
exclusive method for obtaining an adult establishment license. Whenever any establishment ceases to be
licensed whether through the suspension, cancellation, revocation, non-renewal or lapse of its license, its
owners shall immediately remove from public view any sign or display which identifies the establishment as
being an enterprise as defined in subsection 1140.03. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-11)
Robbinsdale City Code 1140.11, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2003)
Subd. 2. Application. The application for an adult establishment license shall be submitted on a
form provided by the city and shall include:
(a) If the applicant is an individual, the name, residence, phone number, and birthdate of the
applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name, residence, phone number, and
birthdate of each general and limited partner. If the applicant is a corporation, the names,
residences, phone numbers, and birthdates of all those persons holding more than 5% of the
issued and outstanding stock of the corporation.
(b) The name, address, phone number, and birthdate of the operator and manager of such
operation, if different from the owners.
(c) The address and legal description of the premises where the adult establishment is to be
located.
(d) A statement detailing any gross misdemeanor or felony convictions relating to sex offenses,
obscenity or the operation of an adult establishment or adult business by the applicant,
operator or manager and whether or not the applicant, operator or manager has ever applied
for or held a license to operate a similar type of business in other communities. In the case
of a corporation, a statement detailing any felony convictions by the owners of more than
5% of the issued and outstanding stock of the corporation, and whether or not those owners
have ever applied for or held a license to operate a similar type of business in other
communities.
(e) The activities and types of business to be conducted.
(f) The hours of operation.
(g) The provisions made to restrict access by minors.
(h) A building plan of the premises detailing all internal operations and activities.
(i) Any other information that the city clerk or city council may require to enforce the
requirements of this section of the city code. (Added, Ord. No. 03-11)
Subd. 3. License fee.
(a) The annual license fee for an adult establishment license is set by Appendix B.
(b) Each application for a license shall be submitted to the city manager and payment made to
the city. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by payment in full of the
required license fee. Upon rejection of any application for a license, the city shall refund
the license fee.
Robbinsdale City Code 1140.11, Subd. 3(c)
(Rev. 2003)
(c) All licenses shall expire on the last day of December in each year. Each license shall be
issued for a period of one year, except that if a portion of the license year has elapsed when
the application is made, a license may be issued for the remainder of the year for a prorated
fee. In computing such fee, any unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as one
month. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-05)
(d) No part of the fee paid by any license shall be refunded, except that a pro rata portion of the
fee shall be refunded in the following instances upon application to the city manager within
30 days from the happening of the event, provided that such event occurs more than 30
days before the expiration of the license:
(i) Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire or other catastrophe.
(ii) The licensee's illness.
(iii) The licensee's death.
(iv) A change in the legal status making unlawful for licensed business to continue.
(e) Each application shall contain a provision on the application in bold print indicating that
any withholding of information or the providing of false or misleading information will be
grounds for denial or revocation of a license. Any changes in the information provided on
the application or provided during the investigation shall be brought to the attention of the
city council by the applicant(s) or licensee. If said changes take place during the
investigation, said data shall be provided to the police chief or the city manager in writing
and they shall report the changes to the city council. Failure to report said changes by the
applicant(s) or the licensee may result in a denial or revocation of a license.
Subd. 4. Investigative fee. Subdivision 1. The investigative fee for an adult establishment license
shall be determined as follows:
(a) Upon applying for the license, the applicant shall pay an investigative fee set by Appendix
B per person identified on the application as an owner, operator or manager.
(b) If it appears that the investigative costs will exceed the amount set forth in Appendix B, the
city manager shall notify the applicant and give the applicant an estimate of costs. The
applicant shall either make an additional deposit equal to the difference or shall withdraw
the application. If the additional deposit is not paid within 14 days, the application shall be
deemed withdrawn.
(c) If the costs of administration, issuance and investigation are less than the deposit, the
balance shall be refunded upon the issuance or denial of the license. No license shall be
issued until the applicant has paid the entire cost of administration, issuance and
investigation.
Robbinsdale City Code 1140.11, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2003)
Subd. 5. Liability insurance. Prior to the issuance of a license, the applicant shall file with the clerk
a liability insurance policy providing coverage of at least $1 million combined single limit issued by an
insurance company authorized in the state of Minnesota. The policy shall provide that no cancellation for
any cause may be made by either the insured or the insurer without first giving written notice of such
cancellation to the city at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the cancellation. The policy shall
further provide that no payment of any claim by the insurance company shall in any manner decrease the
coverage provided for in respect to any other claim or claims brought against the insured or the insuring
company. The policy shall be subject to approval by the city attorney as to form and execution and shall be
issued by companies who are duly licensed to do business in the state of Minnesota. The policy, when
approved, shall be deposited with the clerk. (Added, Ord. No. 03-11)
Subd. 6. Granting of license.
(a) The city manager and police chief, or such persons as they shall designate, shall complete
their investigation within 30 days after the city manager receives a complete application
and all license and investigative fees.
(b) An application for a new license shall be issued upon the approval of the city council only
after a public hearing has been conducted. If the application is for a renewal, the applicant
shall be allowed to continue business until the council has determined to renew or refuse to
renew a license. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-11)
(c) If, after such investigation, it appears that the applicant and the place proposed for the
business are eligible for a license under the criteria set forth in this subsection, then the
license shall be issued by the city council within 30 days after the investigation is
completed. Otherwise the license shall be denied.
(d) Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be transferable to another
holder. Each license shall be issued only for the premises described in the application. No
license may be transferred to another premise without the approval of the city council. If
the licensee is a partnership or a corporation, a change in the identity of any of the
principals of the partnership or corporation shall be deemed a transfer of the license. All
adult establishments existing at the time of the adoption of this subsection shall be required
to obtain an annual license.
Subd. 7. Persons ineligible for license. No license shall be granted to or held by any person:
(a) Under 21 years of age;
(b) Who is overdue or whose spouse is overdue in their payment to any unit of government for
taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against them or imposed upon them;
(c) Who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of a gross misdemeanor or
felony or of violating any law of this state or local ordinance relating to sex offenses,
obscenity offenses or adult establishments;
Robbinsdale City Code 1140.11, Subd. 8
(Rev. 2003)
(d) Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is issued;
(e) Who is residing with a person who has been denied a license by the city or any other
Minnesota municipal corporation to operate an adult establishment, or residing with a
person whose license to operate an adult establishment has been suspended or revoked
within the preceding 12 months;
(f) Who has not paid the license and investigative fees required by this subsection.
Subd. 8. Places ineligible for license.
(a) No license shall be granted for adult establishments on any premises where the applicant or
any of its officers, agents or employees has been convicted of a violation of this subsection,
or where any license hereunder has been revoked for cause, until one year has elapsed after
such conviction or revocation.
(b) No license shall be granted for any adult establishment which is not in full compliance with
the city code, the city's zoning ordinance, the building code, the fire code, the city's health
regulations and all provisions of state and federal law.
Subd. 9. Conditions of license.
(a) Every license shall be granted subject to the following conditions and all other provisions
of this subsection, and of any applicable sections of the city code, the city's zoning
ordinance, the building code, the fire code, city, county, state and federal health regulations
and all provisions of state and federal law. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-11)
(b) All licensed premises shall have the license posted in a conspicuous place at all times.
(c) No minor shall be permitted on the licensed premises.
(d) Any designated inspection officer of the city shall have the right to enter, inspect, and
search the premises of a licensee during business hours.
(e) Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of their place of business and shall
maintain conditions of order.
(f) No adult goods or material services shall be offered, sold, transferred, conveyed, given,
displayed, or bartered to any minor.
(g) The licensee shall take all necessary steps to prevent the consumption or possession of
alcoholic beverages and controlled substances on any part of the premises by either
customers or employees. (Added, Ord. No. 03-11)
(h) The licensee shall refuse to accept as a customer any person obviously under the influence
of alcohol or drugs. (Added, Ord. No. 03-11)
Robbinsdale City Code 1140.11, Subd. 10
(Rev. 2003)
(i) The furnishings to be located on the premises or the equipment available for patrons may
not be modified from the descriptions contained in the application without the prior
approval of the city. (Added, Ord. No. 03-11)
Subd. 10. Penalty.
(a) Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be punished not more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as
prescribed by state law.
(b) Any violation of this section shall be a basis for the suspension or revocation of any license
granted hereunder. In the event that the city council proposes to revoke or suspend the
license, the licensee shall be notified in writing of the basis for such proposed revocation or
suspension. The council shall hold a hearing for the purpose of determining whether to
revoke or suspend the license, which hearing shall be within 30 days of the date of the
notice.
(c) The city council shall determine whether to suspend or revoke a license within 30 days
after the close of the hearing or within 60 days of the date of the notice, whichever is
sooner, and shall notify the licensee of its decision within that period.
Subd. 11. Right of appeal.
(a) In the event that the council determines to suspend, or revoke a license, such suspension or
revocation shall not be effective until 15 days after notification of the decision to the
licensee. If, within that 15 days, the licensee files and serves an action in state or federal
court challenging the council's action, then the suspension or revocation shall be stayed
until the conclusion of such action.
(b) If the city council determines not to renew a license, the licensee may continue its business
for 15 days after receiving notice of such non-renewal. If the licensee files and serves an
action in state or federal court within that 15 days for the purpose of determining whether
the city acted properly, the licensee may continue in business until the conclusion of the
action.
(c) If the city council decides not to grant a license to an applicant, then the applicant may
commence an action in state or federal court within 15 days for the purpose of determining
whether the city acted properly. The applicant shall not commence doing business unless
the action is concluded in its favor.
Robbinsdale City Code 1145.01 (Rev. 2001)
Section 1145 – Lawn Fertilizer Application Control
(Added, Ord. No. 01-03)
1145.01. Lawn fertilizer application control. Subdivision 1. Purpose. The city has conducted studies and
has reviewed existing data to determine the current and projected water quality of various lakes within its
community. The data indicates that lake water quality may be maintained and improved if the city is able to
regulate the amount of lawn fertilizer and other chemicals entering the lakes as a result of storm water runoff
or other causes. The purpose of this section is to define regulations which will aid the city in managing and
protecting its water resources which are enjoyed by its residents and other users.
Subd. 2. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, certain terms and words are defined as
follows:
"Commercial applicator" is a person who is engaged in the business of applying fertilizer for hire.
"Fertilizer" means a substance containing one or more recognized plant nutrients that is used for
its plant nutrient content and designed for use or claimed to have value in promoting plant growth.
Fertilizer does not include animal and vegetable manures that are not manipulated, marl, lime, limestone,
and other products exempted by Rule of the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture.
"Noncommercial applicator" is a person who applies fertilizer during the course of employment,
but who is not a commercial lawn fertilizer applicator.
"Pesticide" means a substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel, or
mitigate a pest, and a substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant or
desiccant.
Subd. 3. Regulations for commercial lawn fertilizer applicators.
(a) License required. After December 31, 2001, no person, firm, corporation or franchise
shall engage in the business of commercial lawn fertilizer applicator with the city unless a
license has been obtained from the city of Robbinsdale or a designee is provided herein.
(b) License application procedure. Applicants for a commercial lawn fertilizer applicator
license shall be submitted to the city of Robbinsdale or a designee. The application shall
consist of the following:
(1) Application form. Application forms shall be provided by the city and shall
include the following instructions:
(i) Name, address and telephone number of applicant and any individuals
authorized to represent the applicant.
(ii) Description of lawn fertilizer formula proposed to be applied on lawns
within the city.
(iii) A time schedule for application of lawn fertilizer and identification of
weather conditions acceptable for lawn fertilizer application.
Robbinsdale City Code 1145.01, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2018)
(2) Product material safety data sheet. A copy of material safety data sheet, including
product chemical analysis of the intended lawn fertilizer, shall be submitted to the city
along with the initial application for a license and, thereafter, at least seven days before
fertilizer composition changes are implemented.
(3) Minnesota state licenses. A copy of all licenses required of the applicant by the state of
Minnesota regarding the application of pesticides and fertilizers.
(4) License fee. The license fee is set forth in Appendix B. The license shall expire on the
31st day of December. The license fee shall not be prorated. (Amended, Ord. No. 2018-
02)
(5) Insurance. The applicant must provide a certificate of insurance with the city with public
liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota. The policy must
provide that it may not be cancelled by the issuer except upon ten days’ written notice to
the city. If the insurance is cancelled the license or permit will be automatically
suspended until the insurance is replaced. (Added, Ord. No. 03-22)
(c) Conditions of license. Commercial lawn fertilizer applicator licenses shall be issued subject to the
following conditions which shall be specified on the license form:
(1) Random sampling. Commercial lawn fertilizer applicators shall permit the city to sample
any commercial lawn fertilizer applications to be applied with the city at any time after
issuance of the initial license.
(2) Possession of license. The commercial lawn fertilizer license, or a copy thereof, shall be
in the possession of any party employed by the commercial lawn fertilizer applicator
when making lawn fertilizer applications within the city.
(3) Possession of product material safety data sheet. A copy of product material data safety
sheet of the lawn fertilizer used shall be in the possession of any party employed by the
commercial lawn fertilizer applicator when making lawn fertilizer applications within the
city.
(4) State regulations. Licensee shall comply with the provisions of the Minnesota fertilizer,
soil amendment and plant amendment law, as contained in Minnesota Statutes, chapter
18C and amendments thereto. The licensee shall also comply with the provisions of the
pesticide control as contained in Minnesota Statutes, chapter 18B.
Subd. 4. General regulations.
(a) Time of application. Neither commercial applicators or noncommercial applicators shall apply
lawn fertilizer when the ground is frozen or when conditions exist which will promote or create
runoffs.
Robbinsdale City Code 1145.01, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2003)
(b) Sample analysis cost. The cost of analyzing fertilizer samples taken from commercial
applicators shall be paid by the commercial applicators if the sample analysis indicates
that phosphorous content exceeds the levels authorized therein.
(c) Fertilizer content. No person, firm, corporation, franchise, or commercial or
noncommercial applicator, including homeowners or renters, shall apply any lawn
fertilizer, liquid or granular, within the city of Robbinsdale which contains any amount of
phosphorous or other compound containing phosphorous, such as phosphate, except:
Robbinsdale City Code 1145.01, Subd. 5
(1) the naturally occurring phosphorous in unadulterated natural or organic
fertilizing products such as yard waste compost;
(2) or as otherwise provided in subdivision 5.
(d) Impervious surfaces and drainage ways. No person shall apply fertilizer to impervious
surfaces, areas within drainage ditches, or waterways.
(e) Buffer zone. Fertilizers and pesticides shall not be applied:
(1) below the ordinary high water lines as established by the Minnesota department
of natural resources; or
(2) within ten feet of any wetland or water resource.
(f) Warning signs for pesticide application. All commercial or noncommercial lawn
fertilizer applicators who apply pesticides to turf areas must post or affix warning signs
on the property where the pesticides are applied. The warning signs shall comply with
the following criteria and contain the following information:
(1) The warning signs must project at least 18 inches above the top of the grass line.
The warning signs must be of a material that is rain resistant for at least a 48 hour
period and must remain in place up to 48 hours from the time of initial
application.
(2) The following information must be printed on the warning signs in contrasting
colors and capitalized letters measuring at least one-half inch, or in another
format approved by the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture. The signs must
provide the following information:
(a) The name of the business, entity, or person applying the pesticide; and
(b) The following language: "This area chemically treated. Keep children
and pets off until (date of safe entry)" or a universally accepted symbol
and text approved by the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture as
recognized as having the same meaning or intent as specified in this
subparagraph. The warning signs may include the name of the pesticide
used.
(3) The warning sign must be posted on a lawn or yard between two feet and five
feet from the sidewalk or street. For parks, golf courses, athletic fields,
playgrounds, or other similar recreational property, the warning signs must be
posted immediately adjacent to areas within the property where pesticides have
been applied and at or near the entrance to the property.
Subd. 5. Exemption and notice requirement. The prohibition against use of fertilizer containing
any quantity of phosphorous under subdivision 4 shall not apply to:
Robbinsdale City Code 1145.01, Subd. 6
(Rev. 2001)
(a) Newly established or developed turf and lawn areas during the first growing season; or
b) Turf and lawn areas which soil tests confirm are below phosphorous levels established by
the University of Minnesota extension services. The lawn fertilizer application shall not
contain an amount of phosphorous exceeding the amount of phosphorous and the
appropriate application rate recommended in the soil test evaluation.
Phosphorous applied as lawn fertilizer pursuant to the aforementioned exemptions shall be watered in the
soil where it is immobilized and generally protected from loss by runoff.
Any person, firm, corporation, franchise, or commercial or noncommercial applicator, including a
homeowner or renter, shall notify the city at least 24 hours prior to applying lawn fertilizer containing
phosphorous contained in the lawn fertilizer to be applied.
Subd. 6. Penalty. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor. The city may revoke a commercial applicator's license for repeat violations of this section.
Robbinsdale City Code 1150.01
(Revised 2013)
Section 1150 – Fireworks
1150.01. Subdivision 1. Consumer fireworks. “Consumer fireworks” means the items defined as
“fireworks” in Minnesota Statutes, section 624.20. (Amended, Ord. No. 13-01)
Subd. 2. Illegal fireworks prohibited. Except as otherwise provided by Minnesota Statutes,
section 624.20 to 624.25, no person shall offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or wholesale,
possess, advertise, use or explode any fireworks, as that term is defined in Minnesota Statutes, section
624.20, subdivision 1.
Subd. 3. License required for consumer fireworks. No person shall offer for sale, expose for
sale, sell at retail or wholesale, or advertise for the sale of any consumer fireworks unless such person
shall first obtain a license to be issued by the city council in the manner herinafter prescribed, and unless
such person shall comply with the provisions of this section and the terms and conditions prescribed in
such license. No license shall be issued for outside fireworks sales or sales from a temporary structure,
unless it is accessory to the principal use and a conditional use permit is issued, per section 520.05,
subdivision 4(f). (Amended, Ord. No. 03-28)
Subd. 4. Zoning compliance. Consumer fireworks may only be sold from an existing retail
building in B-2, B-3, B-4 and DD-1 zones. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-28)
1150.03. Subdivision 1. Application for license. Each applicant shall file a written and signed
application, on a form prepared by the city clerk. Such application shall describe the specific location
where, the day or days when, and the hour or hours during which the applicant intends to offer for sale,
expose for sale, or sell at retail or wholesale any legal fireworks, and such other pertinent information as
the council may deem necessary to enable it to carry out the provisions of this section. No license shall
be issued unless the application has been approved by the planning department as meeting the city’s
zoning regulations, by the fire department as meeting the requirements of the adopted city fire code, and
by the Robbinsdale police department as meeting the requirements of any other state or local laws.
Subd. 2. The application shall contain and the applicant shall provide, at a minimum, the
following information:
(a) Applicant’s name, address, phone number, and date of birth.
(b) The address and phone number for the sale site.
(c) Verification that there shall be at least two code compliant exists from all buildings from
which fireworks are stored or sold.
(d) The duration of the permit.
(e) The type and quantity, in pounds, of the specific type of fireworks to be at the sale site.
(f) A statement that applicant understands that persons selling and purchasing fireworks
must be at least 18 years of age.
(g) A statement that applicant understands what constitutes consumer fireworks and what are
illegal under state law. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-28)
(h) A complete description and drawing showing exactly where the fireworks are going to be
placed for retail sale and where and how they will be stored, and/or a complete
description of all storage, retention and outdoor special effect show activities.
Robbinsdale City Code 1150.03, subd. 3
(Revised 2013)
Subd. 3. Applicant shall file with the application evidence that the applicant has liability
insurance coverage in an amount of $1,500,000 per occurrence to cover licensee’s negligent acts relative
to the sale, possession or use of fireworks. Such insurance shall indicate that the city of Robbinsdale shall
receive notice at least 30 calendar days prior to the cancellation or termination of the coverage. Any
license issued under the authority of this section shall immediately terminate upon the cancellation or
termination of the insurance coverage required herein. (Amended, Ord. No. 13-01)
1150.05. Issuance of license. Subdivision 1. Terms. The council shall grant a consumer fireworks
license to an applicant who complies with the provisions of this section and provides a completed
application with appropriate approvals and proof of insurance, unless the applicant or designated location
has been the subject of prior violations of this section, in the same year of issuance. A license is an
annual license, which shall expire on December 31 of the year of issuance. The license fee as set by
Appendix B shall accompany the application. The license fee shall not be prorated.
(a) Each license issued pursuant to this section shall describe the specific location in which
such sales are authorized to take place, the dates and times in which sales may occur at
such location, and maximum gross weight of consumer fireworks that may be kept on the
premises, relevant licensee data, and such other terms and conditions as may be necessary
for the proper enforcement of this section.
(b) No person shall sell consumer fireworks to a person younger than 18 years of age.
Licensee and licensee’s employees selling consumer fireworks must be at least 18 years
of age. Vendors of consumer fireworks must verify the age of purchaser by the use of
photographic identification. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-28)
(c) The licensee shall prominently post the license at all times at the location where the
consumer fireworks are being offered for sale. Amended, Ord. No. 03-28)
(d) The licensee shall keep at least 2 1/2 gallon water type portable fire extinguishers, or
other approved means of extinguishing a fire, at the approved location where the
consumer fireworks are being offered for sale and where they are stored at times when
they are not offered for sale. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-28)
(e) The licensee shall prominently post at least two approved “No Smoking” signs at the
location where the consumer fireworks are being offered for sale and where they are
stored at times when they are not offered for sale. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-28)
(f) No signs, banners, pennants, or any other forms of advertising shall be displayed unless
in compliance with the Robbinsdale sign ordinance. All permits required by the sign
ordinance shall be obtained.
1150.06. Fireworks display. Subdivision 1. Permit required for display of fireworks. The display of
fireworks, other than consumer fireworks, may be conducted only upon the issuance of a permit from the
city for that purpose. (Added, Ord. No. 03-28)
Robbinsdale City Code 1150.06, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2013)
Subd. 2. Application - fee. The application for a display permit must be on forms prepared by
the city clerk and must be made at least 30 calendar days in advance of the date of the display. The
display permit fee, in Appendix B, must accompany the application. If the application is denied, the fee
will be refunded less the expenses incurred by the city in investigation and review of the application.
(Added, Ord. No. 03-28, Amended, Ord. No. 13-01)
Subd. 3. Eligibility. Display permits will be issued only to entities that are permitted to hold
such permits pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section 624.22. (Added, Ord. No. 03-28)
Subd. 4. Investigtation. The completed application will be promptly referred to the fire chief for
review and recommendation. The fire chief shall report on whether the operator of the display is
competent and is certified by the state fire marshal; and whether the display is of such a character and it to
be so located, discharged or fired that it will not be hazardous to property or endanger any person.
(Added, Ord. No. 03-28)
Subd. 5. Issuance. The city clerk will issue the permit if the fire chief’s report determines that
the operator is competent and certified, and that the fireworks display as proposed will conform to the
safety guidelines of the state fire marshal as provided for in Minnesota Statutes, section 624.22,
subdivision 1(e); and if the applicant has furnished evidence of comprehensive general liability insurance
in an amount customarily recommended for such events. If the report of the fire chief does not contain all
such determinations, or if the evidence of insurance is not sufficient, the city clerk will notify the
applicant in writing of the denial and the reasons for the denial. The city clerk will also promptly refund
the application fee after making the deductions described in subdivision 2. After a permit has been
granted, sales, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for a display are lawful for that purpose only.
A permit is not transferable. (Added, Ord. No. 03-28)
Subd. 6. Scope of display. The display permit only authorizes a display that is in conformity
with the information contained in the approved application including, without limitation, the date, time,
location, direction, nature of the fireworks used in the display, and the operator. (Added, Ord. No. 03-28)
1150.07. Special restrictions. Subdivision 1. No person shall set off, ignite or explode consumer
fireworks on public property or within 15 feet of any building. No indoor, proximate audience displays or
special effects fireworks shows shall be allowed in the city of Robbinsdale. It is unlawful to throw, toss
or aim any fireworks at any person, animal, vehicle or other thing or object or be used in any manner that
may threaten or cause any possible harm to life or damage of property. Consumer fireworks may not be
discharged in such a manner that may create a nuisance or between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(Amended, Ord. No. 03-28)
Subd. 2. All outdoor special effects shows will require a license from the city and a review of
plans and site inspection by the fire department. (Amended, Ord. No. 13-01)
Robbinsdale City Code 1150.07, Subd. 3
(Rev. 2003)
Subd. 3. In buildings that have an automatic sprinkling system, consumer fireworks shall be
limited to a gross weight of 400 pounds. In buildings that do not contain an automated sprinkling system
the amount of consumer fireworks contained in retail sales displays shall be determined by the
Robbinsdale fire chief on a case by case basis after considering the building’s construction, fire
suppression apparatus and other relevant factors. Gross weight permitted by any license shall be shown
on the license.
Subd. 4. No exterior storage, display, sales or transient sales of fireworks are permitted.
Subd. 5. Violations. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. The city council may revoke or suspend the license, following a hearing on such violation.
The city council may also consider such violation in reviewing any application for license for any year
following the year of the violation.
Subd. 6. Application of other laws. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to make lawful the
sale or use of any type of fireworks when such sale or use is prohibited by state law.
1150.09. Inspections; termination until compliance gained. Officers of the city’s police and fire
departments may, at any time when licensee is engaged in selling or displaying fireworks for sale, inspect
the premises to determine compliance with this section. Licensee must discontinue selling or displaying
fireworks for sale until compliance with all provisions of this section, the fire code, and any other state or
federal regulations.
Robbinsdale City Code 1155.01
Section 1155 – Donation Collection Bins
(Ordinance No. 17-01)
1155.01. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the placement and maintenance of donation
collection bins upon any property within the City of Robbinsdale.
1155.02. Definitions. Subdivision 1. For purposes of this section, the terms defined in this subsection
have the meanings given them.
Subd. 2. “Donation collection bin” (hereinafter referred to as “Bin” or “Bins” means a receptacle
in which the general public may deposit items to be recycled, resold, or reused including, but not limited
to, clothing, shoes, textiles, books, or household items.
1155.03. License Required. Subdivision 1. General Rule. No person shall locate a Bin at any place in
the city unless they have obtained a license therefore as provided herein.
Subd. 2. Application For License. Application for such license shall be made to the city clerk
and shall state the full name and address of the applicant, the company name of the owner/operator of the
Bin (if different from the applicant), the property address and site plan depicting the exact size and the
specific location where Bin is to be sited, statement of permission from the property owner of the
premises (if different from the applicant), 24-hour emergency contact information for the owner/operator,
proof of insurance, license fee, and such other information as the city clerk may require. The application
shall be presented to the city council for its consideration, and if granted by the council, a license will be
issued by the city clerk.
Subd. 3. License Fee. The fee for a license is set by Appendix B.
Subd 4. Term. Licenses expire annually on December 31. Licenses are not transferable.
License renewal is subject to the license provisions described in section 1005 Licensing Procedures.
1155.04. Conditions of License. All Bins shall be subject to the following requirements:
(a) Bins shall not be located in residentially-zoned districts or in districts zoned DD1
(b) Bins shall not be placed in the public right-of-way.
(c) Not more than one (1) Bin shall be located at any location or property.
(d) Items collected shall be limited to nonfood items that can be placed inside of the Bin
through the opening and shall not be left outside of the Bin.
(e) Bins shall be installed on a hard, level surface and shall be locked or otherwise secured to
prevent removal of items; maintained in good condition and appearance with no
structural damage, holes, or visible rust; and shall be free of graffiti.
(f) Bins shall be monitored daily, serviced and emptied as needed by the owner or operator,
or the property owner, to prevent outflow of materials onto surrounding area. Items left
outside the Bin shall be collected and removed within twenty-four (24) hours’ notice
Robbinsdale City Code 1155.04(f)
provided to the property owner and operator of the Bin. All sorting and processing of
goods collected shall occur within a completely enclosed building.
(g) Bins shall not be located in any required yards and shall not interfere with on-site
circulation, landscaping, required off-street parking, accessible parking areas, walkways,
or any other requirements that may have been imposed as part of the site plan approved
for the premises.
(h) The Council may impose any additional conditions or restrictions it deems reasonably
necessary or advisable.
1155. 05. Revocation of License. Every such license may be revoked by the Council, after the licensee
has been given reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard, for the violation of any provision of this
code, or for the violation of any conditions, or restrictions imposed at the time of the issuance of the
licensee, or imposed thereafter or upon failure of the licensee to comply with any condition, order or
direction issued by the Council. Notwithstanding that, upon reasonable notice and opportunity to be
heard, the City Council reserves the right to terminate a license for any other lawful basis and return a
pro-rated portion of the licensing fee.
1155. 06. Exceptions. Educational, religious, charitable or other non-profit entities hosting a donation
collection bin on their own property on a temporary basis for fund-raising purposes are exempt from the
licensing requirements.
1155. 07. Violation of Provisions. The City Council may suspend or revoke a license issued pursuant to
section 1005.21.
Robbinsdale City Code 1200.01
(Rev. 2018)
CHAPTER XII
LIQUOR AND BEER
Section 1200 - Sale, Consumption and Display of
Alcoholic Beverages - General Provisions
1200.01. Provisions of state law adopted. Except as modified in this chapter, the provisions of Minnesota
Statutes, chapter 340A, relating to the matters of retail sale, distribution and consumption of alcoholic
beverages are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.
1200.03. Definitions. Subdivision 1. For purposes of this chapter, and in addition to those definitions not
inconsistent with this chapter contained in Minnesota Statutes, chapter 340A, the terms defined in this
subsection have the meaning given them.
Subd. 2. “3.2 malt liquor” means malt liquor containing not less than one-half of one percent
alcohol by volume and not more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight.
Subd. 3. “Bar” means a counter at which alcoholic beverages are served to customers.
Subd. 4. “Brew Pub” as used in this Chapter, means a Brewer who also holds one or more retail
on-sale licenses and who manufactures fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year, at any one
licensed Premises, the entire production of which is solely for consumption on tap at the location where
produced, or for off-sale from those licensed premises as permitted in Minnesota Statutes Section
340A.24, Subdivision 2. (Added, Ord. No. 18-04, Sec. 1)
Subd. 5. “Brewer” means a person who manufactures malt liquor for sale.
Subd. 6. “Commissioner” means the commissioner of public safety of the state of Minnesota.
Subd. 7. “Display” means the keeping, storing and permitting to be kept or stored of an alcoholic
beverage which has been poured, dispensed or has had its package seal broken, on, in or at any table, booth,
bar or other area of a licensed premises accessible to the general public.
Subd. 8. “Distilled spirits” means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, whiskey,
rum, brandy, gin, and other distilled spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof, for nonindustrial
use. (Added Ord. No. 15-10)
Subd. 9. “Hotel” means and includes (i) an establishment where, in consideration of payment
therefor, food and lodging are regularly furnished to transients, which maintains for the use of its guests not
less than 50 guest rooms with bedding and other usual, suitable and necessary furnishings in each room
which is provided at the main entrance with a suitable lobby, desk and office for the registration of its
guests, which employs an adequate staff to provide suitable and usual service, and which is under the same
management and control as the rest of the establishment and has, as an integral part thereof, a dining room
with appropriate facilities for seating not less than 150 guests where the general public is, on consideration
of payment therefor, served meals at tables; and (ii) an establishment consisting of the premises sought to be
licensed and the immovable fixtures located thereon has a fair market value of at least $1,000,000. In
determining the fair market value to assign to the establishment, the council may rely upon real estate tax
information and other factors it deems appropriate.
Robbinsdale City Code 1200.03, Subd. 10
(Rev. 2018)
Subd. 10. “Interest” means an interest, pecuniary or otherwise, in the ownership, operation,
management or profits, of a retail liquor establishment, but does not include (i) bona fide loans; (ii) bona
fide fixed sum rental agreements; (iii) bona fide open accounts or other obligations held with or without
security arising out of the ordinary and regular course of business of selling or leasing merchandise, fixtures
or supplies to the establishment. A person who receives monies from time to time directly or indirectly
from a licensee, in the absence of a bona fide consideration therefor and excluding bona fide gifts or
donations, is deemed to have a pecuniary interest in such retail license: in determining “bona fides”, the
reasonable value of the goods or things received as consideration for any payment by the licensee and other
facts reasonably tending to prove or disprove the existence of any purposeful scheme or arrangement to
evade the prohibitions of this section will be considered.
Subd. 11. “Intoxicating liquor” means ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spiritous, vinous and malt
beverages containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight.
Subd. 12. “Manufacturer” means a person who, by any process of manufacture, fermenting,
brewing, distilling, refining, rectifying, blending, or by the combination of different materials, prepares or
produces intoxicating liquor for sale. (Added Ord. No. 15-10)
Subd. 13. “Microdistillery” has the meaning set forth in subsection 505.09, subd. 81 (zoning code).
(Added Ord. No. 15-10)
Subd. 14. “Package” or “original package” means corked or sealed container or receptacle holding
an alcoholic beverage.
Subd. 15. “Premises” means the square foot area constituting the establishment to be licensed, and
which is described in the license application. Premises may include outdoor areas immediately adjacent to a
building or structure comprising the remainder of the licensed premises including, but not limited to,
porches, decks and patios.
Subd. 16. “Restaurant” shall have the definition given based upon the specific license types as
provided throughout this Code. (Amended, Ord. No. 17-10)
(Amended, Ord. Nos. 97-13; 14-20, Added, Ord. No. 15-10)
1200.05. License required. Except as provided by state law, it is unlawful to directly or indirectly, on any
pretense or by any device, sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise dispose of alcoholic beverages as a part of
a commercial transaction without a license.
1200.07. Application. Subdivision 1. Form. An application for a license is made upon a form supplied by
the city.
Subd. 2. Contents. In addition to such other information as the council may from time to time
require, an application for a license must contain: (i) the name of the applicant; (ii) age of the applicant; (iii)
representations as to the applicant's character, with such references as the council may require; (iv)
citizenship; (v) the type of license applied for; (vi) the business in connection with which the proposed
license will operate; (vii) the location of the establishment, including the legal description of the real
property, together with a specific description of the gross square feet to be occupied by the business to be
operated under the license for which an application has been made; (viii) whether the applicant is the owner
and operator of the business; and (ix) how long the applicant has been in that business at that place. A copy
of each summons received by the applicant under Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.802 during the
preceding year must be attached to each application. An application for any type of intoxicating liquor
license must be in the form prescribed by the commissioner.
Robbinsdale City Code 1200.07, Subd. 3
(Rev. 2017)
Subd. 3. Filing, verification: execution. An application for a license must be filed with the city
clerk. The application must be executed according to state law and city code as set forth in the application
form. (Amended, Ord. No. 13-01)
Subd. 4. False statements. It is unlawful to make a false statement in an application for a license.
1200.09. Fee. The license fees are set by Appendix B and subject to subsection 1000.05. The license fees
are set forth in Appendix B.
1200.11. Restrictions: general. Subdivision 1. Other laws apply. A license is subject to the conditions of
this section, other provisions of this code, and other applicable ordinances, laws or regulations.
Subd. 2. License posting. A retail license must be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises for
which it is granted.
Subd. 3. Racial discrimination. A retail license may not be issued or renewed by the city to a club
which discriminates against members or applicants for membership or guests of members on the basis of
race.
Subd. 4. Order. A licensee is responsible for the conduct of persons on the licensed premises and
must maintain conditions of sobriety and order.
Subd. 5. Exclusive liquor stores. Exclusive liquor stores may not be operated in the city except for
the Municipal Liquor Dispensary set forth in Section 1230. (Amended, Ord. No. 14-20)
Subd. 6. Inspections. A police officer or a properly designated employee of the city may enter,
inspect and search the premises of the licensee during business hours, or at any time when employees are on
the premises, without a search and seizure warrant for the purpose of detecting violations of the provisions
of this chapter. Any private club or public place allowing the consumption or display of intoxicating or 3.2
malt liquor that requires the use of a key, password, passkey, passcard, or other indicia of membership and
access; shall provide the chief of police with such indicia of membership to be used only for the purpose as
set forth in this section. Refusal to permit such inspection is a violation of this section and grounds for
discipline of the licensee, which may include revocation of the license. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-04)
Subd. 7. License: limited to space. A retail license to sell alcoholic beverages is effective for
compact and contiguous area specified in the approved license.
Subd. 8. Prostitution. A licensee or its employees, may not knowingly permit the licensed premises
or a room in those premises or an adjoining building directly or indirectly under the licensee's control to be
used as a resort for prostitutes.
Subd. 9. Licensee's responsibility. A licensee is responsible for the conduct in the licensed
establishment. A sale of alcoholic beverages by any employee authorized to sell such beverages in the
establishment is the act of the licensee.
Subd. 10. Sanitary conditions. Licensed premises must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
Robbinsdale City Code 1200.13
(Rev. 2018)
1200.13. Hours and days of sale. Subdivision. 1. 3.2 malt liquor. On-sale or off-sale of 3.2 malt liquor
may not be made in the city during the hours and on the days that such sales are prohibited by Minnesota
Statutes, section 340A.504. It is unlawful for 3.2 percent malt liquor to be drunk, consumed, served, kept,
displayed, or permitted to be on or in any table, booth, bar, or other place in such a licensed premises, except
the stock of liquors stored therein during such times on the premises in such portions thereof as are
accessible only to the licensee and the licensee’s employees, at which times it is unlawful for 3.2 percent
malt liquor to be sold. (Amended, Ord. Nos. 97-13; 03-04)
Subd. 2. Intoxicating liquor. On-sale of intoxicating liquor, including on-sale at a microdistillery
cocktail room, may not be made in the city during the hours and on the days that such sales are prohibited
by Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.504. It is unlawful for intoxicating liquor to be drunk, consumed,
served, kept, displayed, or permitted to be on or in any table, booth, bar, or other place in such licensed
premises, except the stock of liquors stored therein during such times on the premises in such portions
thereof as are accessible only to the licensee and the licensee’s employees, at which times it is unlawful for
intoxicating liquor to be sold. (Amended, Ord. Nos. 03-04; 15-10)
Subd. 3. Off-Sale Brewer Taproom or Off-Sale Brew Pub. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited
to the legal hours for off-sale at the exclusive liquor store in the city pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Chapter
340A. (Added, Ord. No. 14-20; Amended, Ord. No. 18-04, Sec. 1)
1200.15. Other restrictions. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter:
(a) A licensee may not display alcoholic beverages to the public during hours when the sale of
such alcoholic beverage is prohibited.
(b) It is unlawful to mix or prepare alcoholic beverages for consumption in a public place or
place of business unless that place is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages under this chapter
and has been issued a permit from the commissioner. It is unlawful to consume alcoholic
beverages in an unlicensed place.
(c) Consumption in public places. It is unlawful, except as permitted in this code, for a person
to consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2 malt liquor as defined by Chapter XII, while on a
public highway, public street, public park or other public place. It is unlawful to have on
one's person while in a private motor vehicle upon a public highway, a bottle or receptacle
containing alcoholic beverages which has been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents
of which have been partially removed. The owner of a private motor vehicle or the driver,
if the owner is not present, may not keep or allow to be kept in a motor vehicle upon a
public highway a bottle or receptacle containing alcoholic beverages unless it is kept in the
trunk of the motor vehicle, or, if the vehicle has no trunk, in some other area of the motor
vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers. (Amended, Ord. No. 18-14,
Sec. 2)
(d) Tampering. It is unlawful for a licensee to sell, offer for sale, or keep for sale, alcoholic
beverages in an original package that has been refilled or partly refilled. A licensee may
not directly or through any person delete or in any manner tamper with the contents of an
original package so as to change its composition or alcoholic content while in the original
package. Possession on the premises by the licensee of an alcoholic beverage in the
original package differing in composition, alcoholic content, or type other than the liquor
received from the manufacturer or wholesaler from whom it was purchased, is prima facie
evidence that the contents of the original package have been diluted, changed or tampered
with.
(e) Gambling. Gambling and gambling devices, except lawful gambling devices permitted by
Minnesota Statutes, chapters 349 and 349A, are not permitted on a licensed premises.
Robbinsdale City Code 1200.17
(Rev. 2014)
1200.17. Revocation. Subdivision 1. General. The council may suspend or revoke a license issued under
this chapter, or impose a civil fine for the violation of any provision or condition of this chapter, or of any
state law or federal law regulating or relating to the retail sale of alcoholic beverages, and must revoke the
license for a willful violation which, under the laws of the state, is grounds for mandatory revocation. If a
licensee holds a federal retail liquor dealer's special tax stamp without holding a license for the on-sale of
intoxicating liquor, grounds exist for mandatory revocation of the license.
Subd. 2. Procedure. The licensee must be afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes, section 14.52 to 14.70, before the council may vote whether to revoke or to suspend the
license. A suspension may not exceed 60 days. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.415 are
adopted by reference.
Subd. 3. Fine imposed. As an alternative to suspending or revoking a license, the council may
impose a civil fine, the amount of which is established by resolution by the council, but the fine may not
exceed the limit set forth in Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.415.
1200.19. Persons under 21; illegal acts. Minnesota Statutes, sections 340A.503, subdivisions 1 to 7
inclusive, and 340A.412, subdivision 10, relating to persons under the age of 21 years are adopted and are
incorporated herein specifically by reference and apply to licensed premises and persons under this chapter.
1200.21. Enlargement, alterations of extension of the licensed premises. Proposed enlargement, alteration
or extension of a licensed premises must be reported to the city clerk at or before the time application is
made for a building permit for the change, together with the information required by the council. The
proposal is subject to the investigation fee imposed by subsection Appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No. 14-20)
1200.23. Proof of possession. Proof of the right to the possession by the licensee of the premises may be
required at any time. Lack of evidence satisfactory to the council of such right of possession is grounds for
revocation of the license.
1200.25. Entertainment. Subdivision 1. General rule. Entertainment in the form of live performances,
recorded music or public dancing is permitted on the licensed premises only upon the issuance of an
entertainment license. (Added, Ord. 90-17, Sec. 1)
Subd. 2. Applicability of subsection 1100.07. The provisions of subdivisions 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 9 of
subsection 1100.07 of this code are applicable and govern licenses issued pursuant to this subsection.
Subd. 3. Hours. Unless the license provides otherwise, the licensed entertainment may be
conducted during the hours and the days of the week that the sale of alcoholic beverages is permitted on the
licensed premises but no later than one-half hour prior to the legal closing time.
Subd. 4. Exceptions. No license is required under this subsection for entertainment in the forms of
coin operated jukeboxes which are operated by patrons or television which is located in the bar area of the
licensed establishment.
Robbinsdale City Code 1205.01
(Rev. 2018)
Section 1205 - Intoxicating Liquor Licenses
1205.01. Intoxicating liquor licenses. Subdivision 1. On-sale. On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses are
issued to hotels, restaurants or clubs, and permit the on-sale of intoxicating liquor for consumption on the
licensed premises. Holders of an on-sale intoxicating liquor license may make on-sale sales of 3.2 malt
liquors and wine without further license. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-13, Sec. 3)
Subd. 2. Restaurant. “Restaurant,” for purposes of the on-sale of intoxicating liquors, means (i)
any establishment to be licensed, other than a hotel or motel, under the control of a single proprietor or
manager, having appropriate facilities to serve meals, for seating not less than 30 at one time for meals, and
where in consideration of payment therefor meals are regularly served at tables to the general public and
which employs an adequate staff for the usual and suitable service of its guests and (ii) whose gross receipts
are attributable no more than 60% to liquor and at least 40% to food sales. (Amended, Ord. Nos. 06-14, 17-
10)
If the establishment to be licensed is in a grouping of retail businesses, service establishments, or office uses
located on a single site with common parking facilities, the entire fair market value of the site and all
improvements on the site may be considered for the purpose of meeting the valuation requirement of this
subdivision. (Amended, Ord. No. 96-05, Sec. 1)
Subd. 3. Temporary license. Subject to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.404
(10) and after first receiving approval by the commissioner, a club or charitable, religious, or other nonprofit
organization in existence for at least three years may be issued a temporary license for the on-sale of
intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the city sponsored by the licensee. A temporary
license under this section authorizes the on-sale of intoxicating liquor for the date and time specified in the
license. In addition, the city council may issue to a licensed brewer who manufactures fewer than 3,500
barrels of malt liquor in a year or a licensed microdistillery a temporary license for the on-sale of
intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the municipality sponsored by the brewer or
microdistillery in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.404, subd. 10. (Amended Ord. No. 15-
10)
Subd. 4. Sunday liquor. A special license authorizing sales on Sunday may be issued to a
restaurant, club or hotel with a seating capacity for at least 30 people, in conjunction with the serving of
food and in accordance with law, and that holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license provided that the
establishment may not sell or serve in the City during the hours and on the days that such sales are
prohibited by Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.504. A special license authorizing sales on Sunday may be
issued to a license holder of an On-Sale Brewer Taproom license for the operation of a taproom on Sundays.
A special license authorizing sales on Sunday may be issued to a license holder of an Off-Sale Small Brewer
license for sales on Sunday in compliance with state law. (Amended, Ord. Nos. 99-10; 05-08; 14-20; 15-10)
Subd. 5. Off-sale prohibited. The off-sale of intoxicating liquor, other than at the municipal liquor
dispensary, off-sale small brewer licensees pursuant to subsection 1205.01, subd. 6, and off-sale
microdistillery, pursuant to subsection 1205.01, subd. 8, is prohibited. (Amended, Ord. Nos. 14-20; 15-10)
Subd. 6. Off-sale Small Brewer. The council may issue an off-sale malt liquor license to a brewer
licensed by the Minnesota commissioner of public safety to brew up to 3,500 barrels of malt liquor per year.
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the issuance of such a license is subject to the conditions set
forth in Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.301, subd. 6d and subject to the following conditions:
(a) The malt liquor sold off-sale must be produced and packaged on the licensed premises;
Robbinsdale City Code 1205.01, Subd. 6(b)
(Rev. 2018)
(b) The off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for the municipal liquor
dispensary pursuant to section 1230 and any additional hours if allowed by state law;
(c) The malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed by the purchaser from the licensed premises
before the applicable off-sale closing time per Minnesota Statues, section 340A.301, subd.
6d; and
(d) The malt liquor packaging shall conform to Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.301, subd. 6d
or otherwise in accordance with the provisions of the Minnesota Rules subpart 7515.1100.
(Added, Ord. No. 14-20)
Subd. 7. On-Sale Brewer Taproom. This license may be issued to the holder of a brewer’s license
under Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.301, subd. 6(i), or 6(j). A brewer taproom license authorizes onsale
of malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one brewery
location owned by the brewer. No other beverages containing alcohol may be sold or consumed on the
licensed premises. In addition to the requirements of this Chapter, the issuance of such a license is subject
to the conditions set forth in Minnesota Statues, section 340A.301, subd. 6b. (Added, Ord. No. 14-20)
Subd. 8. Off-Sale Microdistillery. This license may be issued to the holder of a Minnesota
microdistillery license allowing the off-sale of intoxicating liquor produced by the microdistillery. In
addition to the requirements of this section 1200, the issuance of such a license is subject to the conditions
set forth in Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.22, subd. 4. (Added, Ord. No. 15-10)
Subd. 9. On-Sale Microdistillery Cocktail Room. This license may be issued to the owner of a
city-licensed microdistillery for a cocktail room on the premises of the distillery or adjacent to the distillery
location. In addition to the requirements of this section 1200, the issuance of such a license is subject to the
conditions set forth in Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.22. (Added, Ord. No. 15-10)
Subd. 10. On-Sale Brew Pub License. This license may be issued to a brew pub that operates a
Restaurant in the place of manufacture of malt liquor. This license is subject to Minnesota Statutes,
Section 340A.24, and allows the city to issue an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or a 3.2 percent Malt
Liquor License for the brew pub. Sales on Sundays may only occur if a Sunday sales license is obtained
from the city. (Added, Ord. No. 18-04, Sec. 2)
Subd. 11. Off-Sale Brew Pub License. This license may be issued to a brew pub that holds an onsale
brew pub license with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety. This license is subject to
Minnesota Statutes, Section 340A.24, and allows off-sale of malt liquor produced and packaged on the
licensed premises during the legal hours for off-sale at the city’s municipal liquor stores. All malt liquor
sold at off-sale must be removed from the Premises before closing time of such liquor stores. Growlers
only may be sold off-sale on Sundays if a Sunday sales license is obtained from the city. Packaging of
malt liquor for off-sale must comply with Minnesota Statutes, Section 340A.285. (Added, Ord. No. 18-
04, Sec. 2)
1205.03. Fees. Subdivision 1. Timing. The initial license fee is due and payable in full upon issuance of
the license. Fees must be paid into the general fund and may not be refunded once a license is issued. A
license may not be issued until the fee is paid.
Subd. 2. Prorated fees. The fee imposed on an on-sale license granted after the commencement of
the license year will be prorated on a monthly basis. A special license for Sunday liquor sales will be
prorated on a quarterly basis. The pro rata determination includes the month or quarter in which the
application is approved by the council.
Robbinsdale City Code 1205.03, Subd. 3
(Rev. 2014)
Subd. 3. Premises not ready for occupancy. When the license is for premises where the building
is not ready for occupancy, the license fee for the initial license period is due and payable 90 days after
approval of the license by the council or upon the date a certificate of occupancy for the premises is
issued, whichever is sooner.
Subd. 4. No additional fee; certain circumstances. Where a new application has been filed
pursuant to subsection 1205.05 an additional license fee is not required.
Subd. 5. Refund of fee after issuance of license. No part of the fee paid for an intoxicating liquor
license may be refunded, except when operation of the licensed business ceases, not less than one month
before expiration of the license, because of the occurrence of one or more of the following: (Amended, Ord.
No. 17-16)
(a) Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by fire or other catastrophe;
(b) The licensee's death;
(c) The business ceases to be lawful for a reason other than a license revocation;
(d) The licensee ceases to carry on the licensed business under the license due to
redevelopment of the licensed premises involving demolition of the structure; or
(e) The licensee ceases to carry on the licensed business under the license due to relocation of
the business to another location within the City of Robbinsdale.
Subd. 6. Application for Refund. Application for a refund under this subsection must be made, in
writing, to the city council within 60 days from the happening of one of the events enumerated in
subdivision 5. Refunds will be made on a pro rata portion of the fee for the unexpired period of the license,
computed on a monthly basis from the date of occurrence of the qualifying event. For refunds related to
relocation within the city, the refund would be calculated based on the date that the business has opened in
the new location. For example, if a restaurant closes operations in March and reopens in a new location
under the same ownership in mid June, the license refund would be calculated for July through December.
(Added, Ord. No. 17-16)
1205.05. Granting Licenses. Subdivision 1. Reference. Applications for a license will be referred to the
chief of police and to such other city departments as the city manager deems necessary for verification
and investigation of the facts set forth in the application. The chief of police must investigate the
information required in subsection 1200.07. The chief must make a written recommendation and report to
the council a recommendation that must include a list of all violations of federal and state law or
municipal ordinance. (Amended, Ord. Nos. 05-10; 14-20)
Subd. 2. Notice and hearing. Within 20 days of receipt of the written report and recommendation
by the chief of police, the city clerk is to cause to be published in the official newspaper, ten days in
advance, a notice of a public hearing to be held by the council, setting forth (i) the date, time and place
when the hearing will be held, (ii) the name of the applicant, (iii) the premises where the business is to be
conducted, (iv) the nature of the business, and (v) such other information as the city manager may direct.
(Amended, Ord. Nos. 05-10; 14-20)
Robbinsdale City Code 1205.05, Subd. 3
(Rev. 2014)
Subd. 3. Council decision. The council will consider the application and the recommendations of
the police chief and city clerk. The council will render a decision, by a majority vote, denying or
approving the application, giving the reasons therefor. (Amended, Ord. Nos. 03-22; 05-10; 14-20)
1205.07. Fee. Subdivision 1. Imposition. The investigation fee for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license is
set forth in Appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No. 2018-02)
Subd. 2. Additional fee. If an additional investigation is required the licensee must pay an
additional investigating fee set forth in Appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No. 2018-02)
Subd. 3. Refund; limited. This investigation fee is not refundable except to the extent that the city
does not incur investigating costs in a like amount, in which case the balance, as determined by the city
manager is refundable.
Subd. 4. Exception. The investigation fee does not apply to (i) special licenses for Sunday liquor
sales, or (ii) a temporary license.
1205.09. Issuance of license. Subdivision 1. Term. A license is issued to the applicant only. Licenses are
issued only for the premises described in the application. Licenses expire annually on December 31.
License renewal is subject to the license provisions described in section 1005 Licensing Procedures.
(Amended, Ord. No. 02-05)
Subd. 2. Building under construction; issuance delayed. Where a license is granted for premises
where the building is under construction or otherwise not ready for occupancy, the city clerk may not issue
the license until a certificate of occupancy has been issued and the building is ready for occupancy.
1205.11. Notice to commissioner. The city clerk must, within ten days after the issuance of a license,
submit to the commissioner the full name and address of each person granted a license, the trade name, the
effective license date, and the date expiration of the license. The clerk must also submit to the
commissioner a change of address, transfer, cancellation or revocation of any license by the council during
the license period.
1205.13. Renewal. Subdivision 1. An application for the renewal of intoxicating liquor license must be
made at least 30 days prior to the date of the expiration of the license and must be made in the form as the
council may require. If, in the judgment of the council, good and sufficient cause is shown by an applicant
to file for a renewal within the time provided herein, the council may, if the other provisions of this chapter
are complied with, grant the application. (Amended, Ord. No. 04-02)
Subd. 2. Foreign corporation. A foreign corporation must file a current certificate of authority.
Subd. 3. Political contributions. When a licensee submits an application for renewal of a license,
the applicant must state the nature or amount of any contribution made for campaign or political purposes,
the person to whom the contribution was made and the person or organization for whom intended.
Subd. 4. (Deleted, Ord. No. 04-02)
Subd. 5. Financial. At the time of application for renewal of a license, the applicant must submit to
the city clerk, a written statement by a certified public accountant showing compliance with section
1205.01, subdivision 2, and section 1210.01, subdivision 2 of the city code. (Amended, Ord. Nos. 04-02;
14-20)
Subd. 6. Fees. The annual license fee is set by Appendix B.
Robbinsdale City Code 1205.15
(Rev. 2014)
1205.15. Transferability. A transfer of license is not permitted from place to place or person to person
without complying with the requirements of an original application and without approval by the council,
except as provided in this subsection.
(a) Where a new application is filed as a result of incorporation by an existing licensee and the
ownership and control of, and the interest in the license are unchanged, no additional
license fee will be required, but at the time of any such incorporation the form requesting
information required of a corporation in an initial application for a license must be properly
completed, executed and verified and must be submitted to the city clerk. The contents of
the application must be investigated as the city manager deems necessary. The
investigation fee is set forth in Appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No. 2018-02)
(b) Where a new application is filed for a transfer of license from place to place and it is for
premises where the building was not ready for occupancy at the time of the original
application and the new application is filed within 90 days after approval of the original
license by the council but before a certificate of occupancy for the original location has
been issued, no additional license fee is required. The investigation fee is set forth in
Appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No. 2018-02).
1205.17. Excess storage. With the approval of the council and the commissioner, a licensee may store
excess stocks of intoxicating liquor in places other than the licensed premises. The place of storage must be
located within the city. The location and address of the storage place, the length of time it is proposed to
store intoxicating liquor in such place, the quantity of such liquor stored and removal from the storage place
must be reported in writing to the city clerk at least three days prior to the initiation of storage.
1205.19. Persons ineligible for intoxicating liquor licenses. Subdivision 1. An intoxicating liquor license
may not be granted to or held by: (Amended, Ord. No. 14-20)
(a) A person made ineligible for the license by state law;
(b) A corporation that employs a manager who is not eligible under the provisions of this
chapter; (Amended, Ord. No. 13-02)
(c) A spouse of a person ineligible for a license under the provisions of this chapter;
(d) A person, who in the judgment of the council, is not the real party in interest or beneficial
owner of the business operated or to be operated under the license;
(e) A person not a resident of the metropolitan area as defined by Minnesota Statutes, section
473.121, subdivision 2;
(f) A person who has management responsibilities at more than three retail liquor
establishments in the city; (Amended, Ord. No. 13-02)
(g) A partnership, the managing or general partners of which, according to the partnership
agreement, are entitled to participate in the management of the business, which partners are
not residents of the metropolitan area at the date of the application for the license, or if any
such partner has management responsibilities at more than three retail liquor establishments
in the city; or (Amended, Ord. No. 13-02)
Robbinsdale City Code 1205.19(h)
(Rev. 2014)
(h) A corporation where the person to whom the corporation has delegated the management,
general conduct, and control of the affairs of the establishment to be licensed is not a
resident of the metropolitan area at the time of the application for the license, or if such
manager has management responsibilities at more than three retail liquor establishments in
the city. (Amended, Ord. No. 13-02)
Subd. 2. Establishing residence. The time for establishing residence within the metropolitan area
may for good cause be extended by the council.
1205.21. Places ineligible. An intoxicating liquor license may not be issued for: (Amended, Ord. No. 14-
20)
(a) Premises or any business ineligible for the license under state law;
(b) Premises, on which taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the state of Minnesota
are delinquent or unpaid: in the event an action has been commenced pursuant to the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes, chapter 278, which action questions the amount of or the
validity of taxes, the council may, on application by the licensee, waive strict compliance
with this provision: no waiver may be granted, however, for taxes or any portion thereof
which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due;
(c) Premises owned by a person to whom a license may not be granted under this chapter,
except any owner who is an underaged person, a person who is not a citizen of the United
States or a resident alien, or a person who has been convicted of a crime other than a
violation of Minnesota Statutes, chapter 340A;
(d) Premises which has a common entrance or exit between any two establishments licensed
under this chapter, except that a public concourse or public lobby is not to be construed as a
common entrance or exit;
(e) A place where the proposed use of the land is restricted by the zoning code and other
proceedings or legal processes regularly had for that purpose;
(f) Any premises within 100 feet of the central place of worship of any church, the 100 feet
being measured in a straight line from the main entrance of the premises sought to be
licensed to any entrance to the central place of worship of the church: for purposes of this
subsection a church has only one central place of worship as determined by the council, and
the premises sought to be licensed has only one main entrance as determined by the
council: the construction of a central place of worship of any church within the prohibited
area or a change in location of the existing central place of worship after the original license
application has been granted, does not alone, render the premises ineligible for renewal of
the license; or
(g) Premises within 100 feet of the boundary lines of a school building, school grounds, school
athletic fields, or a public park: the 100 feet being measured beginning at the main entrance
of the premises sought to be licensed to any point of said boundary lines: for the purpose of
this subsection, the premises sought to be licensed has only one main entrance as
determined by the council.
1205.23. Conditions of intoxicating liquor licenses. Subdivision 1. Other laws apply. Except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, an intoxicating liquor license is granted subject to the conditions of the provisions
of this chapter, other applicable provisions of this code and state law.
Robbinsdale City Code 1205.23, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2014)
Subd. 2. Off-sale. An on-sale licensee may not sell intoxicating liquor off-sale except for brewers
licensed under Section 1205.01, subd. 6 and 7. (Amended, Ord. No. 14-20)
Subd. 3. Prohibited persons. Intoxicating liquor may not be sold or furnished or delivered to
anyone who, by physical appearance and mannerisms, appears to be in a state of intoxication; to any
habitual drunkard; to a person under 21 years of age or to a person to whom the sale is prohibited by state
law.
Subd. 4. Requirements applicable to outdoor areas adjacent to a structure. If the licensed premises
includes an outdoor area adjacent to the structure, containing the licensed premises, the licensee of such
premises shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) The licensee’s dram shop liability carrier shall have acknowledged, in writing, that the
outdoor area is covered by dram shop insurance;
(b) The outdoor area shall have an improved surface of concrete, asphalt, wood or other
fabricated construction material;
(c) Any portion of an outdoor area at grade or less than six (6) feet above grade shall be
enclosed by a permanent fence at least six (6) feet high (with an emergency exit and
conforming to area landscaping or design guidelines) so as to require all persons using the
outdoor area to enter and exit such area through the building or structure comprising the
remainder of the licensed premises;
(d) Any exterior stairway or ramp access to an outdoor area six (6) feet or more above grade
shall be gated so as to require all persons using the outdoor area to enter and exit such area
through the building or structure comprising the reminder of the licensed premises;
(e) If any portion of the outdoor area is located within 200 feet of a residential district, the
outdoor area shall be screened in a manner approved by the council so as to prevent
viewing of the outdoor area from the residential district and to dampen and deflect noise
away from the residential district;
(f) The outdoor area shall comply with the all applicable laws, zoning district regulations and
building codes including, but not limited to, those relating to handicap accessibility;
(g) Exterior lighting for the outdoor area shall be designed and installed to be recessed and
enclosed on all sides except the bottom so no light is cast directly at any other property;
(h) The outdoor area and surrounding landscaping shall be designed to complement the
building or structure comprising the remainder of the licensed premises structure;
(i) An employee of the licensee shall be assigned to supervise the outdoor area at all times;
(j) Any person that becomes unruly or noisy shall be removed by the licensee from the
licensed premises;
(k) There must be at least one (1) waste receptacle located in the outdoor area;
(l) There must be at least one (1) fire safe cigarette disposal receptacle located in the outdoor
area;
(m) Trash and litter within the outdoor area and within a reasonable distance from the outdoor
area must be picked up and properly disposed; and
Robbinsdale City Code 1205.23, Subd. 4(n)
(Rev. 2014)
(n) The outdoor area shall meet all such other requirements as the council finds necessary or
reasonable to protect nearby properties and the public.
(Added, Ord. No. 14-20)
Subd. 5. Manufacturer's interest. Equipment or fixtures in a licensed place may not be owned in
whole or in part by any manufacturer or distiller of intoxicating liquor except such as shall be expressly
permitted by state law.
Subd. 6. Federal tax stamp. A licensee may not apply for or possess a federal wholesale liquor
dealer’s special tax stamp or a federal gambling stamp. (Amended, Ord. No. 14-20)
Subd. 7. Spirits. A licensee may not keep ethyl alcohol or neutral spirits on any licensed premises
or permit their use on the premises as a beverage or mixed with a beverage.
Subd. 8. Records. The business records of the licensee, including federal and state tax returns,
must be available for inspection by the city manager, or other duly authorized representative of the city or
the council at all reasonable times on reasonable notice.
Subd. 9. Ownership. Changes in the corporate or association officers, corporate charter, articles of
incorporation, by-laws or partnership agreement, as the case may be, must be submitted to the city clerk
within 30 days after such changes are made. Notwithstanding the definition of the term “interest” in the
case of a corporation, the licensee must notify the city clerk when a person not listed in the application
acquires an interest which, together with that of the person's spouse, parent, brother, sister, or child, exceeds
5% and must give all information about that person as it required of a person pursuant to the provisions of
subsection 1200.07.
Subd. 10. Restaurants: hotels. A restaurant must be conducted in such a manner that a principal
part of the business for a license year is the serving of foods. A hotel must be conducted in such a manner
that, of that part of the total business attributable to or derived from the serving of foods and intoxicating
liquors, the principal part of the business for a license year is the serving of food.
Subd. 11. Original package. A licensee may not sell, offer for sale, or keep for sale, intoxicating
liquors in any original package which has been refilled or partly refilled. A licensee may not directly or
through any other person delete or in any manner tamper with the contents of any original package so as to
change its composition or alcoholic content while in the original package. Possession on the licensed
premises by the licensee of any intoxicating liquor in the original package differing in composition,
alcoholic content, or type than the liquor received from the manufacturer or wholesaler from whom it was
purchased, is prima facie evidence that the contents of the original package have been diluted, changed or
tampered with.
Subd. 12. Hotels: guest rooms. Sales of intoxicating liquor may not be made to or in a guest room
of a hotel unless:
(a) The rules of the hotel provide for the service of meals in guest rooms;
(b) The sale of such intoxicating liquor is made in the manner that the on-sale of intoxicating
liquor is required to be made;
(c) Such sale accompanies and is incident to the regular service of meals to guests therein; and
Robbinsdale City Code 1205.23, Subd. 12(d)
(Rev. 1996)
(d) The rules of the hotel and the description, location and number of such guest rooms are
fully set out in the application for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor license.
1205.25. Insurance and bond. Subdivision 1. Minnesota Statutes. In addition to complying with and being
subject to the financial responsibility requirements of Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.409, it is the
continuing condition of any on-sale intoxicating liquor licensee to comply with the conditions of this
subsection.
Subd. 2. Liability insurance. At the time of filing the license application the licensee must provide
evidence of insurance coverage from an approved carrier in the amount of not less than $1,000,000
combined single limit (CSL) for general liability, liquor liability, and property claims and losses. The
insurance shall be submitted to the clerk along with the application for the particular license. The insurance
coverage must specifically provide for the payment by the insurance company on behalf of the insured of all
sums which the insured may become obligated to pay by reason of liability imposed by law for injuries or
damages to persons, other than employees, including the liability imposed upon the insured by reason of
Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.801. The liability insurance policies must provide that no cancellation for
any cause can be made either by the insured or the insurance company without first giving the written notice
required by law, addressed to the city clerk. The policy must be conditioned that the insurer will pay, to the
extent of the principal amount of the policy, any damages for death or injury caused by, or resulting from
the violation of any law relating to the requirements for which the license has been granted. The licensee
and the city must be named as joint insured on the liability insurance policy. (Amended, Ord. No. 96-03,
Sec. 3)
Subd. 3. Bond required. At the time of filing an application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license, the applicant must file a bond with corporate surety, or in lieu thereof, cash or United States
government bonds shall be deposited with the city clerk. The bond, cash or government bonds will be in the
amount of $5,000 for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license and is deemed sufficient for the purpose of the
issuance of a special license for Sunday liquor sales, provided the bond or the terms of such deposit are
amended to include periods during which the licensee is operating under a special license for Sunday liquor
sales.
Subd. 4. Approval of bond or insurance. The surety bonds or insurance policies required by this
subsection are subject to the approval of the council.
Subd. 5. Procedure where cash or government bonds are used. If the applicant uses cash for
security, the cash must be deposited with the city clerk. If United States government bonds are permitted
and are used as security, an assignment or agreement must accompany them and they must be filed with the
city clerk. The licensee may clip and take all interest bearing coupons thereto attached as they become due.
Subd. 6. Surety of insurance companies. The surety on a bond, or the insurer on a liability
insurance policy, must be a surety company or insurance company, duly licensed to do business in the state
of Minnesota. The bond and liability insurance policy must be approved as to form and execution by the
city attorney. Surety bonds or liability insurance policies, when approved by the proper city or state
officers, must be deposited with city clerk.
Subd. 7. Terms of bond. Bonds must be conditioned as follows:
(a) The licensee will obey the law relating to the licensed business;
(b) The licensee will pay to the city when due all taxes, license fees, penalties and other
charges provided by laws;
Robbinsdale City Code 1205.25, Subd. 7(c)
(Rev. 2003)
(c) In the event of violation of any law relating to the business for which the license has been
granted for the sale of liquor, the bond will be forfeited to the city;
(d) The licensee will pay, to the extent of the principal amount of such bond, any damages for
death or injury by, or resulting from, the violation of any law relating to the business for
which the license has been granted, and that such recovery may be had also against the
surety on the bond; and
(e) Approval by the council.
Subd. 8. Benefit of bond. The bond is for the benefit of the city, as obligee, and of all persons
suffering damages under the conditions set forth in subdivision 7. The amount specified in a bond is
declared to be a penalty, and the amount recoverable will be measured by the actual damages. The surety
may not be liable in excess of the penal amount of the bond. In case of forfeiture of the bond for violation
of the law, the district court of Hennepin County may forfeit the penal sum of the bond to the city.
Subd. 9. Deposit of U.S. bonds. If United States government bonds are deposited with the city
clerk instead of a bond with a corporate surety, the bonds must be accompanied by a properly executed
assignment, in form approved by the city attorney, assigning the bonds to the city, to be held subject to the
conditions, forfeiture and penalties provided by the laws of the state of Minnesota and this chapter. The
assignment must contain a stipulation and agreement that the bonds must remain with the city clerk, subject
to the terms and conditions of the assignment and state laws, during the term of the license in connection
with which such government bonds may, with the approval of the council, be returned by the city clerk to
the licensee.
Subd. 10. Deposit of cash. If the applicant deposits cash in lieu of surety bond, the deposit must be
accompanied by a written agreement and assignment upon the part of the licensee, in form approved by the
city attorney by which the licensee assigns the deposit to the city, to be held by the city clerk subject to the
conditions, forfeitures, and penalties required by the laws of the state and this chapter, for a period of the
license in connection with which such deposit is made, and for three years thereafter, at which time the
deposit may be returned to the licensee by the clerk with the approval of the council.
Subd. 11. Affidavit required for return of U.S. bonds or cash. Upon application for return of
United States government bonds or cash, the licensee must file with the city clerk an affidavit stating that no
action or proceeding has been commenced in a court for the forfeiture of the bonds or deposit, or for
damages to any person or persons under the terms and conditions thereof, and that the licensee has no
knowledge of any existing claim or cause of action under the terms and conditions of the assignment and
agreement relating to the government bonds or cash deposit.
1205.27. Licensing of employees. (Deleted, Ord. No. 03-13)
Robbinsdale City Code 1210.01
(Rev. 2018)
Section 1210 – On-sale Wine Licenses
1210.01. On-sale wine licenses. Subdivision 1. Issuance. Upon approval of the commissioner, on-sale
wine licenses may be issued by the city to restaurants that permit the sale of wine not exceeding 14%
alcohol by volume for consumption on the licensed premises only in conjunction with the sale of food.
Wine licenses may be issued by the city clerk upon receiving written approval of the commissioner.
Subd. 2. Restaurant. “Restaurant” for the purpose of the on-sale of wine only, means an
establishment (i) that is under the control of a single proprietor or manager, (ii) where meals are regularly
served at tables to the general public, (iii) which employs an adequate staff for the usual and suitable
services of its guests (iv) that provides for seating not fewer than 25 guests at one time for meals, and (v)
which meets the gross sales requirements of this subdivision. Except for restaurants with a brew pub license
meeting specific requirements, described in this section, the gross receipts during each license year from the
sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages may not be less than 70% of the restaurant’s total gross receipts
from the sale of all food and beverages. For restaurants which have a brew pub license issued pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.24, the gross receipts from the sale of food in a license year shall be at
least 25% of the gross receipts from the sale of all food and beverages excluding receipts from malt liquor
manufactured on site. In order to qualify for the 25% gross receipts threshold provided herein, the
restaurant with a brew pub license must meet all of the following criteria (i) produce a minimum of 500
barrels of malt liquor in a year; (ii) provide at least 150 seats for customers (iii) allow food sales by on-site
city-licensed food trucks (mobile food unit) per Section 1120.04; and (iv) allow, at all times, deliveries from
local restaurants, caterers, and patrons to bring their own meals to be consumed on the premises.
(Amended, Ord. No. 18-04, Sec. 3)
Subd. 3. Restrictions applicable. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, restrictions imposed
by this chapter relating to the on-sale of intoxicating liquor apply to on-sale wine licenses.
Subd. 4. Renewal. When an application is made for a renewal of an on-sale wine license, the
applicant must file with the council a statement made by a certified public accountant that shows the gross
revenues required to verify compliance with the ratio of food to alcohol sales in section 1210.01, subd. 2 for
the 12 month next preceding the date of filing the renewal application. (Amended, Ord. Nos. 97-13, Sec. 3;
14-20; Amended Ord. No. 18-04, Sec. 3)
Subd. 5. Number of licenses. No more than five on-sale wine licenses may be issued by the city at
one time. This number is in addition to, and does not reduce the number of on-sale intoxicating liquor
licenses otherwise permitted.
Subd. 6. No bars. A restaurant possessing an on-sale wine license may not have a bar or other
similar place not used primarily for serving food at which alcoholic beverages are served. This section does
not apply to a restaurant with a brew pub license. (Amended, Ord. No. 18-04, Sec. 3)
Subd. 7. Hours and days of operation. An on-sale wine establishment may not serve or sell wine to
the public during hours when the sale of intoxicating liquor is prohibited by Minnesota Statutes. No special
license for Sunday liquor sale is required for the sale of wine on Sundays. The council may restrict a
particular license to the sale of wine on days other than Sundays. It is unlawful for wine to be drunk,
consumed, served, kept, displayed, or permitted to be on or in any table, booth, bar, or other place in such
licensed premises, except the stock of wines stored therein during such times on the premises in such
portions thereof as are accessible only to the licensee and the licensee’s employees, at which times it is
unlawful for wine to be sold. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-04)
Robbinsdale City Code 1210.01, Subd. 8
(Rev. 2018)
Subd. 8. Sales of intoxicating malt liquor. A holder of an on-sale wine license issued pursuant to
this section who is also licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors at on-sale pursuant to section 1215, may sell
intoxicating malt liquors at on-sale without an additional license. (Added, Ord. No. 99-06)
Subd. 9. Term and fees. Licenses expire annually on December 31. License renewal is subject to
the license provisions described in section 1005 Licensing Procedures. The license fee is set by Appendix
B. (Amended, Ord. Nos. 99-06; 02-05)
Subd. 10. Refund of Fees. Refund of fees for On-Sale Wine Licenses shall follow the procedure
set forth in section 1205.03 Subdivisions 5 and 6. (Added, Ord. No. 17-16)
Robbinsdale City Code 1215.01
(Rev. 2017)
Section 1215 - 3.2 Malt Liquor Licenses
(Amended, Ord. No. 97-13, Sec. 4)
1215.01. 3.2 malt liquor licenses. Subdivision 1. On-sale. On-sale 3.2 malt liquor licenses permit the onsale
of 3.2 malt liquor and may only be issued to restaurants, hotels, clubs, and establishments used
exclusively for the sale of 3.2 malt liquor with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks. (Amended,
Ord. No. 97-13, Sec. 5)
Subd. 2. Off-sale. Off-sale 3.2 malt liquor licenses permit the sale of 3.2 malt liquor at retail in the
original package for consumption off the licensed premises only. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-13, Sec. 5)
Subd. 3. Restaurant. The term “restaurant” for purposes of the on-sale of 3.2 malt liquor means (i)
any establishment to be licensed, other than a hotel or motel; under the control of a single proprietor or
manager; having appropriate facilities to serve meals; for seating not less than 25 at one time for meals; and
where, in consideration of payment therefor, meals are regularly served at tables to the general public; and
which employs an adequate staff for the usual and suitable service of its guests. (Amended, Ord. Nos. 97-
13, Sec. 5, 17-10)
Subd. 4. Temporary license. A club or charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization may be
issued a temporary on-sale license for the sale of 3.2 malt liquor. A temporary license under this
subdivision authorizes the on-sale of 3.2 malt liquor for the date and time specified in the license, and upon
any other terms set by the council. The on-sale of 3.2 malt liquor under this section may take place only on
the premises specified in the license. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-13, Sec. 5)
1215.03. Payment and refund of fees. Subdivision 1. Timing. An application for a 3.2 malt liquor license
must be accompanied by cash or a cashier's check for payment in full of the license fee. Fees are paid into
the general fund. The fees are set by Appendix B. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-13, Sec. 6)
Subd. 2. Rejection. Upon rejection of any application for a license under this section, the city clerk
must refund the license fee.
Subd. 3. Pro rata fee. If the application is for a portion of the license year, a license may be issued
for the remainder of the year for a pro rata fee. In computing the fee, any unexpired fraction of a month is
counted as one month.
Subd. 4. Refund of fee after issuance of license. Refund of fees for 3.2 Malt Liquor Licenses shall
follow the procedure set forth in section 1205.03 Subdivisions 5 and 6.
1215.05. Granting 3.2 malt liquor licenses. Subdivision 1. Investigation. The council must investigate, or
cause to have investigated, all facts set out in the application. After the investigation and after notice and
hearing the council may grant or refuse to grant the application. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-13, Sec. 7)
Subd. 2. Notice. Notice of hearing must be given by publication one time in the official city
newspaper. The notice must state the date, time and place of the hearing, which may not be less than three
days subsequent to the date of the publication of the notice. The notice must also set forth the name of the
applicant, the establishment to which it is proposed that the license be issued, and the address where the
license presides.
Subd. 3. Hearing. Opportunity must be given to any person to be heard for or against the issuance
of the license at a time, place and manner as set forth in the notice. A hearing is not required for an on-sale
permit issued to a club if waived by the council.
Robbinsdale City Code 1215.07
(Rev. 2002)
1215.07. Duration; expiration. Subdivision 1. A 3.2 malt liquor license is issued for a period of one year.
If a portion of the license year has elapsed when application is made, a license may be issued for the
remainder of the year. Licenses expire annually on December 31. The license may be prorated. License
renewal is subject to the license provisions described in section 1005 Licensing Procedures. (Amended,
Ord. Nos. 97-13, Sec. 8; 02-05)
Subd. 2. Renewal. The same procedure applies for the renewal of a license as for the original
issuance of the license. The council may dispense with notice and hearing.
1215.09. Transferability of license. Subdivision 1. Person and premises licensed. A license for 3.2 malt
liquor is issued to the applicant only and is not transferable. A license is issued only for the premises
described in the application and is not transferable to another place without the written approval of the
council. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-13, Sec. 9)
1215.11. Persons ineligible. Subdivision 1. A 3.2 malt liquor license may not be granted to or held by:
(a) A person ineligible for such a license under state law;
(b) A person who has been convicted of a felony or of violating any law or local ordinance
relating to the sale, manufacture or transportation of intoxicating liquor;
(c) A manufacturer of 3.2 malt liquor or a person who has an interest in or is in control of any
place where 3.2 malt liquor is manufactured;
(d) A person who is a holder of a federal retail liquor dealer's special tax stamp for the sale of
intoxicating liquor at such place, or a person who becomes a holder during the period of the
license; or
(e) A person who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is issued.
(Amended, Ord. No. 97-13, Sec. 10)
1215.13. Places ineligible. A 3.2 malt liquor license may not be issued for:
(a) A premises or business ineligible for a license under state law;
(b) A premises where a former licensee has been convicted for the violation of this chapter, or
of the state liquor law, chapter 340A, or where any license hereunder has been revoked for
cause until one year has elapsed after such conviction or revocation;
(c) A premises where there are restrictions against commercial use by the zoning code and
other proceedings or legal processes regularly had for that purpose. (Amended, Ord. No.
97-13, Sec. 11)
Robbinsdale City Code 1215.15
(Rev. 2002)
1215.15. Conditions. Subdivision 1. Other laws apply. This code and state law and the conditions of this
subsection apply to retail 3.2 malt liquor licenses. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-13, Sec. 12)
Subd. 2. Inspection. A police officer or a properly designated employee of the city may enter,
inspect and search the licensed premises during business hours, or when employees are on the premises,
without a search and seizure warrant and they may seize all intoxicating liquor and/or 3.2 malt liquor found
on the licensed premises in violation of the provisions of this chapter or law. The inspection may also be
made to insure that the premises are maintained in a sanitary condition. Any private club or public place
allowing the consumption or display of intoxicating or 3.2 malt liquor that requires the use of a key,
password, passkey, passcard, or other indicia of membership and access; shall provide the chief of police
with such indicia of membership to be used only for the purpose as set forth in this section. Refusal to
permit such inspection is a violation of this section and grounds for discipline of the licensee, which may
include revocation of the license. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-04)
Subd. 3. Intoxicating liquors on the premises. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a
licensee not licensed to sell intoxicating liquor may not sell, permit or suffer the consumption or the display
of intoxicating liquor on the licensed premises or serve any liquids for the purpose of mixing with
intoxicating liquor. The presence of intoxicating liquors on the premises of such a licensee is prima facie
evidence of possession of intoxicating liquors for the purpose of sale; and the serving of liquids for the
purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquors is prima facie evidence that intoxicating liquor is being
permitted to be consumed or displayed contrary to this chapter.
Subd. 4. Conflicting interests. A manufacturer or wholesaler of 3.2 malt liquor may not have any
ownership or interest in an establishment licensed to sell at retail contrary to the provisions of Minnesota
Statutes, chapter 340A. A retail licensee and manufacturer or wholesaler of 3.2 malt liquor may not be
parties to an exclusive purchase contract. A retail licensee may not receive any benefits contrary to law
from a manufacturer or wholesaler of 3.2 malt liquor and may not confer any benefits contrary to law upon a
retail licensee. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-13, Sec. 12)
Subd. 5. Federal retail liquor dealers tax stamp. A licensee may not sell 3.2 malt liquor while
holding or exhibiting in the licensed premises a federal retail liquor dealer's special tax stamp unless the
licensee is licensed under the laws of Minnesota to sell intoxicating liquors. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-13,
Sec. 12)
Subd. 6. On-sale: separate rooms. An on-sale license entitles the holder thereof to sell 3.2 malt
liquor in a separate room of the licensed premises for banquets or dinners at which not less than six persons
are present. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-13, Sec. 12)
Subd. 7. Partitions and obstructions. Windows in the front of any place licensed for on-sale 3.2
malt liquor sales must be of clear glass and a view of the whole interior may not be obstructed by screens,
curtains or partitions. There may be no partition, box, stall, screen or other device which obstructs the view
of any part of the room from the general observation of persons in the room. Partitions, subdivision, or
panels not higher than 48 inches from the floor are not considered obstructions. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-13,
Sec. 12)
Subd. 8. Insurance. Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of Minnesota Statutes,
section 340A.409, and with the requirements set forth in subsection 1205.25 of this chapter is a continuing
condition of a license granted pursuant to this section.
Robbinsdale City Code 1220.01
Section 1220 - Enforcement, Prosecution and
Penalties - Beer and Liquor
1220.01. Enforcement. Authorized police officers are directed (i) to enforce the provisions of this chapter;
(ii) to search the premises and to seize evidence of violations of this chapter and violations of relevant
Minnesota Statutes; and (iii) to preserve such evidence against any persons alleged to be violating this
chapter or law; and to prepare the necessary processes and papers therefor in accordance with this chapter
and law.
1220.03. Prosecution. In a prosecution for a violation of the provisions of Minnesota Statutes incorporated
herein by reference relating to the sale or furnishing of alcoholic beverages to persons under the age of 21
years, and in a proceeding before the council with respect thereto, the fact that the underaged person
involved has obtained and presented to the licensee, employee or agent, proof of age as required by
Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.503, subdivision 6 from which it appears that the person was 21 years of
age and was regularly issued such proof of age documentation, is prima facie evidence that the licensee,
agent or employee is not guilty of a violation of this chapter and is conclusive evidence that a violation, if
one has occurred, was not willful or intentional.
Robbinsdale City Code 1225.01
Section 1225 - Consumption and Display:
Intoxicating Liquor
1225.01. Statutes adopted by reference. Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.414, regulating the licensing of
establishments for the consumption and display of intoxicating liquor, are adopted by reference.
1225.03. Permit issuance. The issuance of a permit by the city under this section and pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.414, permitting the consumption and display of intoxicating liquor, is
subject to all of the provisions (not inconsistent with the purpose of section 340A.414) relating to
intoxicating liquor licenses issued under this chapter.
1225.05. Fee: term. The additional fee for a permit issued pursuant to this section is set by Appendix B.
The permit expires as determined by council.
Robbinsdale City Code 1230.01
Section 1230 - Municipal Liquor Dispensary
1230.01. Municipal liquor dispensary. Subdivision 1. Established and continued. The municipal liquor
dispensary established pursuant to council resolution is established and continued, subject to the provisions
of law and this code.
1230.03. Locations. The municipal liquor dispensary may be located at a suitable place or places in the city
as the council determines. Location sites and facilities may be leased or owned by the city.
1230.05. Regulations: manager. The operations of the municipal liquor dispensary is under the direction of
a manager selected by the city manager. Policies relating to the operation of the municipal liquor dispensary
are determined by the council.
1230.07. Hours. The municipal liquor dispensary is open for business only during the days and hours and
to the extent that the sale of alcoholic beverages is authorized by law.
1230.09. Payment for merchandise. Checks may be accepted in payment for merchandise, provided the
checks are only for the purchase price of the merchandise. Credit cards issued by national credit companies
that have entered into credit agreements with the city may also be accepted in payment for merchandise. No
other form of credit may be advanced by the municipal liquor dispensary.
1230.11. Gambling. It is unlawful to keep, possess or operate in any part of the municipal liquor dispensary
any gambling device except lawful gambling devices as defined in Minnesota Statutes, chapters 349 and
349A.
1230.13. Receipts and disbursements. The handling of municipal liquor dispensary receipts and
disbursements must comply with the procedure described by law for the receipts and disbursements of the
city funds generally.
1230.15. Audit. The council must provide as soon as possible following the close of each fiscal year for an
audit of the accounts of the municipal liquor dispensary for that fiscal year by the public examiner or a
qualified public accountant.
1230.17. Illegal acts; sale prohibited. Intoxicating liquor may not be sold: (a) off-sale at retail in the city
except at the municipal liquor dispensary, or (b) by any person not employed by the municipal liquor
dispensary.
1230.19. Persons under the age of 21. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes, section 340A.503 and
340A.412, subdivision 10, are adopted by reference and apply to the municipal liquor dispensary.
1230.21. Employees. An employee of the municipal liquor dispensary willfully violating any provision of
this chapter or state law relating to gambling or the sale of alcoholic beverages may be discharged for such a
violation.
Robbinsdale City Code 1300.01
CHAPTER XIII
TRAFFIC, MOTOR VEHICLES AND OTHER VEHICLES
Section 1300 - Highway Traffic Regulation
1300.01. State highway traffic regulation act. Subdivision 1. Adopted by reference. Minnesota Statutes,
chapter 169, "The Highway Traffic Regulation Act", is adopted by reference and is as much a part of this
code as if fully set forth herein. A violation of the statutes adopted by reference is a violation of this
code.
Subd. 2. Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the terms defined in Minnesota Statutes,
section 169.01, have the meanings given by that section.
Subd. 3. Application to private streets and roads. This chapter applies to private streets and roads
freely used by the general public.
Subd. 4. Penalty. A violation of the provisions of this chapter is a petty misdemeanor except
where otherwise provided by statute.
1300.03. Motor vehicle registration act. Subdivision 1. Adoption by reference. Minnesota Statutes,
sections 168.011, 168.055, 168.056, 168.09, 168.10, 168.11, 168.27, 168.36, 168.39, 168.41, 168.44 and
168.43 are adopted by reference and are as much a part of this Code as if fully set forth herein.
Subd. 2. Driver's license law. Minnesota Statutes, sections 171.01, 171.02, 171.03, 171.05,
171.08, 171.10, 171.11, 171.17, 171.18, 171.20, 171.22, 171.23 and 171.24 are adopted by reference and
are as much a part of this code as if fully set forth herein.
1300.05. Unreasonable acceleration. Subdivision 1. Prohibition. Unreasonable acceleration of a motor
vehicle on any public or private road or way or street or highway within the city is declared to be a public
nuisance and is prohibited.
Subd. 2. Definition. Unreasonable acceleration of a motor vehicle means acceleration without
apparent reason, and accomplished in such a manner as to cause squealing or screeching sounds by the
tires or the throwing of sand or gravel by tires of the vehicle or both.
Subd. 3. Evidence. Prima facie evidence of such unnecessary and unreasonable acceleration is
the squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires of the
vehicle or both.
Subd. 4. Penalty. A person violating any provision of this subsection is guilty of a petty
misdemeanor.
Robbinsdale City Code 1305.01
Section 1305 - Parking Regulations
1305.01. Scope. The provisions of this section apply to drivers of vehicles and owners of vehicles
operated in the city.
1305.03. Prohibitions. Subdivision 1. General. It is unlawful to stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of
the following places:
(a) on a sidewalk;
(b) in front of a public or private driveway;
(c) within an intersection;
(d) within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
(e) in a public park, except upon designated roadways and in designated parking areas;
(f) upon a street, highway, or road boulevard or in an area between a sidewalk and a street,
highway or road;
(g) upon a median or divider strip in a street, highway or road;
(h) within 15 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station and on the side of the street
opposite the entrance to a fire station within 75 feet of said entrance when properly sign
posted;
(i) within 25 feet of the intersection of curb lines or, if none, then within 15 feet of the
intersection of property lines at an intersection of a highway or road or street;
(j) within 30 feet of any thru street stop sign or thru highway stop sign or at any other stop
sign placed on the side or a roadway or street or highway on the approaching side;
(k) within 20 feet of a point opposite the nearest end of a designated safety zone;
(l) within five feet of the intersection of a public highway with any alley;
(m) at any other place prohibited by law.
Subd. 2. Exceptions. The prohibitions of subdivision 1 do not apply to vehicles parked to:
(a) avoid conflict with other traffic;
(b) comply with a traffic control device;
(c) comply with the directions of a peace officer.
This subsection does not apply to city vehicles parked in connection with official city business.
1305.05. Special loading zones. There is reserved for loading and unloading of passengers or
commodities, during the hours between 8:00 o'clock a.m. and 6:00 o'clock p.m. except on Sundays and
legal holidays, spaces of proper and adequate length wherever the city council directs the police
department to establish and mark a loading zone, and when and to the extent so marked.
Robbinsdale City Code 1305.07
(Rev. 2014)
1305.07. Parking in congested zones. Subdivision 1. General rule. It is unlawful to park a vehicle or
permit it to stand upon a street in a congested zone for a period of time longer than one hour during the
hours between 8:00 o'clock a.m. and 6:00 o'clock p.m.
Subd. 2. Congested zones. It is unlawful to park a vehicle or permit it to stand upon a street
which has been designated a one hour zone for more than one hour. When a one hour zone is in an area
in which parking by resident permit pursuant to subsection 1305.15, the one hour restriction does not
apply to vehicles bearing resident permits, but allows non-permitted vehicles to remain on the street for
not more than one hour.
1305.09. Restricted parking. Subdivision 1. Four hour rule. Except as otherwise provided in this code,
no person in charge of a vehicle may park or permit the vehicle to stand upon a highway, street or alley in
the city or on property owned or leased by the city, for more than four consecutive hours between the
hours of 12 o'clock a.m. and 8 o'clock a.m. nor for more than six consecutive hours at any time.
Subd. 2. Trucks. In an industrial, commercial, or multiple dwelling area where off-street parking
area or truck standing spaces are provided, those vehicles must use the designated area for parking,
loading or unloading.
Subd. 3. Snow. After a snowfall of at least two inches, parking is prohibited on public streets,
highways, and alleys in the city and on property owned or leased by the city. Parking may not resume on
a street, highway or alley until it has been plowed and the snow removed to the curb line. Parking may
not be resumed on any individual property owned or leased by the city until the property has been plowed
to the perimeters thereof. (Amended, Ord. No. 91-14, Sec. 1)
Subd. 4. Declaration of emergency. Whenever in the opinion of the director of public works or
his or her designated representative an emergency exists in the city or in a section or sections thereof
because of snow, rain, freezing rain, sleet, ice, snowdrifts or other natural phenomena which create or are
likely to create hazardous road conditions or impede the free movement of fire, health, police, emergency
or other vehicular traffic, or otherwise endanger the safety and welfare of the community, the director of
public works or his or her designated representative may declare an emergency to exist for up to six
weeks, but such emergency may be sooner terminated if conditions permit. While emergency conditions
exist, the director of public works or his or her designated representative may restrict parking on public
streets in a section or sections of the city. Notice of such emergency and termination thereof shall be
given by press, City website, radio and television and the news media shall be requested to cooperate with
city officials and, when such notice is given, it shall constitute due and proper notice. Where, in the
opinion of the director of the department of public works or his or her designated representative, such
emergency continues to exist for a period in excess of the aforesaid emergency period, he or she is hereby
authorized to declare successive emergency periods. (Added, Ord. No. 14-05)
Robbinsdale City Code 1305.10
(Rev. 1997)
1305.10. (Added, Ord. No. 96-10) Prohibited parking. Subdivision 1. Notwithstanding any provision in
this section to the contrary, the parking of any truck-tractor, semi-trailer, truck tractor and semi-trailer
combination on commercially zoned private property is prohibited except in the following circumstances:
(a) where such parking is necessary in connection with construction activity which is
actually occurring on the property pursuant to a valid and current building permit;
(b) for a period of up to 12 hours, or such longer time as permitted in writing by the police
chief, where such parking is for the purpose of unloading or loading materials, supplies or
inventory to be used in connection with the business activity occurring on the property;
but not for the purpose of storage of such materials, or inventory pending sale;
(c) where such vehicles are actually being offered for sale or lease by the business located on
the property, but only if such sale or lease activity is permitted by this code;
(d) where such parking is in connection with paper recycling, clothing donations, or other
similar activity conducted by non-profit organizations; not to exceed 20 calendar days or
such longer time as permitted in writing by the police chief; or
(e) a vehicle customarily used in connection with a business which is the principal use of the
property on which it is parked, provided that truck parking shall occur only in approved
truck parking areas. This approval shall be granted in writing after review and comment
from the planning and police departments. The approved area shall be identified and
posted on the property with permanent signage.
Subd. 2. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to permit the parking of such vehicle at a
location on the property which:
(a) is within any public right-of-way, or
(b) would obstruct the visibility of vehicle traffic or pedestrian movement, or
(c) would interfere with access by emergency vehicles or equipment, or
(d) is within 150 feet of any residentially zoned property, or
(e) is otherwise in violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation of the city.
Robbinsdale City Code 1305.11
(Rev. 2004)
1305.11. Taxicabs and common carriers. Taxicabs or other vehicles having a capacity for and engaged in
the business of carrying less than seven passengers for hire, or in carrying baggage, property or material
for hire, may not stand on a highway in the congested zone except at stands plainly indicated by markings
or signs placed and maintained by the police department, at locations designated and authorized by the
council, and only to the extent and for the period of time indicated by the markings and signs.
1305.13. Parking by permit only parking. Subdivision 1. Purpose: policy. The council has found that in
certain areas of the city, and in particular in the vicinity of North Memorial Hospital, streets in residential
areas are congested because of heavy residential and non-residential traffic and parking. It is the purpose
of this subsection to stem the flow of commuter traffic from institutional, commercial and industrial
districts into an adjoining residential neighborhood; to reduce air pollution and other environmental
effects of automobile emissions, and to enhance the quality of life in the residential area by reducing
noise, traffic hazards and litter; to protect the residents from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to
their residences; to preserve the character of the residential district as such; to promote efficiency in the
maintenance of these streets in a clean and safe condition; to preserve the value of property; to preserve
the safety of children and other pedestrians and traffic safety, and to promote the peace, good order,
comfort, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. The provisions of this subsection,
providing the parking by permit only, are in furtherance of those objectives.
Subd. 2. Definition. The term “household” means a house or apartment bearing a street address
in a “parking by permit only” parking zone. (Amended, Ord. 04-11)
Subd. 3. General rule. The council may from time to time by resolution designate certain streets
as “parking by permit only” parking zones, and cause them to be so posted. Thereafter, no person in
charge of a vehicle may park or permit the vehicle to be parked on posted streets unless the vehicle bears
a permit as provided in this subsection.
Subd. 4. Permits. The city will make available the following types of permits at the city police
department offices:
(a) Resident household permits. Households on streets designated by resolution pursuant to
subdivision 2, may request a household permit for each vehicle owned or leased by a
member of the household; for vehicles which are currently licensed, in operating
condition and current use. (Amended, Ord. 04-11)
(b) Visitor permits. Each household may obtain a visitor permit or permits subject to
restrictions set forth in subdivision 4c. (Amended, Ord. 04-11)
(c) Limits on permits per household. The number of permits issued to each household shall
not exceed a total of four permits of which no more than three may be “residential
household permits.” The chief of police has the authority to issue additional temporary
permits if warranted by extraordinary circumstances.
Robbinsdale City Code 1305.13, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2004)
Subd. 5. Display. Resident household and visitor permits must bear an identifying serial number
for the household obtaining the permit. A record of households who have permits is kept by the city.
Resident household permits must be displayed in the lower rear corner of the left side window closest to
the rear of the vehicle. Visitor permits must be placed on the dashboard or other conspicuous place to be
easily seen by law enforcement personnel through the windshield. (Amended, Ord. 04-11)
Subd. 6. Costs: fees. To cover the costs of administering the permit system, a fee may be
charged for each permit. The amount of the fee is set by city council at Appendix B. (Amended, Ord. 04-
11)
Subd. 7. Transfer. A resident household parking permit may not be used by, sold, or transferred
to a person not living at the address for which the permit was issued. A visitor permit may not be given
or sold for any purpose other than to permit parking by a visitor while actually visiting the household.
(Amended, Ord. 04-11)
Subd. 8. Exception. This subsection does not apply to persons who perform, or vehicles used in
the performance of, commercial services, repairs, or emergency assistance for a resident, provided that
such persons are then performing, or the vehicles are in fact being used, in such services or assistance.
The exception terminates immediately upon completion of the service or assistance.
Subd. 9. General parking rules apply. Except to the extent otherwise specifically provided in this
subsection, the general parking regulations of the city are applicable within the areas designated “parking
by permit only”.
1305.15. Additional restrictions. In addition to the other provisions of this section, parking vehicles on
the public streets, highways, alleys, and property owned or leased by the city is governed by signs
established by the public works department at the direction of the city council and in accordance with
verbal directions given by a police officer or member of the fire department.
1305.17. Parked vehicles impounded. A vehicle in violation of the traffic and parking regulations of the
city may be ordered removed from a public street, highway, alley, or property owned or leased by the city
by a police officer. The vehicle may be towed away to a garage, service station or other place of
safekeeping as authorized by the city council as soon as possible to facilitate snow removal, street
maintenance, the orderly flow of traffic, fire fighting or other lawful purpose. The vehicle will be
surrendered to the duly identified owner thereof upon payment of the required fees for such towing and
storage. Removal of a vehicle does not bar prosecution for a violation of traffic or parking regulations.
Robbinsdale City Code 1305.19
(Rev. 1998)
1305.19. Parking monitors. Subdivision 1. General rule. Under the direction of the police department
parking monitors and animal control officers are empowered, authorized and directed to issue traffic tags
for parking violations. The tags have the same force and effect as though issued by a duly appointed,
qualified and acting police officer or other peace officer.
Subd. 2. Interference. It is unlawful to resist, delay or obstruct a parking monitor or animal
control officer engaged in the discharge of official duties. It is unlawful to interfere with or obstruct the
issuance of traffic tags by parking monitors or animal control officers. It is unlawful to intentionally
obliterate, remove or destroy identification marks or signals placed upon tires or motor vehicles by
parking monitors or animal control officers in connection with the enforcement of parking regulations.
1305.21. Trucks and semi-tractors and trailers. Commercial vehicles, semi-tractors, trailers or trucks
exceeding a gross vehicle capacity of 9,000 pounds or an overall length of 25 feet may not be parked or
stored on streets or highway in the city.
1305.23. Truck routes. There are established within the corporate limits of the city "truck traffic routes"
identified by signs and markings erected and maintained by the police department as directed by the
council. When a "truck traffic route" has been established and identified, a person driving a truck having
a capacity of two tons or more must drive the truck on the route or routes and none other, except when it
is impracticable to do so or where necessary to traverse another street or streets to a destination for the
purpose of loading or unloading commodities and then only by such deviation from the nearest "truck
traffic route" as is reasonably necessary.
1305.25. Materials on streets or alleys. Subdivision 1. General rule. It is unlawful to throw or place in a
street or alley any glass, nails or other materials likely to puncture or injure rubber ties or any vehicle. A
person involved in an accident in which injurious materials are caused to be thrown or placed in a street
or alley must immediately remove such injurious materials or cause them to be removed.
Subd. 2. Snow. No person may by pushing, shoveling or by any mechanical means cause snow
or ice to be placed in or on any street or alley.
Subd. 3. Debris. A person hauling debris or construction materials and dropping it on city streets
must remove such materials or debris immediately. Persons causing damage to streets by trucks must
repair same to the satisfaction of the city. In the event either of the above provisions are not complied
with the person will be charged by the city for time and materials required to clean or repair said street.
1305.27. Keys in parked vehicles. It is unlawful to allow keys to a vehicle to remain in the ignition lock
while the vehicle is parked and unattended on any street, alley or public property in the city.
1305.29. Parking for park patrons only signage. The city council may, when deemed necessary,
designate by resolution, "parking for park patrons only" parking areas on city streets or rights-of-way,
near city parks. This signage will only be considered for parks that do not have adequate, designated
parking lots for patron use. Thereafter, no person in charge of a vehicle may park or permit the vehicle to
be parked on posted streets unless the vehicle owner is using park facilities or is on park grounds.
(Added, Ord. No. 98-12)
Robbinsdale City Code 1310.01
Section 1310 - Recreational Vehicles
1310.01. Statutes. The regulatory provisions of Minnesota Statutes, section 84.81 to 84.929 inclusive,
regulating snowmobiles and recreational off-road vehicles in the city are adopted by reference.
1310.03. Prohibitions. Subdivision 1. General. Except as provided in this section it is unlawful to
operate a snowmobile or recreation off-road vehicle:
(a) upon a city street or alley in the city;
(b) upon private property of another except upon written permission;
(c) upon publicly owned areas and easements, including school property, park property,
playgrounds, recreational areas, public lakes or lake surfaces, waters public boulevards or
sidewalks, or land designed for the use thereof;
Subd. 2. Time. A snowmobile or recreational off-road vehicle may not be operated after the hour
of 9:30 p.m. nor prior to 8:00 a.m. in the city.
1310.05. Permitted areas. The city council may, by resolution, designate public areas that may be used
by the public for the operation of snowmobiles or recreational off-road vehicles, provided that in
designated areas snowmobile or recreational off-road vehicle may not be operated:
(a) after the hour of 9:30 p.m. nor prior to 8:00 a.m.;
(b) within 50 yards of:
(1) a fisherman engaged in fishing;
(2) a skating rink;
(3) a sliding area.
(c) within 250 feet of lake shore except for designated park entrance and exit areas;
(d) unless the snowmobile or recreational vehicle complies with the state statute on noise;
(e) unless a required safety certificate has been obtained.
A person under 18 years of age may not operate a snowmobile unless the operator has a valid snowmobile
safety certificate in the person's immediate possession issued pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section
84.872 or is under the supervision of an adult.
Robbinsdale City Code 1315.01
(Rev. 2016)
Section 1315 - Bicycles
(Added, Ord. No. 98-01)
1315.01. Statutes. The regulatory provisions of Minnesota Statutes, sections 169.222 and 168C,
regulating bicycles in the city are adopted by reference.
1315.03. Definitions. Bicycle: In this section the term bicycle shall mean every device propelled solely
by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels except scooters and similar
devices and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two front or
rear wheels. (Minnesota Statutes, section 169.01, subd. 51)
1315.05. [Repealed; Ord. No. 16-08].
1315.07. Impoundment of bicycles. Any bicycle found unattended on any public street, highway,
boulevard, sidewalk, alley or any other public property without a currently valid license sticker, or which
has a mutilated frame number or license sticker may be immediately removed and impounded by any
officer or authorized employee of the department. The bicycle shall be returned to the owner upon proof
of ownership and display of a currently valid State of Minnesota registration covering the bicycle.
1315.09. Careful operation/reasonable speeds. No person shall operate or use a bicycle upon any public
street, highway, boulevard, sidewalk, alley or any other public property except in a careful and prudent
manner, or at a speed faster than is reasonable and proper under traffic conditions at the time. Every
bicycle shall be operated with due regard for the safety of the operator and other persons upon the public
streets, highways, boulevards, sidewalks, alleys or any other public property.
1315.11. Bicycle rentals. A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is
licensed by the State of Minnesota and a license sticker is attached and the bicycle is in good mechanical
condition and is equipped with lights and other equipment as required by Minnesota Statutes, section
169.222 and this section.
1315.13. Penalty. Any person who shall operate or use a bicycle in violation of the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
Robbinsdale City Code 1320
(Rev. 2009)
Section 1320 – Idling – Diesel Engine Powered Commercial Motor Vehicles
(Added, Ord. No. 09-09)
1320.01. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health and the environment by
reducing vehicular emissions in and adjacent to parks and conserving fuel while enhancing the rest and
safety of all drivers of diesel vehicles.
1320.03. Applicability. This chapter applies to diesel engine powered commercial motor vehicles (as
that term is defined in 49 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 390.5) which are designed to operate
on highways, and to locations within and adjacent to park property including Victory Memorial Parkway.
1320.05. General requirement for vehicles. No owner or operator of a vehicle shall cause or permit
vehicles covered by this chapter to idle in any park, or on any roadway or parking area adjacent to park
property, including Victory Memorial Parkway, except as noted in section 1320.07.
1320.07. Exemptions.
(a) Section 1320.05 does not apply for the period or periods where:
(1) A vehicle idles while forced to remain motionless because of on-street traffic, an
official traffic control device or signal, or at the direction of a law enforcement
official.
(2) The ambient outside air temperature is less than 36 degrees or more than 80
degrees Fahrenheit.
(3) Idling of the primary propulsion engine is necessary to power work-related
mechanical or electrical operations other than propulsion (e.g., mixing or
processing cargo or straight truck refrigeration). This exemption does not apply
when idling for cabin comfort or to operate non-essential on-board equipment.
(4) A vehicle idles due to mechanical difficulties over which the driver has no
control; an officer or inspector enforcing this chapter may require that the owner
or operator of the vehicle submit repair documentation or receipt within a
specified number of days in order for this conditional exemption to apply.
(b) Section 1320.05 does not apply to a police, fire, ambulance, public safety, military, or
other emergency or law enforcement vehicle, or any vehicle being used in an emergency
capacity, idles while in an emergency or training mode and not for the convenience of the
vehicle operator.
Robbinsdale City Code 1320.09
(Rev. 2009)
1320.09. Auxiliary power units. Operating an auxiliary power unit, generator set, or other mobile idle
reduction technology as a means to heat, air condition, or provide electrical power as an alternative to
idling the main engine shall not be precluded under this chapter.
1320.11. Penalties. Violations of the provisions of this chapter may be enforced by any one, all, or any
combination of the following penalties and remedies:
(a) Violations shall be punishable in accordance with section 115 of this code.
(b) This chapter may also be enforced by injunction, abatement, mandamus, or any other
appropriate remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Robbinsdale City Code 2000.01
CHAPTER XX
MISDEMEANORS
Section 2000 - General Provisions
2000.01. Criminal code adopted. Minnesota Statutes, chapter 609, the Criminal Code of 1963, is adopted
by reference. A violation of the statutes herein adopted is a violation of this code and is a misdemeanor or,
if so designated in those statutes, a gross misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor.
2000.03. State prohibited drug laws adopted. Minnesota Statutes, chapter 152 relating to prohibited drugs
and drug paraphernalia is adopted by reference. A violation of the statutes herein adopted is a violation of
this code and is a misdemeanor or if so designated in those statutes, a gross misdemeanor or a petty
misdemeanor.
2000.05. State obscenity laws adopted. Minnesota Statutes, sections 617.23 to 617.299 relating to
obscenity are adopted by reference. A violation of the statutes herein adopted is a violation of this code and
is a misdemeanor or if so designated in those statutes, a gross misdemeanor, or a petty misdemeanor.
2000.07. Public Nuisance laws adopted. Minnesota Statutes, sections 617.80 to 617.87, relating to public
nuisance are adopted by reference. A violation of the statutes herein adopted is a violation of this code and
is a misdemeanor or if so designated in those statutes, a gross misdemeanor, or a petty misdemeanor.
Robbinsdale City Code 2005.01 (Rev. 2003)
Section 2005 - Miscellaneous Special Provisions
2005.01. Indecent swimming or bathing. It is unlawful for a person to swim or bathe in any creek, stream
or pond within the limits of the city without being clad in swimming apparel.
2005.03. Cruelty to animals and birds. A person who inhumanely, unnecessarily, cruelly or wantonly beats,
injures or otherwise abuses any animal or bird within the city is guilty of a misdemeanor.
2005.05. Public possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages. It is unlawful, except as permitted in
this code, for a person to consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2 malt liquor as defined by chapter XII, while (i)
on a public street, (ii) in a public park or other public place, (iii) on any private property without the consent
of the owner of such property, or (iv) while in a vehicle upon a public street. The term "park" includes
public parking areas located within or immediately adjacent to a park. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-13, Sec. 13)
2005.07. Aid to law enforcement officials: identification. It is unlawful for a person to provide a police
officer with inaccurate information as to that person's identity and place of residence when requested to do
so.
2005.09. False registration. It is unlawful for a person to falsely register or willfully obtain or permit false
registration of any other person at a tourist camp, cabin camp, hotel, rooming house or other place
furnishing sleeping or overnight stopping accommodations for transient guests.
2005.11. Lurking. It is unlawful for a person in a public or private place, to lurk, lie in wait, to be
concealed with intent to do mischief or to commit a crime or an unlawful act.
2005.13. Loudspeaker devices. Subdivision 1. General rule. The maintenance in a building or premises or
on a motor vehicle, of a radio device, mechanical device, or loudspeaker or device of any kind whereby the
sound therefrom is cast directly upon the streets and public places when the device is maintained for
advertising or other commercial purpose, is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
Subd. 2. Permits may be issued. Notwithstanding subdivision 1, the council may, by motion, grant
a permit for the operation of a device described in subdivision 1 upon a finding that the location, volume,
intended course of use, and type of broadcast of the particular device for which such permit is sought will
not constitute a nuisance. The permit may be granted upon any conditions which the council deems
consistent with the public interest, and may be revoked at any time by motion of the council.
2005.15. Noise regulations. Subdivision 1. Parties: gatherings. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. it is unlawful to participate in a party or gathering of people from which noise or music or other sound
emanates in sufficient volume such as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet or repose of persons residing
in a residential area. The city council may, in its discretion, approve a request for extended hours for an
event(s). (Amended, Ord. No. 99-01; Ord. No. 03-05)
Robbinsdale City Code 2005.15, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2003)
Subd. 2. Radios, paging systems. (Added, Ord. No. 03-05)
(a) No person may use, operate, or permit the operation of any radio, receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, tape, disc player or MP3 player, paging system, machine or any
other device in a manner so as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet or repose of persons
residing or visiting in a residential area.
(b) Operation of any such device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a
manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of a structure of building in which it is
located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a distance of 40 feet if the source is
located outside of a structure or building, is prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section.
(c) Operation of any such device at any time in a motor vehicle in such a manner as to be
plainly audible at a distance of 40 feet from the motor vehicle is prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section.
(d) When sound that violates this section is produced or reproduced by any such device in a
motor vehicle, the motor vehicle’s owner is guilty of the violation if the owner is present
and allows the violation to occur or fails to take reasonable steps to stop the violation. If
the motor vehicle’s owner is not present at the time of this violation, the person in charge or
control of the vehicle at the time of the violation is guilty of the violation. In addition to an
owner or a driver, any person who controls or assists with the production or reproduction of
sound violating this section is guilty of the violation.
Robbinsdale-City Code 2010.01
Section 2010 - Public Property
2010.01. Defacement of buildings. It is unlawful to mark with ink, paint, chalk or other substance, or post
handbills on, or in any other manner deface or injure school building or structure or municipal building or
structure, or mark, deface or injure fences, trees, lawns or fixtures appurtenant to or located on the site of
such buildings or structures or post handbills on such fences, trees or fixtures or place a sign on the site.
2010.03. Breach of peace on school grounds or municipal property. Whoever does any of the following on
school ground or school property or on municipal grounds or municipal property knowing, or having
reasonable grounds to know that it will, or will tend to, alarm, anger or disturb others or provide an assault
or breach of the peace, is guilty of a misdemeanor:
(a) engages in brawling or fighting; or
(b) disturbs an assembly, meeting, school activity or class, not unlawful in its character; or
(c) engages in offensive, obscene or abusive language or in boisterous and noisy conduct
tending reasonably to arouse alarm, anger or resentment in others.
2010.05. Trespassing on school property. A person not in immediate attendance at the school and being in
a school building or upon school premises may not trespass in or upon school property by remaining on the
premises after being ordered to leave the premises by a school official. The person, having been ordered by
a school official to leave a public school and having left such premises, may not re-enter said public school
without the written permission of the school principal or the school official who gave the order to leave the
public school. The term "school official" means the principal, assistant principal, or any school teacher.
Robbinsdale City Code 2012.01 (Rev. 1995)
Section 2012 - Skateboards and Roller Skates
(Added, Ord. No. 95-2, Sec. 1)
2012.01. Skateboards and roller skates. Subdivision 1. Findings. The city finds and determines that it is
desirable and in the public interest to regulate and control the use of skateboards and roller skates and to
prohibit their use entirely on certain public and private property within the city.
2012.03. Definitions. Subdivision 1. For the purposes of this section the terms defined in this subsection
have the meanings given them.
Subd. 2. "Skateboard" means a device for riding upon, usually while standing, consisting of a piece
of wood or other composition mounted on skate wheels.
Subd. 3. "Roller skate" means a form of skate having small wheels or rollers instead of a runner.
The term shall also include devices commonly known as roller blades and roller skis.
Subd. 4. "Operate" means to ride on or upon or to control the operation of a skateboard or roller
skates.
2012.05. Prohibitions and regulations. Subdivision 1. No person shall operate a skateboard or roller skates
under the circumstances set forth in the following subdivision.
Subd. 2. On the private property of another without the express permission of the owner or
occupant of such property.
Subd. 3. On private property upon which signs have been posted prohibiting the operation of
skateboards or roller skates.
Subd. 4. On all public tennis courts within the city and on all sidewalk areas adjacent to the
community center, municipal building, and public safety building.
Subd. 5. On all public areas where signs have been posted pursuant to council resolution
prohibiting the operation of skateboards or roller skates.
Subd. 6. On any state or county highway located within the city except to cross said highway in an
otherwise lawful fashion.
Subd. 7. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to be likely to endanger the safety of any
person or the property of any other person.
Subd. 8. To fail to yield the right of way to pedestrians upon emerging from any alley, driveway or
building, upon approaching any sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across any alleyway.
Subd. 9. To fail to yield the right of way to any vehicle lawfully operating upon entering upon any
roadway.
Subd. 10. To attach the skateboard or roller skates or the person of the operator to any vehicle upon
a roadway.
Robbinsdale City Code 2012.05, Subd. 11 (Rev. 1995)
Subd. 11. To place wax or any other substances on public property to facilitate the sliding of a
skateboard or roller skate.
2012.07. Penalty. Subdivision 1. Any person who shall operate a skateboard or roller skates in violation of
the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. Any person who aids or abets the
commission of the prohibited act described in Subsection 2012.05, subdivision 10 is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Subd. 2. Impoundment. Any police officer who observes any violation of this section is
authorized to impound the skateboard or roller skates and to hold the same at the Police Department. The
skateboard or roller skates will be immediately released to the parent or legal guardian of an operator under
the age of 18 years, and shall be released to any operator 18 years of age or older following the expiration of
a 24-hour impoundment period.
Robbinsdale City Code 2015.01
(Rev. 2001)
Section 2015 - Curfew Regulations
(Deleted, Ord. 01-05)
Hennepin County Ordinance 16 entitled "Juvenile Curfew",
as amended, hereby adopted by reference
Robbinsdale City Code 2020.01
(Rev. 2006)
Section 2020 - Nuisances; General
(Repealed, Ord. No. 06-05)
Robbinsdale City Code 2021.01 (Rev. 1999)
Section 2021 – Code Enforcement Abatement Regulations
(Added, Ord. 99-08)
2021.01. Code enforcement abatement regulations. Subdivision 1. Defining a nuisance. The term
nuisance in this section refers to a class of legal wrongs which arise from a property owner/person’s
unreasonable or unlawful use of real or personal property and which produces annoyance, inconvenience,
discomfort, hurt or is a threat to the general welfare, health, and safety of the city.
Also, “whoever has control of real property and permits it to be used to maintain a nuisance or lets the same,
knowing it will be so used” is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Subd. 2. Public nuisances. The following is hereby declared a non-exclusive list of nuisances:
(a) Accumulations of refuse, or other debris except lawful compost. See section 605 of the city
code;
(b) Snow or ice not removed from public sidewalks within 12 hours after the snow or other
precipitation has ceased to fall (see section 805 of the city code);
(c) Fences, walls, posts, and similar structures, stored firewood, other exterior storage,
volunteer trees, bushes, or other plant life but not including wild, annual, or perennial
flowers that are located within the public right-of-way (see section 510.25 of the city code);
(d) Anything erected, placed, planted, maintained, or allowed to grow on a corner lot in any
district in such manner as to materially impede sight between a height of three feet and ten
feet above centerline grades of the intersection streets in the triangle bounded by the curb
lines of such corner lot and a straight line joining points in such curb lines 35 feet from their
intersection (see section 510.25 of the city code);
(e) Passenger vehicles and trucks parked on an unapproved surface or in any inoperative state
or unlicensed or unregistered, or any combination thereof, parked or stored in an outside
location. Inoperative shall mean incapable of movement under its own power or the need
of repairs or transportation to a junk yard (see section 510.25 of the city code);
(f) All materials and equipment not stored within a building or not fully screened so as to be
visible from adjoining properties, except for the following: clotheslines, operable
recreational equipment and vehicles, construction and landscaping material being used in
current projects on the premises, and off-street parking of passenger vehicles. (Amended,
Ord. No. 06-02);
(g) Any other violation of the city code which the city council or city manager deems likely to
cause annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort, hurt or which is a threat to the general
welfare, health, and safety of the city;
Robbinsdale City Code 2021.01, Subd. 3
(Rev. 2007)
(h) Engaging in any business or activity which is dangerous, hurtful, unwholesome, offensive
or unhealthy to the neighborhood, or which constitutes an annoyance to the persons in the
neighborhood, or is detrimental to the property in the neighborhood. (Added, Ord. No. 06-
05)
(i) Permitting, suffering, or maintaining, or failing to remove any offensive, nauseous, hurtful,
dangerous, unhealthy condition resulting from a failure to properly dispose of garbage,
sewage, waste, debris or any other unwholesome or offensive substance, liquid or thing,
upon one's premises, or dropping, discharging, passing, depositing or otherwise delivering
the same upon the premises of another or public property. (Added, Ord. No. 06-05)
(j) Constructing or maintaining or permitting or suffering upon one's property any billboard,
sign, poster, or advertisement, or to post, publish, promulgate, broadcast, display, issue or
circulate any insulting, profane or abusive emblem, sign, or device, or blasphemous written
or printed statement, calculated or such as is likely to cause a breach of the peace. (Added,
Ord. No. 06-05)
(k) Displaying, circulating, issuing or publishing any slanderous or obscene, immoral or lewd
pictures, posters, literature, writings, drawing or oral statements. (Added, Ord. No. 06-05)
(l) Permitting, suffering, or maintaining any fence, wall, planting, landscape materials, or any
other item within 20 feet of any street right-of-way corner which interferes with or
obstructs traffic visibility. (Added, Ord. No. 06-05)
(m) Covering or blocking the doors or windows of a building with boards or timbers that are
loose or rotting or the surface of which is unpainted or covered with cracked or blistering
paint. (Added, Ord. No. 06-05)
(n) A clandestine lab site as defined by Hennepin County Ordinance Number 25 (Public Health
Nuisance Ordinance) and as adopted pursuant to section 635 of this code. (Added, Ord.
No. 06-05)
(o) Any other violation of the city code which the city council or city manager deems likely to
cause annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort, hurt or which is a threat to the general health
and safety of the city. (Added, Ord. No. 06-05)
(p) Violation of the provisions of section 915.21 of this Code. (Added, Ord. No. 07-17)
Subd. 3. Abatement procedure. The code enforcement official shall follow the steps listed below:
(a) Record complaint. Record all complaints received on the appropriate city form that lits the
nature and location of the alleged violation.
(b) Inspect property. Inspect property in question (after obtaining any necessary
warrant/permission if necessary) and document the existence of any perceived nuisance.
Robbinsdale City Code 2021.01, Subd. 3 (c)
(Rev. 2006)
(c) Prepare correction notice. If it is determined that a nuisance exists, a notice of violation
must be provided to the violator and said notice shall contain the following:
(i) The nature of the violation and appropriate ordinance citation.
(ii) The necessary action needed to correct the violation.
(iii) The date by which the corrections must be made before the city will seek
abatement.
(iv) The right of and the manner for the alleged violator to request a hearing before the
city council unless it is an emergency case.
(v) A description of the penalties if the violation is not corrected.
(vi) A statement that all unreimbursed costs incurred by the city in abating the nuisance
shall be assessed against the property unless payment is received within 30 days of
the original billing to the property owner.
(d) Serve correction notice. A notice shall be served to the property owner in person or by U.S.
mail. If the premises are not occupied and or owner is unknown, the notice may be served
by posting it on the premises.
(e) Determine violation status. Determine whether the violation has been corrected by the set
date in the notice.
(f) Order abatement. If the violation has not been corrected the city manager may order the
abatement be implemented by city staff or by a designated contractor or may place the
abatement on the city council agenda for approval by resolution to abate.
(g) Conduct clean up. Unless state law provides otherwise, failure of the property owner to
correct a violation by the time the abatement is implemented shall constitute agreement that
any materials on the area to be abated constitute rubbish and that the city of Robbinsdale or
their contractor may dispose of them.
(h) Document all costs. Document all costs involved including administrative, legal, clean up,
and storage and/or disposal of any property removed.
(i) Submit a bill. Submit a bill for the amount of the total costs of the abatement to the
property owner.
(j) Unpaid bills/assessment. The owner of the premises upon which a nuisance is abated by
the city is personally liable for the costs of the abatement, including administrative costs. If
the bill is not paid by the due date then the amount shall be a lien against the subject
property and the amount shall be collected as a special assessment in the manner provided
by Minnesota Statutes, chapter 429. (Amended, Ord. No. 06-05)
Robbinsdale City Code 2021.01, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2010)
(k) Recovery of costs related to clandestine lab sites. The city may recover costs incurred in
the removal or abatement of a clandestine lab site, including any costs incurred by the city
related to its enforcement obligations under Hennepin County Ordinance Number 25
(Public Health Nuisance Ordinance). The owner of the premises upon which a clandestine
lab is abated is personally liable for the costs of the abatement, including any costs incurred
by the city related to its enforcement obligations under Hennepin County Ordinance
Number 25. If the owner does not pay such costs, the amount shall be a lien against the
subject property and the amount shall be collected as a special assessment in the manner
provided by Minnesota Statutes, chapter 429.101. (Added, Ord. No. 06-05)
Subd. 4. Time to correct. All nuisance corrections must be made within 14 days of mailing of the
correction notice, unless a shorter or longer time is provided for by the city code (e.g. snow removal, etc.) or
by the city council through the appeal process.
Subd. 5. Appeal. Any appeal must be filed within ten days of the mailing of the corrections notice
unless another part of the city code provides a longer time period. The code enforcement officer may grant
a time extension for extenuating circumstances. The city manager has the authority to deny any such time
extension.
Subd. 6. Emergency case. The city manager or city council shall have the authority to determine
which violations constitute an emergency case. An emergency case has no appeal process and requires
immediate action. In other than emergency cases a letter, warning, citation or any combination thereof shall
be issued prior to taking any abatement action.
Subd. 7. The city council and/or city manager may institute any lawful action or proceeding in the
name of the city of Robbinsdale to prevent, remedy or abate any violation of the city code.
Subd. 8. Nothing in section 2021 shall prevent the city from taking such other actions as are
permitted under law and the penalties provided herein shall be accumulative.
Subd. 9. Penalties for prohibited acts. Penalties are provided for in section 115 of the city code.
2021.03. Securing vacant buildings and buildings unfit for occupancy. (Added, Ord. No. 07-18; Amended,
Ord. No. 10-03)
(a) Declaration of buildings unfit for occupancy. Any building which is damaged, decayed,
dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, vermin or rodent infested, or which lacks provision for
basic illumination, ventilation, or sanitary facilities to the extent that the defects create a
hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants or of the public may be declared
unfit for occupancy. Whenever any building has been declared unfit for occupancy, the
enforcement officer shall order same vacated within a reasonable time and shall post a
placard on same which shall: (Amended, Ord. No. 10-03)
Robbinsdale City Code 2021.03 (a)(1)
(Rev. 2010)
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a description of the property sufficient for identification;
(3) Include a statement of a reason or reasons why it is being issued;
(4) Include a description of the repairs and improvements required to bring the
dwelling or multiple dwelling into compliance with the provisions of this section,
and
(5) Include a statement of time to correct the violations.
(b) Reoccupancy of buildings ordered to be vacated. It is unlawful for such building to be used
for occupancy until the defective conditions have been corrected and written approval has
been issued by the enforcement officer. It is unlawful for any person to deface or remove
the declaration placard from any such building. (Amended, Ord. No. 10-03)
(c) (Added, Ord. No. 10-03) Identification of vacant building. A building that is unoccupied
and that meets one or more of the following conditions is deemed to be vacant:
(1) property has been foreclosed upon as identified by the county;
(2) windows or entrances to the premises are boarded up or closed off, or multiple
window panes are broken and unrepaired;
(3) doors to the premises are smashed through, broken off, unhinged or continuously
unlocked;
(4) gas, electric or water service to the premises has been terminated;
(5) rubbish, trash, or debris has accumulated on the premises;
(6) the police or sheriff’s office has received at least two reports within a 180 day
window of trespassers on the premises, or of vandalism or other illegal acts being
committed on the premises; or
(7) the premises are deteriorating and are either below or are in imminent danger of
falling below minimum community standards for public safety and sanitation.
Robbinsdale City Code 2021.03 (d)
(Rev. 2010)
(d) Secure unfit and vacated buildings. The owner of a building which has been declared unfit
for human habitation, or which is otherwise vacant as set forth in subsection (c), above,
must make same safe and secure so that it is not hazardous to the health, safety, or welfare
of the public and does not constitute a public nuisance. Any vacant building open at doors
or windows, if unguarded, shall be deemed a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the
public and a public nuisance within the meaning of this section, and may be secured by the
City under the provisions of Minnesota Statutes 463.251. The City Manager may order the
City to proceed with the emergency securing of any vacant and unsecured building if, in the
opinion of the City Manager the building presents an immediate danger to the health and
safety of persons in the community. The City Manager’s order shall be in writing and shall
state the conditions showing the existence of an emergency. A copy of the order shall be
promptly mailed to the record owner, the taxpayer identified in the county records, and the
holder of any mortgage or sheriff’s certificate. Failure to provide such notice shall not
invalidate the order to secure. All costs incurred by the City for securing a vacant building
under this Section may be charged against the real property as a special assessment
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 463.251, 463.21, and 463.151. (Amended, Ord. No. 10-03)
(e) Hazardous building declaration. In the event that a building has been declared unfit for
occupancy and the owner has not remedied the defects within a prescribed reasonable time,
the building may be declared a hazardous building and treated consistent with the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes. (Amended, Ord. No. 10-03)
(f) Standards for boarded openings. All boarding over windows, doors or other openings shall
be covered with ½" or thicker CDX plywood that is primed and painted to a light or
matching color. The board(s) shall be the minimum number of pieces needed to cover the
opening, well cut to fit and placed so there are no protruding edges. The board shall be
mounted in such a manner or sealed at edges so that rainwater is shed away from interior
structural components. Fasteners shall be galvanized or anodized finish and shall be placed
at board corners and then no further than 12 inches apart around the board perimeter.
(Amended, Ord. No. 10-03)
Robbinsdale City Code 2025.01
Section 2025 - Conduct in or Near School Buildings
or Grounds
2025.01. Definitions. Subdivision 1. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the meanings
given them.
Subd. 2. "Public school" means any school building, school grounds, play area, parking lot or
athletic field owned or leased by a public school district.
Subd. 3. "School official" means the principal, assistant principal, or any school teacher of a public
school.
2025.03. Trespassing prohibited. A person may not trespass in or upon any public school by remaining
upon the school premises after being ordered to leave by a school official.
2025.05. Permission required for reentry. A person, having been ordered by a school official to leave a
public school and having left the premises, may not reenter the public school without the written permission
of the school official who gave the order to leave the public school.
2025.07. Defacement of school buildings. A person may not mark with ink, paint, chalk or other substance,
or post hand bills on, or in any other manner deface or injure fences, trees, lawns or fixtures appurtenant to
or located on the public school, or post hand bills on such fences, trees or fixtures. Signs may not be placed
or posted anywhere on a public school without the express permission of a school official.
2025.09. Breach of peace on school grounds. A person may not make or assist in making any noise,
disturbance, diversion or activity by which peace, quiet and good order of the public school are disturbed.
2025.11. Fighting and brawling on school grounds. A person may not engage in, threaten to engage in, or
assist in engaging in any riot, fight, brawl, tumultuous conduct or act of violence in a public school.
2025.13. Indecent language on school grounds. A person may not use foul, offensive, obscene or indecent
language in a public school.
Robbinsdale City Code 2030.01
Section 2030 - Nudity in Certain Establishments
2030.01. Nudity in certain establishments. Subdivision 1. Definitions. For purposes of this section the
terms defined in this subsection have the meanings given them.
Subd. 2. "Nudity" means the showing of the post-pubertal human male or female genitals, pubic
area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of a post-pubertal female breast with
less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple or the showing of
covering male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
Subd. 3. "Sadomasochistic abuse" means scenes involving a person or persons, any of whom are
nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving
the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such persons.
Subd. 4. "Sexual conduct" means acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or
physical contact with a person's unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person is a female, her
breast.
Subd. 5. "Sexual excitement" means the condition of the human male or female genitals or the
breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation or the sensual experience of humans engaging in
or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity.
Subd. 6. Prohibition. It is unlawful for the licensee, owner or manager of any establishment
licensed pursuant to chapter XII of this code to permit or allow in such establishment nudity,
sadomasochistic abuse, sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in this section, or for a person to
participate or engage in such conduct. Violation of this subsection is grounds for the revocation of a license
issued pursuant to chapter XII.
2030.03. Public display to minors. Subdivision 1. Definitions. As used in this section, the terms defined
have the meanings given them.
Subd. 2. "Description or depiction of illicit sex or immorality" means:
(a) human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
(b) acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
(c) fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast.
Subd. 3. "Nude or partially denuded figures" means:
(a) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic areas, buttocks, and
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
(b) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Robbinsdale City Code 2030.03, Subd. 4
Subd. 4. "Knowingly" means having knowledge of the character and content of the publication or
failure on notice to exercise reasonable inspection which would disclose the content and character of the
same.
Subd. 5. Display prohibited. No person may knowingly display to public view at any business
establishment frequented by minors under the age of 18 years or where minors are or may be invited as a
part of the general public, any motion picture, or any still picture, or any photograph, or any book,
pocketbook, pamphlet or magazine the cover or content of which, exploits, is devoted to, or is principally
made up of sexual immorality or which is lewd, lascivious, or indecent, or which consists of pictures of
nude or partially denuded figures poses or presented in a manner to provoke or arouse lust or passion or
exploit sex, lust or perversion for commercial gain or any article or instrument of indecent or immoral use.
Robbinsdale City Code 2035.01
Section 2035 - Obstructing Pedestrian
or Vehicular Traffic
2035.01. Obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic. It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons
to loiter, stand, sit, lie, or remain upon or within any street, sidewalk, driveway, crosswalk or any public way
or to otherwise occupy any portion thereof, or to place an object upon or within any street, sidewalk,
driveway, cross-walk or any public way, with the intent or purpose to block, obstruct or interfere with the
uninterrupted and orderly free flow of any pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon.
2035.02. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor.
Robbinsdale City Code 2040.01 (Rev. 2001)
Section 2040 - Crystal Lake and South Twin Lake Speed Regulations during high water levels
(note: regular lake regulations are found in Section 815.07)
(Added, Ord. No. 97-12, Amended, Ord. No. 19-01, Sec. 3)
2040.01. Purpose. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 86B.201-205, 459.20 and Minnesota Rules parts
6110.3000-6110.3700, it is the purpose of this section to temporarily regulate the operation and speed of
watercraft on Crystal Lake and South Twin Lake.
2040.03. Definitions. Subdivision 1. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases
have the meanings set forth below:
Subd. 2. "Persons" includes an individual, partnership, corporation or any body of persons whether
incorporated or formed into an association or not.
Subd. 3. "Operate" means to navigate or otherwise use a watercraft.
Subd. 4. "Watercraft" has the meaning given in Minnesota Statutes 86B.005, subdivision 8.
Subd. 5. "Slow-no wake" means the operation of a watercraft at the slowest possible speed
necessary to maintain steerage and in no case greater than 5 mph.
Subd. 6. "Crystal Lake" means section 5 and 6, township 029, range 24, the lake bordered by
Lakeview Terrace Park on the south, Highway 81 on the west, Shoreline Drive on the north, Crystal Lake
Boulevard on the east.
Subd. 7. "South Twin Lake" means section 6, township 029, range 24, sections 9 and 10, and
sections 15 and 16, township 118, range 21, the lake bordered by Trunk Highway 100 on the north,
Highway 81 on the west and County Road 9 on the south.
2040.05. Crystal Lake regulation. No person shall operate a watercraft at greater than a slow-no wake
speed on Crystal Lake until the level has dropped to at least an elevation of 848 feet above sea level as
determined by the engineering department and remained at or below that level for at least three consecutive
days. (Amended, Ord. No. 01-04)
2040.06. South Twin Lake regulation. No person shall operate a watercraft at greater than a slow-no wake
speed on South Twin Lake until the level has dropped to at least an elevation of 852.25 feet above sea level
as determined by the engineering department and remained at or below that level for at least three
consecutive days. (Added, Ord. No. 01-04)
2040.07. Exemptions. Authorized resource management, emergency and enforcement personnel, when
acting in the performance of their duties, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
2040.09. Marking. The city of Robbinsdale shall be responsible for informing the public, posting
notification at all public accesses and marking or buoying areas affected by this section as necessary to give
reasonable notice of the speed restriction of this section.
Robbinsdale City Code
2040.11. Enforcement. Primary responsibility for enforcement of this section shall rest with the Hennepin
County sheriff's department. This, however, shall not preclude enforcement by other licensed peace
officers.
2040.13. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
APPENDIX B
ROBBINSDALE ORDINANCE CODE
AND GENERAL FEE SCHEDULE
Updated 12/2019
TABLE OF ?CONTENTS
APPENDIX B
ROBBINSDALE ORDINANCE CODE
AND GENERAL FEE SCHEDULE
Miscellaneous Fees ......................................................................................................................................................................................1
Fees Established Under Separate Resolution and Maps ..............................................................................................................................2
General Provisions – Chapter I Administrative Penalty System .................................................................................................................2
Building, Housing and Construction Regulations – Chapter IV.............................................................................................................. 3-4
Parking Ramp & Rental Inspections ............................................................................................................................................................3
Planning and Land Use – Chapter V........................................................................................................................................................ 5-6
Public Health and Food – Chapter VI ..........................................................................................................................................................7
Public Utilities and Public Works – Chapter VII .........................................................................................................................................8
Streets, Alleys and Public Ways and Parks – Chapter VIII .........................................................................................................................9
Public Safety: Animals and False Alarms – Chapter IX ............................................................................................................................10
Domestic Partnership Registry – Chapter X ..............................................................................................................................................11
Business and Trade Regulations – Chapter XI .................................................................................................................................... 11-13
Liquor and Beer – Chapter XII ..................................................................................................................................................................14
Traffic, Motor Vehicles; Miscellaneous Permits; Police and Fire Miscellaneous.....................................................................................15
Attachment A: DEMOLITION AND MOVING PERMIT FEES
Attachment B: PLUMBING PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
Attachment C: PLUMBING PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
Attachment D: MECHANICAL PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
Attachment E: SIGN FEES
Attachment F: PARK FACILITIES/EQUIPMENT FEES
Attachment G: CONDUIT DEBT ISSUANCE FEE SCHEDULE
Attachment H: RENTAL LICENSE INSPECTION FEES
Attachment I: SCHEDULE OF OFFENSES AND FEES ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY SYSTEM
?Fees listed are local only. State and/or County fees may also apply.
APPENDIX B Page 1
FEE SCHEDULE
Description, Ordinance Chapters/Section Type Department Expiration Fee
MISCELLANEOUS FEES
Special Assessment Searches Fee Eng & Assessor $25/search
Special Assessment Self Search Fee Assessor $10/visit
City Ordinance Code (updating not included) Fee Administration $150
City Zoning Ordinance Code (updating not included) Fee Administration $100
City Charter (updating not included) Fee Administration $50
Budget Book - Annual Fee Finance $75
Financial Statements - Annual Fee Finance $75
Comprehensive Plan (updating not included) Fee Administration $75
Copies of Miscellaneous Information Fee All $0.25 Per page
Council Meeting Minutes - mailed – Non-Resident Only Fee Administration $25/year or $0.25 Per page + Postage
Notary Fee All $5.00 per oath; Limited to 2 per occasion
(Effective 8-1-14)
Owners List – name & address only (paper copy) Fee Assessor $100 entire city or $0.25 Per page
Owners List - property characteristics (paper & electronic) Fee Assessor $45 per hour for research
Property Record card – except personal residence Fee Assessor $2/record card to maximum of 5
Abatement – administrative oversight Fee Assessor $25
Returned Check Fee Finance $30 each
Filing of Various Instruments Fee Administration None
Administrative Charge for Special Assessments Fee Administration $50 each
Abatement of Nuisance/Problem Property
Fee All $50 + actual city costs recovered
$50 per visit to property by Inspector prior
to and follow-up on Abatement
Conduit Debt Issuance Fee Finance See Attachment G
APPENDIX B Page 2
FEE SCHEDULE
Description, Ordinance Chapters/Section Type Department Expiration Fee
FEES ESTABLISHED UNDER SEPARATE RESOLUTIONS
Water Utility Surcharge – per dwelling unit Separate Resolution
Water Utility Rate - per 1000 gallons Separate Resolution
Sanitary Sewer Surcharge - per dwelling unit Separate Resolution
Sanitary Sewer Rate – per 1000 gallons Separate Resolution
Storm Water – per acre Separate Resolution
Street Lighting – mid block Separate Resolution
Garbage (See Public Health) Separate Resolution
Speed Bumps (Resolution 6340) $200 per bump site.
Speed Bump Signs $150 per sign – 2 signs required per block
Speed Bump Administration Fee $50
Tree Removal – Administration fee – requested oversight $75.00
Tree Removal –Administration fee - forced removal 150.00
MAPS
Aerials: Fee
Engineering $35 - 34”x46” 1”=300’
$30 - 21”x27” 1” = 500’
$25 - 18”x24” 1”=600’
Others: Fee
Engineering $15 - 24”x36” standard plan (photo copy)
$30 - 34”x46” lg address/zoning 1” =300’
$25 - 21”x27” sm address/zoning 1”=500’
$20 - 18”x24” address 1”=600’
Shipping for any of the above maps Fee Engineering $5
GENERAL PROVISIONS – CHAPTER I
Administrative Penalties – 117 Fee Code Enforcement Per occurrence See Attachment I
APPENDIX B Page 3
FEE SCHEDULE
Description, Ordinance Chapters/Section Type Department Expiration Fee
BUILDING, HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS – CHAPTER IV
Demolition & Moving– 400.05 Permit Building Insp. See Attachment A
Plumbing – 400.05 Permit Building Insp. See Attachment B
Fire Suppression – 400.05 Permit Building Insp. See Attachment C
General, Building – 400.05 Permit Building Insp. See Attachment C
Plan Review Permit Building Insp. See Attachment C
License Verification (surcharge) Permit Building Insp. See Attachment C
Excavations & other activities in the right of way – 405.19 Permit Building Insp. See Attachment C
Mechanical Permit Building Insp. See Attachment D
Signs – 410.25 Permit Building Insp. See Attachment E
Masonry – 405.15 Permit Building Insp. 12/31 $50
Contractors – 405.13 License Building Insp. 12/31 $50
Excavator – 405.09 License Building Insp. 12/31 $50
Demolition – 405.08 License Building Insp. 12/31 $50
Heating & Air Conditioning – 405.01 License Building Insp. 12/31 $50
Off-Site Directional Signs—410.05 & 841 License Administration &
Engineering
12/31 $240/sign initial fee
$40/sign/face plus sign replacement costs, if
any, annually
Roofing – 405.17 License Building Insp. 12/31 $50
Plastering, Stucco, Lathing – 405.11 License Building Insp. 12/31 $50
Plumbing – 405.01 License Building Insp. 12/31 $50
Sewer Maintenance – 405.07 License Engineering 12/31 $50
Crane – 405.21 License Engineering 12/31 $50
Sign Hanger – 410.27 License Building Insp. 12/31 $50
Parking Ramp – 415.05 Certificate Engineering 6/30 $100
Inspection of Rental Dwellings – 425.31 License Code Enforcement 12/31 Biannually See Attachment H
Re-inspection of Rental Dwellings – 425.31 License Code Enforcement See Attachment H
APPENDIX B Page 4
FEE SCHEDULE
Description, Ordinance Chapters/Section Type Department Expiration Fee
BUILDING, HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS – CHAPTER IV (CONTINUED)
Point of Sale Administration Fee – 435.07 Fee Comm. Devt 12/31 ? $50 Initial Evaluator Certification Fee
? $25Annual Evaluator Certification
? $50 Filing Fee for Point of Sale Reports
? $50 Building Official Verification of R/R
Item Completion/Resolution – 1st visit,
waived if work covered by building permit.
$25/visit for additional follow-up
inspections, as required for compliance.
? $25 Filing Fee for Buyer’s Responsibility
Agreement
APPENDIX B Page 5
FEE SCHEDULE
Description, Ordinance Chapters/Section Type Department Expiration Fee
PLANNING AND LAND USE REGULATIONS – CHAPTER V
Lot split – 500.13 Fee Community Development Per Project $200
Sketch Plats – 500.15 Fee Community Development Per Project $100
Preliminary Plats – 500.17 Fee Community Development Per Project $200+$100/lot *
Final Plat – 500.19 Fee Community Development Per Project $150 *
Subdivision Variance Application – 500.39 Fee Community Development Per Project $200 *
Initiation of Amendment to Subdivision Regulations – 500.47 Fee Community Development Per Project $500 *
Initiate Amendment to City of Zoning Code Fee Community Development Request $500 *
Use Permit – 535.11, Subd. 1 Fee Community Development Per Project $85 + time & materials
$100 + additional expenses
incurred
$25 Sign permits requiring
Council approval
Conditional Use Permit – 535.15, Subd. 1(a) Fee Community Development Per Project $250 *
Zoning Amendments – 535.15, Subd. 1(a) Fee Community Development Per Project $500
Zoning Variances and Appeals – 535.15, Subd. 1(a) Fee Community Development Per Project $200 *
Review Encroachments in City Rights-of-Way Fee Community Development Per Project $150 *
Comprehensive Plan Amendments – 535.15, Subd. 1(a) Fee Community Development Per Project $500 *
Vacation – 830.01 Fee Community Development Per Project $200 *
Zoning development pre-application review (variance, CUP,
Rezoning, et al)
Fee Community Development Per Project $50 *Fee applied to project if
project proceeds.
Tax Combination or Split Review Fee Community Development Per Request $75
Request by a lender/agency, etc. for a Zoning Compliance letter Fee Community Development Per Request $75 **
Zoning research for state license forms (i.e. salon, wholesale
motor vehicle, etc.)
Fee Community Development Per Request $75 **
Request for property status letter (non-conforming, illegal, et al) Fee Community Development Per Request $200 **
Request for Floodplain technical assistance Fee Community Development Per Request $50 **
Request for Zoning Classification or Flood Plain panel & date Fee Community Development Per Request $25 **
*Applicant may be liable for additional expenses such as legal fees.
** Applicant may be billed for additional staff time.
APPENDIX B Page 6
FEE SCHEDULE
Description, Ordinance Chapters/Section Type Department Expiration Fee
PLANNING AND LAND USE REGULATIONS – CHAPTER V (Continued)
Mailing fee for all required mail notifications Fee Community Development Per Address $1 per address
Architectural Review – signs in overlay district Fee Community Development Per location $50
Architectural Review – New construction in overlay district Fee Community Development Per location $50/hour. 1 hour minimum
Development consulting (except city sponsored) Fee Community Development Per Request $50/hr. 1-hour minimum.
*Fee applied to project if
project proceeds.
Rezoning request for R-2 to R-1 Fee Community Development Per Request $150
APPENDIX B Page 7
FEE SCHEDULE
Description, Ordinance Chapters/Section Type Department Expiration Fee
PUBLIC HEALTH – CHAPTER VI
Garbage Collector License Administration 12/31 $50/1st truck and
$50/additional truck
Dumpster on Private Property 605.03 Fee listed along with fees for
dumpster in right of way –
Chapter VIII
Garbage Collections – 605.07 Fee Administration Adjusted annually by Council
Garbage/Recycling Cart Exchange Fee Utility Billing $5
Residential Solid Waste Truck Return or Extra Pickup.
Return: i.e. customer error. Extra: i.e. tenant move out.
Fee Utility Billing $10
Therapeutic Massage, Establishment – 613.13
License
Fee
Administration
Police Department
12/31 $250 annually
$500 initial investigation
$200 renewal investigation
Therapeutic Massage, Individual – 613.13
License
Fee
Administration
Police Department
12/31 $75 annually
$50 annual investigation fee
Therapeutic Massage, Home Business—613.13
? Limited to a business owner who is also the sole
therapist
License
Fee
Administration
Police Department
12/31 $150 annually new
$100 annually renewal
$100 annual investigation
Temporary Food Sales – 615.01 License Administration 12/31 $50; Non-Profits may submit
all events at one time for one
annual fee
Restaurant/Café without alcohol– 615.01 License Administration 12/31 $50
Restaurant with alcohol – 615.01 & 1205.01 License Administration 12/31 $200
Soft Drink Parlor – 615.03 License Administration 12/31 $50
Convenience Food/Drive-In Establishment – 615.05 License Administration 12/31 $50
Body Art Business - 625 License Administration 12/31 $100 annually
$500 initial investigation
$200 renewal investigation
APPENDIX B Page 8
FEE SCHEDULE
Description, Ordinance Chapters/Section Type Department Expiration Fee
PUBLIC UTILITIES – CHAPTER VII
Storm, water & sanitary sewer connection inspection - 700.33 Permit Engineering $75/connection
Fire Water Charge (FWC) 705.03 Fee Finance Quarterly None
Restoration of Service Charge – 705.09 Fee Finance $30
Telecommunications Facilities and Equipment – 715.03
Permit Engineering Per occurrence $100 (construction, maintenance,
relocation on public right-of-way)
Telecommunications Towers – 720 License Clerk Annual or per
occurrence
$500 (develop, construct, or erect
tower and maintain tower).
$500 per occurrence (modify tower
or antenna array)
STREETS, ALLEYS AND PUBLIC WAYS – CHAPTER VIII
Street Excavations – 800.05 Permit Engineering Each Occurrence $35/utility company
$75/all others
Street Repair – 800.23 Permit Engineering $600 for 1st 30 s.f. + $15 each
additional square foot
Curb cuts/Driveway Apron or Sidewalk – 800.23 Permit Engineering $50
Excavations or Other Activities in Right of Way – 800.23 Permit Engineering See Street Excavations above
Vacation – 830.01 Fee Planning Per Project $200
Newspaper Racks – 839.03 License City Clerk 12/31 $25/year up to 5 boxes; $5/box
$150 impoundment fee
$25/site inspection or relocation
Courtesy Bench – 840.01 License City Clerk 12/31 $50/bench
Placement of Dumpster/Collection Bin/Storage Container –
In Right-of-Way 845.15
Private Property 605.03
Permit
Permit
Engineering
Code Enforcement
(7 day permit)
30 days
$50 1st 7 days; $75 for second
week; $210 for each week after the
second week. No pro-ration.
$0 1st 30 days; $50 2nd 30 days;
$100 3rd and subsequent 30 day
permits.
$50 per month for new residential
& commercial construction for no
more than 6 and 9 months
respectively. $100 per month
thereafter.
APPENDIX B Page 9
FEE SCHEDULE
PUBLIC WORKS/PUBLIC UTILITIES MISC.
Sump Pump utility charge Fee Engineering $50 per month
Water Meter Fee Public Works $130 + tax
Tailpieces Fee Public Works $10 + tax per pair
Horn (mandatory in new homes starting 01-01-06) Fee Public Works $35 + tax
Locate curb stops, without Gopher State One Call Locate Fee Public Works $50 each locate
Shut Off Water at Stop Box Fee Public Works $150 ($100 refund if unable to shut
off)
Hydrant meter rental fee Fee Public Works $50 per week + $1,000 deposit +
water usage
Resident Requested Sign – non warrant, including install Fee Public Works $200 new; $40 + cost of sign for
replacement
Tree Trimming Fee Forestry 12/3 $50
Pick up and Storage of Temporary Traffic Control Devices Fee Public Works Per Permit $65 for one device & $15 for each
additional device for pick up; plus
$250 for up to 10 items for up to 5
calendar days of storage; $250 for
additional storage for up to 5
calendar days. Note: signs not
picked up within 15 days are
deemed to be abandoned.
Street Light Knockdown Fee
LUMEC Light (Robbinsdale Streetscape Light) Fee Public Works $4,500
HOLOPHANE LIGHT (CR81 – Single Luminaire) Fee Public Works $4,800
HOLOPHANE LIGHT (CR81 – Double Luminaire) Fee Public Works $6,900
ACUITY Light (25’ pole) Fee Public Works $3,200
ACUITY Light (Noble – 25’ pole + banner) Fee Public Works $3,300
ACUITY Light (CR9 – 40’ pole) Fee $4,400
EQUIPMENT & PERSONNEL – PER HOUR
Litter picker; Lawn mower Fee Public Works $20 + actual labor cost
Pickup truck, Van Fee Public Works $25 + actual labor cost
Utility trailer, Roller & trailer, Paint Striper, Compressor truck Fee Public Works $30 + actual labor cost
Dump truck, Water Wagon Fee Public Works $40 + actual labor cost
Backhoe, Loader, Sweeper, Grader Fee Public Works $50 + actual labor cost
Vactor Fee Public Works $200+actual labor cost
Utility Meter Return Fee Engineering 20% of initial equipment cost
APPENDIX B Page 10
FEE SCHEDULE
Description, Ordinance Chapters/Section Type Department Expiration Fee
PARKS MISCELLANEOUS
Park Buildings Fee Parks See Attachment F
Picnic Shelters Fee Parks See Attachment F
Athletic Fields & Rink Lights Fee Parks See Attachment F
Park Facilities and Equipment Fees Fee Parks & Recreation See Attachment F
APPENDIX B Page 11
FEE SCHEDULE
Description, Ordinance Chapters/Section Type Department Expiration Fee
PUBLIC SAFETY – CHAPTER IX
Dog and Cat – 915.03 License Administration 12/31 – every
other year
$15 neutered/spayed
$20 not neutered/spayed
$10 fee Multi-Cat Residence (in
addition to regular licenses)
$3/duplicate tags
Impoundment – 915.19 Fee Animal Control $75/1st offense
$100/2nd offense
$125/3rd offense
Boarding fee for large & small
animals–current contract rates apply.
Domesticated Animal – 915.37 Permit
Fee
Administration 12/31 $25 +$1/address mailing to 200 feet
$50/initial investigative fee
Wild & Exotic Animal – 915.39 Permit
Fee
Administration 12/31 $50
$50/initial investigative fee
Potentially Dangerous Animals – 915.25
Dangerous Animals – 915.27
Permit
Fee
Police 12/31 $200
False Alarms – 920.09
Penalties Police & Fire Departments 12/31 See Attachment I
Repeat Nuisance Service Call Fee – 927.05
Fee Police & Code
Enforcement
365 day cycle $250 for each call starting with third
call, after proper notice, charged to
owner and/or $250 for occupant if
not the owner, plus additional fees
for excess costs all per 927.05, Subd.
2, plus penalties in this code section.
APPENDIX B Page 12
FEE SCHEDULE
Description, Ordinance Chapters/Section Type Department Expiration Fee
DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP REGISTRATION – CHAPTER X
Domestic Partnership Registration – 1015 PART B Fee Administration Not applicable $20 – registration plus $1 per each
additional certified copy at time of
registration
$15 – charge per certified copy plus
$1 per each additional certified copy
any time other than initial registration
$15 – termination fee
BUSINESS AND TRADE REGULATIONS – CHAPTER XI
Mini-golf – 1100.01 License Administration 12/31 $75
Pool Hall or Bowling Alley – 1100.03.13
Change of Location – Pool Hall or Bowling Alley –
1100.03.14
License
License
Administration
Administration
12/31
12/31
None
Same as regular
Theater – 1100.05 License Administration 12/31 $200
Carnivals, Shows, Public Entertainment (Outdoors) – 1100.07 License Administration 12/31 $100/day – single performance
$300/multiple performance not to
exceed 3 days
$50/each additional day over 3 days
Carnivals, Shows, Public Entertainment (Indoors) – 1100.07 License Administration 12/31 $75/day – single performance
$150/annual
Entertainment (Indoors) including banners permitted by
521.01 subd 9(6)
License Administration 12/31 $250/annual includes both indoor and
outdoor advertising banners limited
to 90 days total
Mechanical Amusement Devices – 1100.09 License Administration 12/31 $15 per site and:
$15/pinball machine
$15/kiddie ride machine
$15/all other mechanical amusement
devices including video games
APPENDIX B Page 13
FEE SCHEDULE
Lawful Gambling Investigation Fee – 1105.07 Initial
Premises
Permit
Administration N/A $100
Lawful Gambling, Exempt from MN § Section 349.214 –
1105.09
Permit Administration 12/31
$50/annually/bingo only
$5/occasion/bingo only
*Note electronically connected
Bingo-State License
APPENDIX B Page 14
FEE SCHEDULE
Description, Ordinance Chapters/Section Type Department Expiration Fee
BUSINESS AND TRADE REGS – Chapter XI (Cont’d)
Public Dances – 1110.05 Permit Administration 12/31
Daily Basis
$1,000
$60/day
Pet Shop – 1115.03
License Administration 12/31 $50
Peddlers – 1120.01 License
Fee
Administration 12/31 $100
$50 investigation fee
Transient Merchant – 1120.03 License Administration 12/31 $50 – per vehicle or location
Transient Merchant – 1120.04 State licensed mobile food unit
(MFU) at a temporary fixed location
NOTE: There are zoning restrictions. Only allowed in B-3 and B-4
with property owner approval and in City Parks with Council
Approval
License Administration Annual $25/Site Plan Review
$25/MFU
Going Out of Business Sale – 1120.05 License Administration 12/31 $35 + $2 for each $1,000 of inventory
or major part thereof
$75-renewal for no more than 30 days
$25/day – second renewal for 30 days
Car Wash – 1130.01 License Administration 12/31 $75
Cigarette Vending /Tobacco Sales– 1132.05 License Administration 12/31 $325
Christmas Tree Sales – 1130.05 License Administration 12/31 $75
Dry Cleaning/Laundry Facility – 1130.07 License Administration 12/31 $50
Auto Dealer – 1130.09 (Regulated under MN § Chapter 168) Must provide copy of state license
Gas Station Pumps – 1130.11 License Administration 12/31 $100/1st pump
$10/each additional pump
Secondhand Goods Sales – 1135.09
Secondhand Goods Sales – 1135.17, Investigation
License
Fee
Administration
6/30
$200
$750 investigative fee
$400/multiple dealers/same location
$50/one day secondhand sales
$75/more than 1 day, less than 5 days
Consignment House Dealer – 1135.09 License Administration 12/31 $100
$500 initial investigation fee
$200 renewal investigation fee
APPENDIX B Page 15
FEE SCHEDULE
Description, Ordinance Chapters/Section Type Department Expiration Fee
BUSINESS AND TRADE REGS – Chapter XI
(Cont’d)
Pawn Broker – 1135.09
Pawn Broker, Investigation – 1135.17
License
Fee
Administration 12/31 $2,750 + $2.00 transaction
$800 investigation fee – up to
$10,000 to recover costs
Adult Establishments – 1140.11
Adult Establishment – 1140.11, Investigation
License
Fee
Administration 12/31 $2,500
$50 per video booth/viewing stall
$800 investigation fee – up to
$10,000 to recover costs
Lawn Fertilizer Application Control – 1145.00
License
Fee
Administration 12/31 $100 - 1st Vehicle
$25 each additional vehicle
Donation Collection Bins - 1155 License
Fee
Administration 12/31 $50 per bin
APPENDIX B Page 16
FEE SCHEDULE
Description, Ordinance Chapters/Section Type Department Expiration Fee
LIQUOR AND BEER – CHAPTER XII
Intoxicating Liquor: Off-sale, Municipal Liquor Dispensary Only – 1205.01, Subd. 5
Intoxicating Liquor: 1205.01, Subd. 5 & 6
Off-sale, Municipal Liquor Dispensary –
Off-sale, Brewer Off-Sale Malt Liquor
Off-sale Microdistillery
License Administration 12/31
$100/brewer or brew pub off-sale
$300/microdistillery
Intoxicating Liquor – 1205.07
(NOTE: Public hearing required for increase in liquor fees)
License Administration 12/31
$5,800/on-sale
$300/on-sale club/0-1,000 members
$500/on-sale club/1,001 + members
$2,000/on sale wine only
$550/brewer taproom or brew pub
on-sale
$300/cocktail room
$200/Sunday on-sale (pro-rate qtly)
$50/temporary, non-profit only
$50/temporary, small brewer or
microdistillery for social event
Intoxicating Liquor, Investigation – 1205.07 Fee Police Department $500 to $10,000 out-state (for all new
intoxicating liquor license
applications, including wine).
$250 renewal
This fee does not apply to Special
Sunday or Temporary
3.2% Malt liquor – 1215.03
(NOTE: Public hearing required for increase in liquor fees)
License Administration 12/31
$100/off-sale
$550 on-sale only
$50/temporary, non-profit only
3.2% Malt Liquor, Investigation – 1215.05 Fee Police Department 12/31 $100/off sale only
$500/on-sale only
$250 on-sale renewal
Entertainment – 1200.25 License Administration 12/31 $150
APPENDIX B Page 17
FEE SCHEDULE
Description, Ordinance Chapters/Section Type Department Expiration Fee
TRAFFIC, MOTOR VEHICLES AND OTHER VEHICLES – CHAPTER XIII
Parking by Permit Only – 1305.13 Fee Police Department First 3 permits $0.00
Fourth permit - $25.00
MISCELLANEOUS PERMITS
Loudspeaker Devices – 2005.13 Permit City Council 12/31 $75.00
POLICE MISCELLANEOUS
Audio Tapes Fee Police $20 each
Video Cassette Tapes & DVD’s Fee Police $20 each
Fingerprinting (upon request) Fee Police $20
Police Reports (any) Fee Police $0.25 per page
Photos Fee Police Actual costs + $10 handling fee
Security & Traffic Assignment for Officers Fee Police Current senior top patrol overtimehourly
rate, including benefits, +3%.
Vehicle Lock-outs Fee Police None
Request for Criminal Information – Apartment Complexes Fee Police $100 annual
False Alarms Fee Police See Attachment I
Drug & Chem. Lab cleanup – Ord. 625 Costs All Owner to Pay Costs
FIRE MISCELLANEOUS
Burning Permit Permit Fire 12/31 $35
Inspections – Day Care facilities Fee Fire $50 each visit
Inspections – Rental properties Fee Fire See Attachment H
Fire Reports Fee Fire $0.25 per page
Fire Water Charge Fee Fire None
Firework – consumer – Section 1150 License Fire 12/31 Maximum allowable by State Statute
624.20
Fireworks – Display permit – Section 1150.06 Permit Fire 12/31 $ 200.00
ATTACHMENT A
DEMOLITION AND MOVING PERMIT FEES
FEES REQUIRED
The Building Inspector, before issuing any house-moving permit or the demolition of any
building or structure shall require payment by the applicant for such permit of fees in the
amounts herein provide.
DEMOLITION PERMIT
The demolition permit fee shall be based on the total cost of demolishing such structure at the
rate of 1.5% of the contract value.
In no case shall the fee charged for any demolition permit be less than fifty dollars ($50).
MOVING PERMIT
(a) For holding up, raising or moving any building or structure on the same lot, the fee shall
be fifty dollars ($50).
(b) Minor buildings, as used in this section, shall be taken to mean accessory buildings,
including, but not limited to, private garages, sheds, construction shacks, etc., as shall be
determined by the Building Inspector.
(c) For a permit for moving any building, except a minor building as herein defined, from
one location to another on private property, or to a different lot over the streets of the
city, the fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100). The same permit fees shall apply to
any building being moved through the city from a place outside the city to another
location outside the city.
ATTACHMENT B
PLUMBING PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
FEES REQUIRED
The Building Official, before issuing any permit for the installation, alteration, addition or repair
of any plumbing work, fixture or device shall require the payment by the applicant for such
permit of the fees or fees in the amount herein provided.
Contract $2,439.00 or less ………………………………… $50.00
Contract $2439.00 to $10,000 ………………………………2% of contract value
Contract more than $10,000 ………………………………$200.00 for first $10,000.00
Plus 1.5% for the remainder of contract value
The fee for appliance only permits shall be $15.00 per appliance.
1) The cost of installations, alterations, additions, or repairs shall include all labor and
materials supplied by the contractor. In addition, it shall include all materials supplied by other
sources when these materials are normally supplied by the contractor. The value of work by a
homeowner shall be equal to the cost for labor and materials that would be charged by a
contractor. All values shall be subject to approval of or determined by the Building Official.
2) REVISION OF ESTIMATED COST: The estimated cost shall be subject to review
by the Building Official, and if the estimate does not reflect the true cost, it shall be revised and
the applicant shall pay the fee based upon such revision. The Building Official may revoke any
permit issued containing false information regarding the value of the work authorized by said
permit pursuant to Section 89.150 of this Code. If the actual cost exceeds the estimated by five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or more, the applicant shall report within thirty (30) days after
completion of this job, the actual cost to the Inspections Department and the fee shall be revised
and the applicant shall pay a fee computed on the basis of the actual cost.
3) The city may require permit applications be accompanied by a copy of the contract.
PLAN REVIEW FEES
When submittal documents are required by the code, a plan review fee may be required at the
time of submitting the documents for plan review. Said plan review fee shall be 65 percent of the
plumbing permit fee.
The plan review fees specified in this subsection are separate fees from the permit fees specified
above and are in addition to the permit fees.
When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or
when the project involves deferred submittal items, an additional plan review fee may be
charged.
ATTACHMENT B – Page 2
WORK COMMENCING BEFORE PERMIT ISSUANCE
If work for which a permit is required by the code has been commenced without first obtaining a
permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for the work. An
investigation fee equal to the permit fee shall be collected and is in addition to the required
permit fees.
ATTACHMENT C
ROBBINSDALE BUILDING CODE FEE SCHEDULE*
Total Valuation Fee
$1.00 to $500.00 $50.00
$501.00 to $2,000.00 $23.50 for the first $500.00 plus $3.05 for
each additional $100.00 or fraction thereof,
to and including $2,000.00, with a minimum
fee of $50.00.
$2,001.00 to $25,000.00 $69.25 for the first $2,000.00 plus $14.00
for each additional $1000.00 or fraction
thereof, to and including $25,000.00
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $391.25 for the first $25,000.00 plus $10.10
for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction
thereof to and including $50,000.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $643.75 for the first $50,000.00 plus $7.00
for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction
thereof, to and including $100,000.00
$100,001.00 to 500,000.00 $993.75 for the first $100,000.00 plus $5.60
for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction
thereof.
$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $3,233.75 for the first $500,000.00 plus
$4.75 for each additional $1,000.00 or
fraction thereof, to and including
$1,000,000.00
$1,000,001.00 and up $5,608.75 for the first $1,000,000.00
plus $3.65 for each additional $1,000.00
or fraction thereof.
OTHER INSPECTION FEES
1. Inspections outside of normal business hours (min. charge two hours)…......$65.00 per hour 1
2. Re-inspection fee assessed under provisions of section 305.8.…............…...$65.00 per hour 1
3. Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated
(minimum charge one-half hour).....................................................................$65.00 per hour 1
ATTACHMENT C – Page 2
4. Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to
approved plans (minimum charge one-half hour)............….….......................$65.00 per hour 1
ATTACHMENT C – Page 3
5. For use of outside consultants for plan checking and inspections, or both
.....................…….…….……….……….……….……….……….………...……Actual Cost 2
1Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the greatest. The cost shall include
supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages and fringe benefits of the employees involved.
2Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.
RESIDENTIAL - FLAT FEES
Siding $50 + $25 for each inspection over one (1)
Windows $50 + $25 for each inspection over one (1)
Roofing, over existing layer $50 + $25 for each inspection over one (1)
Roofing, tear off $75 + $25 for each inspection over two (2)
FIRE SUPPRESSION EQUIPMENT FEES
The Building Official, before issuing any permit for the construction, installation, alteration,
addition or repair of any fire suppression system or equipment connected therewith, shall require
the payment by the applicant for such permit of the fees. The fees for fire suppression systems
shall be the same as established by the building permit fee above, based on the contract value.
The cost of installations, alterations, additions, or repair shall include all labor and materials
supplied by the contractor. In addition, it shall include all materials supplied by other sources
when these materials are normally supplied by the contractor.
REVISION OF ESTIMATED COST: The estimated cost shall be subject to review by the
Building Official, and if the estimate does not reflect the true cost, it shall be revised and the
applicant shall pay the fee based upon such revision. The Building Official and/or Fire Chief
may revoke any permit issued containing false information regarding the value of the work
authorized by said permit. If the actual cost exceeds the estimated by five hundred dollars
($500.00) or more, the applicant shall report within thirty (30) days after completion of this job,
the actual cost to the Inspections Department and the fee shall be revised and the applicant shall
pay a fee computed on the basis of the actual cost. A copy of the contract may be required to
verify the value.
ATTACHMENT C – Page 3
PLAN REVIEW FEES
When submittal documents are required by the Building Code, a plan review fee may be required
at the time of submitting the documents for plan review. Said plan review fee shall be 65 percent
of the building permit fee. The plan review fee for similar buildings shall not exceed 25 percent
of the normal building permit fee.
The plan review fees specified in this subsection are separate fees from the building permit fees
specified above and are in addition to the building permit fees.
When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or
when the project involves deferred submittal items, an additional plan review fee shall be
charged as required by the Building Code.
WORK COMMENCING BEFORE PERMIT ISSUANCE
If work for which a permit is required by the code has been commenced without first obtaining a
permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for the work. An
investigation fee equal to the permit fee shall be collected and is in addition to the required
permit fees.
LICENSE VERIFICATION FEE
A surcharge of $5.00 shall be added to all residential building permits when performed by state
licensed residential building contractors and remodelers, and residential roofers. This fee will be
in addition to the Building Permit and Plan Check fees.
ATTACHMENT D
MECHANICAL PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
FEES REQUIRED
The Building Official, before issuing any permit for the construction, installation, alteration,
addition or repair of any furnace, boiler, heating or power plant or system, or any device or
equipment connected therewith, or for any other device connected, or to be connected, with any
chimney or stack, or for the construction, installation, alteration, addition or repair of any air
conditioning or ventilation system or sheet metal ductwork or piping system or equipment
connected therewith, shall require the payment by the applicant for such permit of the fees or
fees in the amount herein provided.
Contract $2,439 or less ….……….……….……….…………………$50
Contract $2,439 to $10,000….……….……….……….……………..2% of contract value
Contract for more than $10,000 ….……….………………$200 for first $10,000
Plus 1.5% for the remainder of contract value
(a) The cost of installations, alteration, additions, or repairs shall include all labor and
materials supplied by the contractor. In addition, it shall include all materials supplied by
other sources when the contractor normally supplies these materials.
(b) REVISION OF ESTIMATED COST: The estimated cost shall be subject to review by
the Building Official, and if the estimate does not reflect the true cost, it shall be revised
and the applicant shall pay the fee based upon such revision. The Building Official may
revoke any permit issued containing false information regarding the value of the work
authorized by said permit pursuant to Section 89.150 of this Code. If the actual cost
exceeds the estimated by five hundred dollars ($500) or more, the applicant shall report
within thirty (30) days after the completion of this job, the actual cost to the Inspections
Department and the fee shall be revised and the applicant shall pay a fee computed on the
basis of the actual cost.
(c) A copy of the contract must accompany all commercial permit applications.
PLAN REVIEW FEES
When submittal documents are required by the code, a plan review fee may be required at the
time of submitting the documents for plan review. Said plan review fee shall be 65 percent of
the mechanical permit fee.
The plan review fees specified in this subsection are separate fees from the permit fees specified
above and are in addition to the permit fees.
ATTACHMENT D – Page 2
When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or
when the project involves deferred submittal items, an additional plan review fee may be
charged.
WORK COMMENCING BEFORE PERMIT ISSUANCE
If work for which a permit is required by the code has been commenced without first obtaining a
permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for the work. An
investigation fee equal to the permit fee shall be collected and is in addition to the required
permit fees.
ATTACHMENT E
SIGN FEES
SIGN PERMIT FEES SHALL BE:
$100.00 Permanent Signs
$ 50.00 Temporary Signs
$250.00 Special Signs once annually
$500.00 Special Signs more than once annually
Street Spanning Banner Signs Per Installation below**
PLAN REVIEW FEES
When submittal documents are required by the code, a plan review fee may be required at the
time of submitting the documents for plan review. Said plan review fee shall be 65 percent of
the sign permit fee.
The plan review fees specified in this subsection are separate fees from the permit fees specified
above and are in addition to the permit fees.
When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or
when the project involves deferred submittal items, an additional plan review fee may be
charged.
WORK COMMENCING BEFORE PERMIT ISSUANCE
If work for which a permit is required by the code has been commenced without first obtaining a
permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for the work. An
investigation fee equal to the permit fee shall be collected and is in addition to the required
permit fees.
**Street Spanning Banners – City code 410.11, Subd 14
$100 permit fee for use of wires for one double sided banner per occasion for banners delivered
including necessary hardware connections. Those Community Groups who have contributed a
minimum of $750 for installation of the Banner wires on West Broadway shall be exempt from
this fee. A fee to cover the charge for hardware need for installation of the sign not supplied
with the sign will be charged at cost.
Liability Insurance
Not required
$50 late fee for those delivering banners after noon Friday
ATTACHMENT F
PARK, COMMUNITY GYMS AND FITNESS CENTER FACILITIES
? Local Youth Associations may reserve shelter building or picnic shelter for meetings or association
level special events free of charge. Additional fees for extra services or features will be charged.
? 50% reduction in fee for local youth associations to use synthetic turf fields in March or April,
if grass fields are not available.
? Reduced rates are available for long term rentals of a minimum of 10 times by individuals or local
associations.
? Clean-up/Damage deposit for use is $250 unless otherwise noted.
? Additional deposits may be required as noted below.
? Liability insurance may be required based on activity and facility being used.
? Permit required for any gathering of 25 or more people according to City ordinance 815.05
? Set up time must be included in rental hours.
? Picnic Shelters will have preset 6 hour time slots for weekends. Weekdays will be prorated for
shorter time periods upon request.
? Special requests requiring staff overtime will be billed at current rates.
? Additional portable restroom requests will be billed at current rates or supplied by renter with
locations approved by staff.
? Rates include taxes.
Resident Non-Resident Local Youth Associations
Shelter Building $15/hour-2 hour minimum $25/hour-2 hour minimum $0
Clean up/Damage Deposit $500 $500 $500
Picnic Shelter (LVT) $150/half day;
$250/full day
$225/half day;
$375/full day
$0
Picnic Shelter (other shelters) $75/half day;
$125/full day
$115/half day;
$185/full day
$0
Beer/Wine permit with Picnic
reservation (City Code 815.03)
$50
$50 $50
Additional deposit $100 $100 $100
Tennis/Horseshoe Courts $25/hour $40/hour N/A
Ice Rinks $25/hour $40/hour N/A
Open Park Area* for less than
50 people
$25/hour $40/hour $0
Open Park Area* for 50-500
people
$50/hour with maximum of
$500/day
$80/hour $0
* Area to be specified on request and approved by staff
Large Multi-Sport Field (LVT,
RMS)
30/hour $45/hour $15 (3 hours)
All Star Field $40/hour $80/hour $15 (1.5 hrs.) or
$25 (3 hrs.)
Baseball Field-no prep $25/hour $40/hour $0
Diamond game prep during
regular working hours in addition
to rental fees
$40 per time $40 per time $25 per time
Lights $15 per hour $20 per hour $12 per hour
Canoe/Kayak Rack Rental $50 (May 1 -Oct 15) $65 (May1-Oct 15) N/A
Portable Recreation Feature** 25 per feature $25 per feature $25 per feature
Deposit for features $500/feature up to $1500 $500/feature up to $1500 $500 flat fee
**Portable Recreation Feature includes, but not limited to, inflatables, stages, dunk tanks, rides, climbing wall,
mechanical games.
Resident Non-Resident Local Youth Association
RCGFC Gym $45 per hour per gym $55 per hour per gym $30 per hour per gym
Deposit $100 $100
Fitness Center $100 per hour $200 per hour $35/hour with coach supervision
required
Deposit $500 $500
Supervisor*** $25 per hour $25 per hour $25 per hour
*** No Supervisor fee charged during normal business hours.
Resident rates for RCGFC may apply for Robbinsdale Area School District residents.
ATTACHMENT G
CONDUIT DEBT ISSUANCE FEE SCHEDULE
CONDUIT DEBT PURPOSE
Periodically, qualified organizations will approach the City to issue tax-exempt debt through the
City for the purchase of qualified equipment or the development, construction, or remodeling of
facilities. The City is able to issue this debt to qualified organizations as authorized by
applicable Minnesota Statutes and Federal Income Tax Law. The debt is issued in the City’s
name and reported within the City’s Comprehensive Annual Financial Report. The City has a
practice of charging a fee to qualified organizations who issue this type of debt through the City.
FEE SCHEDULE
New debt issuance fees:
0.5% of the initial amount of bonds being issued, due upon issuance.
0.5% of the initial amount of bonds being issued, due on first anniversary after the issuance of
the bonds.
0.125% of the outstanding principle of the bonds, due annually until the bonds have been retired.
Refinancing issuance fees (periodically, an organization that issued bonds previously may desire
to refund the old bonds and issue new bonds in their place):
0.125% of the initial amount of bonds being issued, due upon issuance.
0.125% of the outstanding principle of the bonds, due annually until the bonds have been retired.
JOINT POWERS FEES
An organization within Robbinsdale may desire to finance projects at facilities it owns within
Robbinsdale by issuing bonds through another city. This requires the City Council to give host
city approval and/or enter into a Joint Powers Agreement with the other city. Under this
circumstance, the debt issuance fees would be the same as listed in the fee schedule above with
the caveat that the fees would only pertain to the amount of bonds being issued related to
projects being completed within the City of Robbinsdale.
When there is a reissuance or a refinancing, and the qualified organization did not previously pay
all of the new debt issuance fees listed above, the qualified organization shall pay the new debt
issuance fees listed above excluding any fees previously paid to the City of Robbinsdale.
ATTACHMENT H
RENTAL LICENSE INSPECTION FEES
City Code Section 425.31
Base Rental License Fees – includes routine bi-annual inspection and one return visit to verify
required corrections have been made. Additional inspections required because work has not
been completed or units are not available for inspection at scheduled times may be subject to
additional charges as described below.
An escalating license fee will apply when a rental property owner fails to apply for or comply
with the requirements allowing for issuance of a rental license:
Term: Bi-annual
Base License Fee as
of the first working
day in November
Received after ten
working days in
November
Received after
twenty working
days in November
Single Family or
½ duplex (when other side owner
occupied)
$125 $225 $325
Duplex or double bungalow (with one
owner)
$225 $325 $425
Three unit dwelling $300 $400 $500
Townhomes (3 or more attached units) $125 $225 $325
Apartments (additional fire inspection fee
if over 10 units)
$300 including
first 3 units plus
$20 per unit
$400 $500
Fire Inspection Fee $125 per structure
Initial/Conversion Inspection Fee: $750
Any existing single unit (home, apartment, or townhome) converted to rental use shall require a
complete Housing Maintenance Code Inspection prior to occupancy. In addition, property
owners or a locally designated manager must attend a training session (425.31, Subd 2) within 6
months of obtaining the rental license. The training shall review rental property regulations and
owner obligations including, but not limited to, utility billing which can be assessed to the
property and repeat nuisance call fees. Where the owner designates a local manager
representative to the orientation meeting, written materials will be sent to the owner who must
certify that the material has been read and understood. $150 of this fee may be waived for
property owners who have personally completed this orientation program within the previous 12
month period and who have had no reported nuisance problem with any other properties owned
by the same owner in the City of Robbinsdale. Failure to complete the training within 6 months
shall subject the owner to a service fee described below.
Change in Ownership Property Review Fee: $500
When rental property ownership changes, a review of all of the previous rental licensing
inspections and a walk through of the property will be conducted with the new owner. If this is
the owner’s first rental property in Robbinsdale, staff will also review rental property regulations
and owner obligations including, but not limited to, utility billing which can be assessed to the
property and repeat nuisance call fees. Where the owner designates a local manager
representative to walk-thru the property and receive the information, written materials will be
ATTACHMENT H – Page 2
sent to the owner who must certify that the material has been read and understood. $150 of this
fee may be waived for property owners who have personally completed an orientation program
with the City of Robbinsdale within the previous 24 month period and who have had no reported
nuisance problem with any other properties owned by the same owner in the City of
Robbinsdale.
Service Fee for Failure to Attend Initial/Conversion Training or Crime Free Housing Training
(Section 425.31, Subd 4)
$100 for each month that training is not completed for a maximum of three months. If after 3
months (9 months after license issuance) the training has not been completed, the rental
license(s) may be subject to suspension or revocation by the City Council.
Failure to Provide Copy of Lease Addendum $100
After one month, rental license is subject to suspension or revocation by the City Council.
Failure to Terminate Tenancy (425.32, Subd 5b) $750
For each month, after 3 months, the rental license is subject to suspension or revocation by the
City Council.
Re-inspection Fees
$50 for each unit requiring re-inspection for the second and each subsequent re-inspection visit
necessitated by required repairs not being completed or access being denied. If the initial
inspection has a series of deadlines, the initial re-inspection of each group of items would be
covered in the base license fee.
Interim Inspection Fees:
$50 for each visit required to inspect legitimate maintenance concerns reported by tenant, area
resident, or observed by City Staff between the bi-annual licensing inspections.
Administrative Fees:
Surcharge for failure to schedule required inspection:
An administrative fee of $100 will be assessed as a surcharge when a required inspection is 10
days past due and the owner or owner’s representative has not scheduled the appointment and
staff is required to make this contact.
Appeal Fee $30/ filing of an appeal to City Council on a HMC order.
ATTACHMENT I
SCHEDULE OF OFFENSES AND FEES
ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY SYSTEM
General Rules of Administrative Fine System
1. Each day a violation exists constitutes a separate offence. (117.01, subd 4A)
2. Fees are due to the City within 10 days of the date of the citation. (117.01, subd 5B)
3. A late payment charge of 10% of the fine amount, with a minimum of $15, is required if not
paid within 10 days from the date of the citation. (117.01, subd 10D)
4. City may collect unpaid fines by a special assessment to the property when the violation can
be identified to a property. (117.01, subd 10 A&B)
5. Failure to pay a fine or request a hearing is punishable by criminal penalties. (117.01, subd
11)
6. Appeal hearings can be scheduled. Hearing officers will not be city employees and will be
selected from a list of qualified individuals. (117.01, subd 6 & 7)
Level One Violations $50.00
? Minor or incidental inappropriate garbage/recycling/yard waste management including, but
not limited to, garbage placed for pick up without stickers, garbage containers not properly
stored between collection dates, improper use of carts, use of extra carts not being billed.
? Inoperable vehicle on property, inoperable vehicle being used as storage (*inoperable
vehicle includes those vehicles with tabs 90 days past due).
? Local parking violations including, but not limited to, vehicle parked on grass, violation of
permit parking restrictions, snow emergency violations, inappropriate RV storage.
? Animal issues including, but not limited to, barking dogs, unlicensed animal (under owner’s
control), excessive feces on the yard.
? Property condition including, but not limited to, tall grass, vegetation overflowing alley,
adjacent public sidewalk not shoveled, minor exterior storage (junk in the yard or along
alley).
? Loud parties, recreational fire violations.
? False alarms each false alarm for the 4th –6th occurrence in a calendar year.
Level Two Violations $100.00
? Local parking violations including, but not limited to, parking in fire lanes, blocking access.
? Property maintenance violations including, but not limited to, peeling paint, eaves hanging,
doors delaminated, fences collapsing.
? City code violations (not listed elsewhere) designated as a misdemeanor or petty
misdemeanor, including Chapter 5–Zoning code. Includes erosion control, sight triangle
violations, setback encroachments, excessively bright lights, bus idling, being in parks after
hours.
? Animals at large (licensed), failure to follow restrictions for potentially dangerous animals.
? False alarms each false alarm for the 7th – 10th occurrence in a calendar year.
? Sign regulation violations, unpermitted exterior display of merchandise.
? Missing address numbers visible from the street or alley.
ATTACHMENT I – Page 2
Level Three Violations $150.00
? Unlicensed animal at large.
? False alarms each false alarm for the 11th –15th occurrence in a calendar year.
Level Four Violations $200.00
? False alarms each false alarm in excess of 15 occurrences in a calendar year.
Level Five Violations $400.00
The violation is a major infraction that involves unsafe conditions, constitutes a blighting
influence on surrounding properties or neighborhood, involves neglect of property
maintenance, or endangers life or property, supported by the enforcement officer’s written
justification.
? Failure to obtain a required permit or license (not listed elsewhere), includes rental without a
license and creation of a 2nd dwelling unit in a structure without zoning approval
? Failure to maintain or violation of a condition of approval for a conditional use permit,
Home occupation violations.
? Excessive or habitual accumulations of garbage, rubbish or exterior storage of materials
unrelated to a lawfully permitted construction or remodeling project.
? Unpermitted use of street right-of-way or boulevard encroachments.
? Illegal occupancy of a basement, attic or other room with inadequate egress for sleeping
purposes.
Violation for Excessive Repeat Nuisance Service Calls:
? $500 for the 4th Repeat Nuisance Service Call in 730 days
? $500 for the 5th Repeat Nuisance Service Call in 730 days
? $1000 for the 6th Repeat Nuisance Service Call in 730 days
? $1500 for the 7th Repeat Nuisance Service Call in 730 days
? $2000 for each Repeat Nuisance Service Call in excess of 7 occurrences in 730 days
Disorderly House
? $2000 for conviction under Minnesota Statutes Section 609.33
Repeat Violations
Repeat violations occurring within 12 months are subject to double fees. Said violations are a
new case involving the same violation (i.e. a second offence parking in a fire lane). Repeat
violations are distinguished from continuing violations. Double fees do not apply to false
alarms. Subsequent repeat violations occurring within 12 months are subject to a doubling of
the preceding penalty.
ATTACHMENT I – Page 3
Continuing Violations
When situations which are subject to an administrative citation continue without resolution for
more than a month despite repeat citations, an officer may issue a citation with a fee doubling
the preceding penalty, not to exceed $2000.
Hearing Officer ability to adjust fees for continuing violations
In cases involving continuing violations, the hearing officer may adjust and impose a fee for
each day the violation continues, not to exceed $2,000 per violation per day; unless city code
specifies differently, i.e. max erosion control $300/day.
Fees Payable to Hearing Officers:
Fees paid to hearing officer: The fee will be $150 as a maximum charge for up to two
consecutive hearings. Additional consecutive hearings would be $75 each.
Hearing Request fee:
Hearing Request Deposit fee: $25 is due along with the appeal form. The fee is refundable as
provided in the hearing officer’s decision. In cases where a violation was found to have
occurred, the hearing officer may apply the refund towards the citation payment as provided in
the hearing officer’s decision.
Special Assessment Charge:
A special assessment charge of $50- will be added for unpaid fine amounts that are specially
assessed.
(Rev. 2016)
ROBBINSDALE ZONING CODE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section 505 Zoning: general provisions.
505.01. Title.
505.03. Purpose and intent.
505.05. Application and interpretation.
505.07. Uses.
505.09. Definitions.
Section 510 Zoning: districts, general provisions.
510.01. Districts.
510.03. Boundaries.
510.05. Uses not provided for.
510.07. Non-conforming buildings, structures and uses.
510.08 Curing non-permitted uses and structures; statement of policy
510.081 Use or structure not permitted in the district
510.09. Lots.
510.11. Accessory buildings, uses and equipment.
510.13. Yards.
510.15. General building requirements.
510.17. Off-street parking.
510.19. Off-street loading.
510.21. Land reclamation.
510.23. Building permits.
510.25. General performance standards.
Section 515 Zoning: residential districts (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-B, townhouse, cooperative and
condominium development)
515.01. R-1, single family residential district.
515.03. R-2, single and two-family residential district.
515.05. R-3, medium density residential district.
515.07. R-B, residential-business district.
515.09. Townhouse, cooperative, condominium development.
(Rev. 2016)
Section 517 P Zoning district regulations
517.01 P, Public facilities district
517.03 Lot requirements and setbacks
517.05 Building requirements
517.07 Parking requirements
517.09 Landscape requirements
517.11 Performance standards
517.13 Tower and telecommunications facilities requirements
Section 520 Zoning: commercial districts.
520.01. B-1, neighborhood commercial district.
520.03. B-2, limited commercial district.
520.05. B-3, highway commercial district.
520.07. B-4, community business district.
520.09. NG, neighborhood grocery district.
Section 521 Zoning: downtown district
521.01. DD-1, downtown district
521.03 DD-2 – Downtown transition and transit district
Section 525 Zoning: industrial districts.
525.01. B-W, business-warehouse district.
Section 530 Zoning: special districts and regulated uses.
530.01. Statutory authorization
530.02. B4p pawnbrokers, secondhand goods dealer, consignment house dealers, auction
house dealers and traders district regulations
530.03. Repealed.
530.04. Adult establishments.
530.05. Planned unit development.
530.07. Downtown architectural guidelines overlay district.
(Rev. 2016)
Section 535 Zoning: administration and enforcement.
535.01. Conditional use permits.
535.03. Rezoning and text amendments.
535.05. Variances and appeals.
535.07. Certificate of occupancy.
535.09. Enforcement and penalties.
535.11. Use permit.
535.13. Procedures for adopting and amending the comprehensive plan.
535.15. Fees.
Appendix A Zoning district boundaries
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 505.01
Section 505 - Zoning: general provisions
505.01. Title. Sections 505 through 535 are the zoning code of the City. In sections 505 through 535 the
zoning code is referred to as "this code". The city code of ordinances is known as the "city code".
505.03. Purpose and intent. This code shall establish minimum requirements, adopted to protect the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the people. This code shall divide the city into use districts and
establish regulations in regard to the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of
structures and land. These regulations are established to protect the various use areas; to promote the
orderly development and redevelopment of the use areas; to provide adequate light, air, convenience of
access to property; to provide stability in residential neighborhoods; to limit congestion in the public
right-of-ways; to prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures by regulating the use
of land and buildings and the bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding them; to provide for
compatibility of different land uses; to conserve the value of land and buildings; to provide for the
administration of this code; to provide for amendments to this code; to prescribe penalties for the violation
of this code and to define the powers and duties of the board of zoning appeals and the planning commission
in relation to this code.
505.05. Application and interpretation. Subdivision 1. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this code shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety and welfare.
Subd. 2. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this code are either more or less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any law, ordinance, statute, resolution, or regulation of
any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall
prevail.
Subd. 3. No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and no
structure or land shall be used for any purpose nor in any manner which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this code.
505.07. Uses. Subdivision 1. Except as provided herein, no building, structure or premises shall hereafter
be used or occupied and no building permit shall be granted that does not conform to the requirements of
this code.
Subd. 2. Any building, structure or use lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this code may be
continued. Should the building, structure or use become non-conforming due to the adoption of this code, it
may be continued in compliance with subsection 510.07.
505.09. Definitions. Subdivision 1. For purposes of this code, the terms defined in this subsection have the
meanings given them.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 505.09, Subd. 2
(Rev. 2015)
Subd. 2. "Accessory building, structure or use" means a subordinate building, structure or use
which is located on the same lot as the principal building or use and is necessary or incidental to the conduct
of the principal building or use. Other subordinate buildings include, but are not limited to, dog house,
kennel, gazebo, playhouse, etc. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-05)
Subd. 3. “Agriculture” means principal use of land for production of food, horticultural or
ornamental crops to be harvested for use off site. (Added, Ord. No. 15-06)
Subd. 4. "Alley" means a public or private way less than 24 but not less than 14 feet in width
affording secondary means of access to abutting property.
Subd. 5. “Art Studio” means a building or space within a building where two and three dimensional
objects are made, displayed and sold that have form or beauty such as paintings or sculpture. (Added, Ord.
No. 13-05)
Subd. 6. "Automobile wrecking or junk yard" means any place where two or more motor vehicles
not in running condition or not licensed, or both, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being
restored to operation; or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles
or parts thereof, including any commercial salvaging and scavenging of any other goods, articles or
merchandise.
Subd. 7. "Automobile repair - major" or "major automobile repair" means general repair, rebuilding
or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers, collision service, including body, frame or fender
straightening or repair, over-all painting or paint job, vehicle steam cleaning.
Subd. 8. "Automobile repair - minor" or "minor automobile repair" means minor repairs, incidental
body and fender work, painting and upholstering replacement of parts and motor services to passenger
automobiles and trucks not exceeding 3/4 ton capacity, but not including any operation specified under
"automobile repair - major."
Subd. 9. "Balcony" means a horizontal flat surface that projects from the wall of a building, is
enclosed by a parapet or railing, and is entirely supported by the building.
Subd.10. "Basement" means that level of a building where the vertical distance from average grade
to the floor below is more than the vertical distance from average grade to the floor next above.
Subd. 11. "Boarding house" means a building other than a hotel where, for compensation and by
arrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging, or both, are provided for persons, not members of the
family, as defined herein, pursuant to previous arrangements and not to anyone who may apply, but not
including a building providing these services for more than 10 persons.
Subd. 12. "Boarding house or boarding home - foster children" means a family dwelling where
children out of their parents' homes, age 16 or under or in the case of mental retardation age 21 or under, or
both, are cared for 24 hours a day, for a period of 30 days or more. The number to be cared for in one foster
child boardinghouse shall not exceed five including the foster family's own children.
Subd. 13. "Bufferyard" means an area of land, identified on a site plan or by a zoning ordinance,
established to protect and screen one type of land use from another land use that is dissimilar. (Added, Ord.
No. 93-01)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 505.09, Subd. 14
(Rev. 2015)
Subd. 14. "Buildable area" means the portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been
provided.
Subd. 15. "Building" means any structure which is built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, or personal property. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-05)
Subd. 16. "Building height" means the vertical distance measured from the average finished ground
grade to the top of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof and to the average elevation
of the highest peak and its highest principal eave on a pitched or hipped or gambrel roof. See also Grade -
Finished Ground.
Subd. 17. "Business" means any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is
exhibited or sold, or which occupies time, attention, labor and materials, or where services are offered for
compensation.
Subd. 18. "Channel" means a natural or artificial depression of perceptible extent, with definite bed
and banks to confine and conduct flowing water either continuously or periodically.
Subd. 19. "City staff" means city official authorized by the city manager to perform a specific
function.
Subd. 20. "Clinic". See medical clinic.
Subd. 21. "Club or lodge" means a non-profit association of persons, who are bona fide members
paying annual dues, use of premises being restricted to members and their guests. It shall be permissible to
serve food and meals on such premises providing adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are
available. Serving of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed, providing such is
secondary and incidental to the operation of the dining room for the purpose of serving food and meals, and
providing further than such servicing of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable federal,
state, and municipal laws, ordinances, and regulations. Offices of such non-profit association or
associations occupying such premises shall not exceed 20% of the total value of the building.
Subd. 22. “Cocktail Room” means a self-contained room for the on-sale of distilled liquor
produced by the distiller for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one distillery location owned
by the distiller pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 340A.22. (Added, Ord. No. 15-07)
Subd. 23. "Community center" means a building or portion thereof which is used for public health
facilities; governmental offices or meeting rooms; publicly owned social service facilities; meeting rooms
and facilities for civic and cultural organizations and groups; publicly sponsored recreational activities; or
any similar use intended for the use and benefit of residents of the city.
Subd. 24. "Conditional use" means those occupations, vocations, skills, arts, businesses,
professions, or uses specifically designated in each zoning use district, which for their respective conduct,
exercise or performance in such designated use districts may require reasonable but special, peculiar,
unusual or extraordinary limitations, facilities, plans, structures, thoroughfares, conditions, modifications, or
regulations in such use district for the promotion or preservation of the general public welfare, health,
convenience, or safety therein and in the city and therefore may be permitted in such use district only by a
conditional use permit as provided by this code.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 505.09, Subd. 25
(Rev. 2013)
Subd. 25. "Condominium" means a form of individual ownership within a multi-family building
which entails joint responsibility for maintenance and repairs. In the condominium each apartment or
townhouse is owned outright by its occupant.
Subd. 26. "Convenience food establishment" means an establishment which serves food in or on
disposable or edible containers in individual servings for consumption on or off the premises.
Subd. 27. "Cooperative or cooperative housing" means a multiple family dwelling owned and
maintained by the residents. The entire structure and real property is under common ownership as
contrasted to a condominium dwelling where individual units are under separate individual occupant
ownership.
Subd. 28. "Counseling or training service" means a service operated by a non-profit organization
which provides advice or assistance on matters including career guidance, chemical or alcohol abuse, and
health concerns but not including in-patient, overnight, or custodial care facilities which provide living
quarters for recipients of the service or staff. A counseling or training service shall not include medical
examinations, dispensing of drugs or medication or other treatments normally conducted in a hospital or
clinic. A counseling or training service shall not include employment agencies or offices for private
attorneys, psychiatrists, psychologists and other private for-profit practitioners.
Subd. 29. “Covered porch” means a horizontal, flat structure higher than the adjoining area having
a roof which may be screened and may have an opaque area up to 18 inches from floor level. (Added, Ord.
No. 03-33)
Subd. 30. "Curb level" means the establishment elevation of the curb in front of the building
measured at the center of such front. Where no curb level has been established, the city shall establish such
curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this code.
Subd. 31. "Day care" means a service provided to the public in which foster care, and supervision
and training or combinations thereof, for children of school or preschool age is provided during part of a day
(less than 24 hours) with no overnight accommodations or facilities and children are delivered and removed
daily.
Subd. 32. "Deck or open porch" means a horizontal flat surface higher than the adjoining area not
having any roof, walls or lattice but may have a railing no higher than 42 inches.
Subd. 33. "Department store" means a business which is conducted under a single owner's name
wherein a variety of unrelated merchandise and services are housed enclosed and are exhibited and sold
directly to the customer for whom the goods or services are furnished.
Subd. 34. "District" means a section or sections of the incorporated area of the city for which the
regulations and provisions governing the use of buildings and lands are uniform for each class of use
permitted therein.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 505.09, Subd. 35
(Rev. 2013)
Subd. 35. "Dog or cat kennel" means any place where four or more dogs or cats over six months of
age are boarded, or bred or offered for sale, or a combination thereof.
Subd. 36. "Double bungalow" means a two-family dwelling with two units side by side.
Subd. 37. "Drive-in establishment" means an establishment which accommodates the patron's
automobile from which the occupants may receive a service or in which products purchased from the
establishment may be consumed.
Subd. 38. "Duplex" means a two-family dwelling with one unit above the other.
Subd. 39. "Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof, designed exclusively for residential
occupancy, including one-family, two-family and multiple family dwellings, but not including hotels,
motels and boarding houses.
Subd. 40. "Dwelling, single-family" or "single-family dwelling" means a detached dwelling
designed exclusively for occupancy by one family.
Subd. 41. "Dwelling, two-family" or "two-family dwelling" means a dwelling designed exclusively
for occupancy by two families living independently of each other.
Subd. 42. "Dwelling, multiple" or "multiple dwelling" means a dwelling designed exclusively for
occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other.
Subd. 43. "Dwelling unit" means one room or rooms connected together, constituting a separate,
independent housekeeping unit for owner occupancy, or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer
basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure,
and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
Subd. 44. "Dwelling, mobile home" or "mobile home dwelling" means a detached residential
dwelling unit designed for transportation after fabrication on streets or highways on its own wheels or on
flatbed or other trailers, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or
other temporary or permanent foundations, connections to utilities, and the like. A travel trailer is not to be
considered as a mobile home.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 505.09, Subd. 45
(Rev. 2013)
Subd. 45. "Senior housing" means a multiple dwelling building with open occupancy limited to
persons at least 55 years of age. No more than 10% of the occupants may be persons under 55 years of age.
Such occupants under 55 years of age must be a spouse, other blood relative, or caregiver of an occupant
who is at least 55 years of age, or have some function related to the building itself, such as caretaker or
superintendent. To continue to qualify for senior housing classification the owner or the agency shall
annually file with the city a certified copy of a monthly resume of occupants of such a multiple dwelling,
listing the number of tenants by age and clearly identifying and setting forth the relationship of all occupants
under 55 years of age or under to qualified tenants, or to the building. The succeeding certificates of
occupancy shall be granted based upon the requirements of section 535.07 and the resumes of applicants
selected to occupy the building. It shall be publicly displayed on the building premises and shall set forth
the zoning requirements of age limitations and relationship, lot size, number of units, and parking
requirements. A deed restriction, irrevocable during the life of the building unless additional property is
acquired to make the building comply with the zoning requirements for ordinary multiple dwellings shall be
recorded against the property on which the senior housing structure is to be located. A certified copy of said
deed restriction showing the recorded stamp of the county recorder or the registrar of titles shall be filed
with the application for conditional use permit. The city council may waive the deed restriction referred to
herein, in the event the fee and equitable owners of the premises or structure executed an agreement
appurtenant to the land and running with the land indicating that in the event more than 10% of the housing
units are occupied by persons under 55 years of age, the building occupancy by persons under 55 years of
age shall be reduced to such a level commensurate with the parking requirements for a senior housing
structure or shall provide additional parking areas sufficient to meet the requirements of this code, this being
1/2 space for a senior unit and 1-1/2 spaces for a housing unit occupied by persons under 55 years of age.
Said agreement also to provide a penalty payment of $100 per day as to each parking space shortage or
violation. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
Subd. 46. "Equal degree of encroachment" means a method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a
proportionate share of flood flows.
Subd. 47. "Essential services" means the erection, construction, alteration of maintenance or
underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems, collection,
communication, supply, or disposal systems by public utilities, municipal, or other governmental agencies,
but not including buildings.
Subd. 48. "Family" means one or more person each related to the other by blood, marriage, or
adoption, or a group of not more than four persons not all so related maintaining a common household and
using common cooking and kitchen facilities.
Subd. 49. "Farmers market" means a specified land area managed by a single operator who leases
space/stalls for the outdoor sales of (1) fresh fruit and produce food products, (2) meat and fish items, (3)
plants and flowers, and (4) bakery goods, dairy products, delicatessen and grocery items. (Added, Ord. No.
00-04)
Subd. 50. "Flood" means a temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of a
wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 505.09, Subd. 51
(Rev. 2015)
Subd. 51. "Flood frequency" means the frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood
stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
Subd. 52. "Flood fringe" means that portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. Flood
fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the flood insurance study for the city.
Subd. 53. "Flood plain" means the beds proper and areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse
which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
Subd. 54. "Flood profile" means a graph or longitudinal plot of water surface elevations of a flood
event along a reach of a stream or river.
Subd. 55. "Flood proofing" means a combination of structural provisions changes, or adjustments
to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.
Subd. 56. Floodway" means the bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of the watercourse and
those portions of adjoining flood plains which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood
discharge.
Subd. 57. "Floor area - gross" or "gross floor area" means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of
the several floors of such building or buildings measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls.
Basement areas devoted to storage, and space devoted to off-street parking shall be excluded.
Subd. 58. "Floor area - net" or "net floor area" means the sum of the total gross floor area less
common, multi-use areas used solely for non-public purposes including but not limited to dead storage;
mechanical rooms or closets, or both; window show cases; toilets or restrooms; atriums; elevators; elevator
shafts and ducts.
Subd. 59. “Food Truck” means a vendor selling ice cream, popcorn, candy, soft drinks or food
items from a self-propelled vehicle or trailer directly to consumers. (Added, Ord. No. 15-09)
Subd. 60. "Garage - private" or "private garage" means an accessory building or accessory portion
of the principal building which is intended for and used to store the private passenger vehicles of the family
or families resident upon the premises, and in which no business service or industry is carried on. Such
garage shall not be used for the storage of more than one commercial vehicle owned by the resident upon
the premises. The load capacity of such commercial vehicles shall not exceed nine thousand pounds gross
weight. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-05)
Subd. 61. "Garage - public" or "public garage" means a building or portion of a building, except
any herein defined as a private garage or as a repair garage, used for the storage of motor vehicles, or where
any such vehicles are kept for remuneration or hire and in which any sale of gasoline, oil, and accessories is
only incidental to the principal use.
Subd. 62. "Garage - repair" or "repair garage" means a building or space for the repair or
maintenance of motor vehicles but not including factory assembly of such vehicles, automobile wrecking, or
junk yards.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 505.09, Subd. 62
(Rev. 2016)
Subd. 63. "Grade - finished ground" means the finished average ground elevation along the
perimeter of the building.
Subd. 64. “Greenhouse” means a structure consisting primarily of glass, glass-like or translucent
material devoted to the protection or cultivation of food, horticultural or ornamental crops.
(Added, Ord. No. 15-06)
Subd. 65. "Guest room" means a room occupied by one or more guests for compensation and in
which no provision is made for cooking but does not include rooms in a dormitory for sleeping purposes
primarily.
Subd. 66. "Handicap housing" means a multiple dwelling which is entirely accessible to physically
handicapped persons, with open occupancy limited to persons who have a physical, sensory, or mental
impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities. No more than 10 percent of the
occupants may be persons without an impairment as defined above. Such non-impaired occupants must be
a spouse, other blood relative, or caregiver of an impaired occupant, or have some function related to the
building itself, such as caretaker or superintendent. To continue to qualify for handicap housing
classification the owner or agency shall annually file with the city a certified copy of a monthly resume of
occupants of such a multiple dwelling, listing the number of tenants by type of disability and clearly
identifying and setting forth the relationship of all non-disabled occupants to qualified tenants, or to the
building. The succeeding certificates of zoning compliance shall be granted based upon the requirements of
subsection 535.07 (certificate of zoning compliance) and the resumes of applicants selected to occupy the
building. It shall be publicly displayed on the building premises and shall set forth the zoning requirements
of disability limitations and relationships, lot size, and number of units. A deed restriction irrevocable
during the life of the building unless additional property is acquired to make the building comply with the
zoning requirements for ordinary multiple dwellings, shall be recorded against the property on which the
handicap housing structure is to be located. A certified copy of said deed restriction showing the recorded
stamp of the registrar of deeds or the registrar of titles shall be filed with the application for conditional use
permit. Nothing in this definition shall prevent a state-licensed residential facility serving 7 through 16
persons from being considered a multiple dwelling in any zoning district where handicap housing is not a
permitted or conditional use.
Subd. 67. "Home occupation" means any gainful occupation engaged in by the occupants of a
dwelling at or from the dwelling when carried on within the dwelling unit. (Amended, Ord. No. 16-06)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 505.09, Subd. 67
(Rev. 2013)
Subd. 68. "Hospital" means an institution open to the public in which sick or injured persons are
given medical or surgical care, or care of contagious or incurable diseases. This care is conducted on a 24
hour basis and is designed for overnight occupancy of the patient.
Subd. 69. “Hospitality house” means a building designed for occupancy by family members of
patients receiving care at a Level One Trauma Center in guest rooms that may or may not have full
housekeeping facilities. (Added, Ord. No. 07-15)
Subd. 70. "Hotel" means a building designed for occupancy as the temporary abiding place of
individuals who are lodged with or without meals, in which no provisions are made for cooking in any
individual room or suite, and in which there are six or more guest rooms.
Subd. 71. "Junkyard" means an open area where waste, used or second-hand materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, stored, bailed, packed, disassembled, or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron
and other metals, paper, rags, rubber, tires, and bottles. A junkyard includes an automobile wrecking yard
but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings.
Subd. 72. "Kennel". See dog or cat kennel.
Subd. 73. "Land reclamation" means the reclaiming of land by depositing 400 cubic yards or more
of material so as to elevate the grade. Land reclamation shall not be interpreted as depositing of fill from a
building excavation on the same property.
Subd. 74. "Lot" means for purposes of this code, a lot is a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to
meet minimum zoning requirements for use and coverage and to provide such yards and other open spaces
as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on a dedicated or private street and may consist of:
(a) a single lot of record or a portion of a lot of record;
(b) a combination of complete lots of record or portions of lots of record or both;
(c) a parcel of land described by metes and bounds provided that in no case of subdivision shall
any residential lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this code;
or
(d) a parcel of land approved by the city subsequent to the date of this code and which is
occupied or intended for occupancy by one principal building or principal use.
Subd. 75. "Lot area" means the area of a horizontal plane within the lot lines.
Subd. 76. "Lot, corner" or "corner lot" means a lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or
more intersecting streets or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a single street, the interior angle of
which is 135 degrees or less. For the purpose of this definition, a cul-de-sac on a street shall not be
construed as a deflection in alignment so as to create a corner lot.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 505.09, Subd. 76
(Rev. 2015)
Subd. 77. "Lot depth" means the mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot
line measured within the lot boundaries.
Subd. 78. "Lot frontage" means that boundary of a lot abutting a street right-of-way. If a lot is a
corner lot, the front shall be the shorter line that abuts the street right-of-way.
Subd. 79. "Lot line" means a property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership,
except that where any portion of the lot extends into abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to
be the street or alley line.
Subd. 80. "Lot width" means the mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at
right angles to the lot depth at a point equal to the minimum depth required for a front yard.
Subd. 81. “Microdistillery” means a distillery as defined by Minnesota Statutes, Section
340A.101 operated within the state producing premium, distilled spirits in total quantity not to exceed
40,000 proof gallons in a calendar year. (Added, Ord. No. 15-07)
Subd. 82. "Medical clinic" means a structure intended for providing medical examinations and
service available to the public. This service is provided without overnight care available.
Subd. 83. "Motel or tourist court" means a building or group of detached, semidetached, or
attached buildings containing guest rooms or dwellings, each of which has a separate outside entrance
leading directly from the outside of the building, with garage or parking space conveniently located to each
unit, and which is designed, used, or intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of transient
guests traveling by automobile.
Subd. 84. "Motor fuel station" means a place where gasoline is stored only in underground tanks;
kerosene, or motor oil and lubricants or grease, for operation of automobiles, are retailed directly to the
public on premises; and including minor accessories and services for automobiles, but not including
automobile major repairs and rebuilding. When the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale of motor fuels or
oils is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public garage for
purposes of this code.
Subd. 85. "Name plate" means a sign indicating the name and address of a building or the name of
an occupant thereof and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
Subd. 86. "Non-conforming building, structure, or use" means any building, structure or land
lawfully occupied by a use or lawfully established at the time of the passage of this code or amendments
thereto which does not conform with the requirements of this code.
Subd. 87. "Nonproduction brewery" means a small brewery that sells at least 75% of its malt liquor
on-site at its taproom. (Added, Ord. No. 14-21)
Subd. 88. "Non-profit organization" means an organization exempt from taxation under section
501(a) and described in sections 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), or 501(c)(7) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended.
Subd. 89. "Nursing home or rest home" means a building having accommodations where care is
provided for two or more invalid, infirm, aged, convalescent, or physically disabled persons that are not of
the immediate family, but not including hospitals, clinics, sanitariums, or similar institutions.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 505.09, Subd. 89
(Rev. 2013)
Subd. 90. "Obstruction, flood plain" or "flood plain obstruction", means a dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert,
building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting, into any
channel, watercourse, regulatory flood plain which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of
water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
Subd. 91. "Off-set duplication" means the reproduction of printed materials by photomechanical
processes, limited to a maximum print size of 11 inches by 17 inches, and not involving any industrial type
processes. Off-set duplication shall be deemed to include such activities as punching, collating, cutting, etc.,
when engaged in as accessory activities to the principal activity of off-set duplication.
Subd. 92. "Off-street loading space" means a space accessible from the street, alley or way, in a
building or on the lot, for the use of trucks while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. Such space
shall be of such size as to accommodate one truck of the type typically used in the particular business.
Subd. 93. "Open porch or deck". See deck.
Subd. 94. "Open sales lot" means any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying and selling
new or second-hand passenger cars or trucks or both, motor scooters, motorcycles, boats, trailers, aircraft,
and monuments and for the storing of same prior to sale.
Subd. 95. "Out-patient care" means medical examination or service available to the public in a
hospital. This service is provided without overnight care and shall be considered a separate, independent,
principal use when combined or operated in conjunction with a hospital.
Subd. 96. "Parking ramp" means a structure designed and used for the storage of motor vehicles at,
below or above grade or a combination thereof.
Subd. 97. "Patio" means a horizontal flat surface not higher than the adjoining area and not having
any roof or walls.
Subd. 98. "Parking space" means an area, enclosed in the main building, in an accessory building,
or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one standard or compact automobile which has adequate access to a
public street or alley and permitting satisfactory ingress or egress of any automobile.
Subd. 99. "Parking space, compact" or "compact parking space" means a parking space not less
than 7-1/2 feet wide and 16 feet in length. Compact parking spaces must be provided at a rate of 25% of the
total required off-street parking.
Subd. 100. "Permitted use" means a use which may be lawfully established in a particular district
or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and performance standards, if any, of
such districts.
Subd. 101. "Principal use" means the main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
subordinate or accessory uses. A principal use may be either permitted or conditional.
Subd. 102. "Reach" means hydraulic engineering term used to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream
or river between two consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 505.09, Subd. 103
(Rev. 2017)
Subd. 103. "Recreational vehicle" or "RV" means a vehicle designed for recreational use, including
but not limited to the following: campers, camper trailers, watercraft, snowmobiles, and all-terrain vehicles.
A trailer used to transport recreational vehicles shall itself be considered a recreational vehicle. A slip-in
camper shall be considered a recreational vehicle regardless of whether it is mounted on a truck or is free
standing. In order for a motor vehicle or trailer to be considered a camper, at least four of the following life
support systems must be present, two of which must be (a), (b) or (c):
(a) cooking with liquid propane gas supply.
(b) potable water supply including sink and faucet.
(c) separate 110-125 volt electrical power supply.
(d) heating or air conditioning separate from vehicle engine.
(e) refrigerator, electric or propane
(f) toilet, self-contained or connected to a plumbing system.
Subd. 104. "Regional flood" means a flood which is representative of large floods known to have
occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an
average of frequency in the magnitude of the 100 year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous
with the term "base flood" used in the flood insurance study.
Subd. 105. "Regulatory flood protection elevation" or "RFPE" means an elevation not lower than
one foot above the elevation of the regional flood, plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a flood way.
Subd. 106. "Restaurant" means an establishment which serves food in or on non-disposable dishes
to be consumed primarily while seated at tables or booths within the building.
Subd. 107. "Rooming house" means a building other than a hotel where, for compensation for
definite periods, lodging is provided for persons not of the family as defined herein, but not including a
building providing this service for more than ten persons.
Subd. 108. "Satellite antenna" means an apparatus, usually dish shaped, used for receiving
electromagnetic waves from satellites orbiting the earth.
Subd. 109. "Set-back" means the minimum horizontal distance between a building and street or lot
line.
Subd. 110. "Sign" means any material no matter how arranged, which has outdoor advertising as its
principal, intended purpose. A sign is a structure for the purpose of this code.
Subd. 111. "Small brewery" means a facility that manufactures and distributes malt liquor in a total
quantity not to exceed 3,500 barrels a year in compliance with Minnesota Statute Section 340A.301, subd.
6d. A small brewery may have space dedicated as a taproom to distribute on-sale and off-sale malt liquor in
compliance with Minnesota Statutes Section 340A.301, subd. 6b and 6d. (Added, Ord. No. 14-21)
Subd. 112. “Small wireless facility” means a deployed wireless facility with each antenna limited
to six cubic feet and all associated equipment (excluding back-up generators and similar back-up
equipment) being concealed or occupying no more than 28 cubic feet. (Added, Ord. No. 17-07)
Subd. 113. "State licensed nonresidential facility" means a facility operating a nonresidential
program within the meaning of Minnesota Statutes, section 245A.02, subdivision 10, as amended.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 505.09, Subd. 114
(Rev. 2014)
Subd. 114. "State licensed residential facility" means a facility operating a residential program
within the meaning of Minnesota Statutes, section 245A.01, subdivision 14, as amended.
Subd. 115. "Story" means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above or the ceiling or roof next above such floor. A basement
shall not be counted as a story.
Subd. 116. "Structure" means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent
location on the ground, underground, or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground
or underground. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-05)
Subd. 117. "Swimming pool" means any permanently constructed basin for holding water,
designed for human use, with a minimum water depth of 24 inches. Swimming pools do not include
treatment pools, therapeutic pools, whirlpools, spa pools, wading pools, temporary or seasonal aboveground
swimming pools; or landscape ponds, rain gardens, or storm water facilities not intended for human
use. (Added, Ord. No. 07-19)
Subd. 118. "Substantial improvements" means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure (a) before the improvement or
repair is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure. The term does not include either (i) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe
living conditions or (ii) any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of historic places or state
inventory of historic places.
Subd. 119. "Taproom" means a facility dispensing malt liquor in compliance with city code section
1200 and state law. (Amended, Ord. No. 14-21)
Subd. 120. "Townhouse" means single family attached unit in structures housing three or more
dwelling units, contiguous to each other only by the sharing of one common bearing wall, such structures to
be of the town or row house type as contrasted to multiple dwelling apartment structures. No single
structure shall contain in excess of eight dwelling units and each dwelling unit shall have separate and
individual front and rear entrance.
Subd. 121. (Deleted, Ord. No. 11-14)
Subd. 122. "Unenclosed porch" means a deck or open porch with a roof but no walls or lattice.
Subd. 123. "Use" means the purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designated, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied, utilized or maintained, and shall include the
performance of such activity as defined by the performance standards of this code.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 505.09, Subd. 124
(Rev. 2017)
Subd. 124. "Usable open space" means a required ground area or terrace area on a lot which is
graded, developed, landscaped and equipped and intended and maintained for either active or passive
recreation or both, available and accessible to and usable by all persons occupying a dwelling unit or
rooming unit on the lot and their guests. Such areas shall be grassed and landscaped or covered only for a
recreational purpose. Roofs, driveways and parking areas shall not constitute usable open space.
Subd. 125. "Variance" means the varying of specific literal provisions of this code as provided for
in Section 535.05. (Amended, Ord. No. 11-14)
Subd. 126. "Vestibule" means a passage hall or room between the outer door and the interior of a
building.
Subd. 127. “Wireless support structure” Any proposed new pole associated with a small wireless
facility that does not exceed the lessor of 50 feet in height above grade or 10 feet above an existing pole that
is being replaced unless a greater height is approved by the City Engineer. (Added, Ord. No. 17-07)
Subd. 128. "Yard" means an open space on the lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its
lowest level to the sky. A yard extends along a lot line at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width
specified in the yard regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located.
Subd. 129. "Yard, front" or "front yard" means yard extending along the full width of the front lot
line between side lot lines and from the abutting front street right-of-way line to the front building line in
depth.
Subd. 130. "Yard, rear" or "rear yard" means the portion of the yard on the same lot with the
principal building located between the rear line of the building and the rear lot line and extending for the full
width of the lot. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-05)
Subd. 129. "Yard, side" or "side yard" means the yard extending along the side lot line between the
front and rear yards.
(Amended, Ord. No. 08-02; Amended Ord. No. 15-07)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.01
(Rev. 1997)
Section 510 - Zoning: districts, general provisions
510.01. Districts. Subdivision 1. For the purpose of this code, the city is hereby divided into the zoning
districts and groups of zoning districts listed in this subsection.
Subd. 2. Residential districts:
(a) "R-l" single family residential district.
(b) "R-2" single and two family residential district.
(c) "R-3" medium density residential district.
(d) "R-4" residential-business district.
Subd. 3. Business districts:
(a) "B-1" neighborhood business district.
(b) "B-2" limited community business district.
(c) "B-3" highway commercial district.
(d) "B-4" community business district.
Subd. 4. Industrial districts:
(a) "B-W" business-warehousing district.
Subd. 5. Special districts:
(a) "FP" flood plain district.
(b) "NG" neighborhood grocery.
(c) "PUD" planned unit development.
(d) "P" public facilities district (Amended, Ord. No. 97-06)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.03
(Rev. 1997)
510.03. Boundaries. Subdivision 1. Application. The boundary lines of the districts listed in this section
are hereby established as shown on that certain map entitled "Zoning District Map of Robbinsdale,
Minnesota", which map is properly approved and filed with the city clerk and as described in Appendix A1
of this code. The zoning district map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon
shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein and is hereby made a part of this code by
reference and incorporated herein as fully as if set forth herein at length.
Subd. 2. Boundaries. Zoning district boundary lines as indicated in Appendix A1 of this code
follow lot lines, the projected center lines of streets or alleys, railroad right-of-way lines, the center of
water courses or the corporate limit lines, all as they exist upon the effective date of this code. If district
boundary lines do not follow any of the above described lines, the district boundary lines are established
as indicated in Appendix A1. Where a district boundary line divides a lot of record which was in single
ownership at the time of enactment of this code and places a portion of such lot of record in two or more
zoning districts, any portion of such lot within 50 feet on either side of such a dividing district boundary
line may be used for any use of either zoning district provided, however, if any portion of such lot shall
extend beyond the 50 foot limitation, the district line as shown shall prevail.
Subd. 3. Appeal. Appeals from the city staff's determination and questions of doubt concerning the
exact location of a zoning district boundary shall be heard by the planning commission who will then
forward a recommendation to the city council for final decision.
Subd. 4. Vacation. When any street, alley or other public right-of-way is vacated by official action
of the city, the zoning district abutting the center line of said alley or other public right-of-way shall not be
affected by such proceeding.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.03, Subd. 3
510.05. Uses not provided for. Subdivision 1. Interpretation. Whenever in any zoning district a use is
neither specifically permitted nor denied, it shall be the duty of the city planner to make an interpretation of
the appropriate zoning district for the use in question. The interpretation of the city planner shall be based
upon the similarity of the use to other uses already specifically identified by this code and shall include but
not be limited to consideration of the operational characteristics of the use, the intensity of the use, the
general compatibility of the use with other uses identified by this code, and consistency of the use with the
stated purpose of the districts established by this code.
Subd. 2. Planning commission. Upon an interpretation having been made by the city planner, the
planning commission shall be notified in writing of the interpretation for their concurrence or dissent. If
within a period of ten days after such notification any member of the commission informs the city planner of
a disagreement with the interpretation, the commission shall meet as a whole, according to its rules of
procedure, to either approve or disapprove the interpretation. The commission may exercise the discretion
to make any determination by following the procedures contained in section 535.03 of this code for an
amendment. If within the ten day period no objection is raised on the part of the planning commission, the
interpretation of the city planner shall stand as the determination of the appropriate zoning district for the
use under consideration.
Subd. 3. Amendments. If an interpretation is made that a use under consideration is most similar to
other uses which are identified by this code as conditional uses, then determination of the appropriate zoning
district for said use shall only be made consistent with the procedures contained in subsection 535.03 of this
code for an amendment. Such amendments shall specify any conditions or standards deemed generally
necessary to reduce adverse affects of the use and to assure its compatibility with other permitted and
conditional uses contained within the district for which the amendment is proposed.
Subd. 4. Appeals. The provisions of subsection 535.05 of this code, relating to appeals, may be
invoked where it is alleged that a determination made pursuant to this section is in error.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.07
(Rev. 2008)
510.07. Non-conforming buildings, structures and uses. Subdivision 1. Purpose. It is the purpose of this
subsection to provide for the regulation of non-conforming buildings, structures and uses and to specify
these requirements, circumstances and conditions under which non-conforming buildings, structures and
uses will be operated and maintained. This code establishes separate districts, each of which is an
appropriate area for the location of uses which are permitted in that district. It is necessary and consistent
with the establishment of these districts that non-conforming buildings, structures and uses not be permitted
to continue without restriction. Furthermore, it is the intent of this subsection that all non-conforming uses
shall be eventually brought into conformity.
Subd. 2. Existing uses. Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this code
shall not be enlarged but may be continued at the size and in the manner of operation existing upon such
date except as hereinafter specified, or subsequently amended. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-04)
Subd. 3. Unsafe conditions. Nothing in this code shall prevent the placing of a structure in safe
condition when said structure is declared unsafe by the building inspector providing the necessary repairs
shall not constitute more than 50% of fair market value of such structure. Said value shall be determined by
the city assessor or a professionally certified or recognized appraiser retained by the owner and approved by
the city council. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-04)
Subd. 4. Moving. No non-conforming building, structure or use shall be moved to another lot or to
any other part of the parcel of land upon which the same was constructed or was conducted at the time of
this code unless such movement shall bring the non-conformance into compliance with the requirements of
this code. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-04)
Subd. 6. Changes in use.
(a) When any unlawful non-conforming use of any structure or land in any district has been
changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be physically changed to any
non-conforming use.
(b) A lawful non-conforming use of a structure or parcel of land may be changed to lessen the
non-conformity of use. Once a non-conforming structure or parcel of land has been so
changed it shall not thereafter be so altered to increase the non-conformity.
Subd. 7. Damage or destruction of non-conforming building, structure or use. Any nonconforming
building, structure or use including the lawful use or occupation of land on premises existing at
the time of the adoption of an additional control of this code, may be continued, including through repair,
replacement, restoration, maintenance or improvement, but not including expansion, unless the nonconforming
use or occupation of land or premises is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater
than 50% of its market value, and no building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the
property is damaged. In this case, a municipality may impose reasonable conditions upon a building permit
in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property. Any subsequent use or occupancy of
the land or premises shall be a conforming use or occupancy. The city may, by ordinance, permit an
expansion or impose upon nonconformities reasonable regulations to prevent and abate nuisances and to
protect the public health, welfare and safety. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-04)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.07, Subd. 8
(Rev. 2008)
Subd. 8. Discontinued use. Whenever a lawful non-conforming use of a structure or land is
discontinued and then remains discontinued for a period of 12 months, any future use of said structure or
land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this code. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-04)
Subd. 9. Lawful non-conforming accessory structure. A lawful non-conforming accessory
structure in an R-1 district may be expanded to increase the usability provided that the entire expansion
meets the current zoning regulations and the structure is accessory to a single family dwelling. (Amended,
Ord. No. 08-04)
Subd. 10. Buildings under construction. Any proposed structure which will, under this Code,
become non-conforming but for which a building permit has been lawfully granted, not more than six
months prior to the effective date of this code, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans,
provided construction is started within six months of the effective date of this code, and continues to
completion within two years. Such structure and use shall thereafter be a legally non-conforming structure
and use. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-04)
Subd. 11. Maintenance. Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or related
to a lawful non-conforming use is permitted, including necessary non-structural repairs and incidental
alterations which do not extend or intensify the non-conforming use. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-04)
Subd. 12. Alterations. Alterations may be made to a building containing lawful non-conforming
residential units when they will improve the livability thereof, provided they will not increase the number of
dwelling units or the non-conformity of the structure. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-04)
Subd. 13. Screening. All non-residential, non-conforming buildings, structures and uses shall be
screened on the side and rear yards from abutting and surrounding residential uses in compliance with
subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-04)
Subd. 14. Nonrental units. Lawful non-conforming, non-income producing, residential units in R-1
and R-2 districts may be expanded to improve their livability, provided that the entire expansion meets the
current zoning regulations. If, however, the expansion extends the non-conformity, without going any
closer to the property line, such expansion may be permitted as a conditional use. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-
04)
Subd. 15. Decks. Lawful non-conforming residential units in R-1 and R-2 districts may be
expanded by adding a deck provided that the deck meets the current zoning regulations and a certificate of
survey is provided to the city. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-04)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.08
(Rev. 1999)
510.08. (Added, Ord. No. 99-11) Curing non-permitted uses and structures; statement of policy. The city
council has become aware that there exists a number of instances of uses and structures which, for a variety
of reasons, are not permitted within the residential district in which they are located. The council is,
however, mindful that many such uses and structures have existed for long periods of time in harmony with
surrounding permitted uses. The council believes that with respect to many such uses and structures, it is in
the best interest of the city and of the owners of the property on which such uses and structures are located,
that they be allowed to continue. The council also believes that, in many instances, requiring the owner of
the property to pursue other procedures contained in this code could result in unnecessary hardship.
Therefore, the procedures contained in section 510.081 of this code are intended to provide an expeditious
and reasonable method whereby certain non-permitted uses and structures may be made lawful and
permitted.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.081
(Rev. 2008)
510.081. (Added, Ord. No. 99-11) Use or structure not permitted in the district. Subdivision 1. Procedure.
The owner of property which contains a use or structure which is not permitted in the district in which it is
located may make application to the Community Development Department (“department”) for a
nonconforming use permit (“NUP”).
(a) The request for a nonconforming use (“NUP”) permit, as provided within this subsection,
shall be filed with the city on an official application form a minimum of four weeks before
the planning commission meeting at which formal action is requested. Such application
shall be charged a fee as established in subsection 535.15. This fee shall not be refunded.
Such application shall also be accompanied by three copies of detailed written and graphic
materials fully explaining the existing use. A certificate of survey showing all structures,
significant features, and any other information determined by the city shall be submitted.
The application, along with all related information, shall be referred to the city planning
commission for consideration and a recommendation to the city council.
(b) The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the planning commission in
order to answer questions concerning the proposed “NUP”.
(c) The “NUP” application shall be referred to the city staff for a report and recommendation
to be presented to the commission. The city staff’s report and recommendations shall be
given to the city planning commission at least five days prior to the meeting at which said
report and recommendations are to be presented. The report and recommendations of the
city staff are to be entered in and made part of the permanent record of the planning
commission meeting.
(d) The planning commission shall make findings of fact regarding any adverse effects of the
proposed “NUP” and what additional requirements may be necessary to reduce such
adverse effects. Its judgment shall be based upon, but not limited to, the following factors:
(1) the use or structure has existed in substantially its present form for at least 15 years;
(2) during its existence no adverse neighborhood impacts have been reported to the
city;
(3) the use or structure was established either by a prior owner, or by the current owner
upon a good faith belief that the use or structure was lawful when established; and
(4) the structure either conforms to the current requirements of the building code, or
the requirements of the building code as of the effective date of the NUP; or the
city building official and applicant have agreed upon a compliance schedule which
will bring the structure into compliance with the applicable building codes
according to the terms of the schedule.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.081, Subd. 1(e)
(Rev. 1999)
(e) The planning commission shall have the authority to request additional information from
the applicant concerning operational factors or to retain expert testimony with the consent
and at the expense of the applicant, concerning operational factors, said information to be
declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections
of this code.
(f) Notice of time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper at least ten days prior to the day of the hearing. Individual notices shall be
mailed not less than ten days before the hearing to all owners of property according to the
assessment records, within 350 feet of the parcel included in the request.
(g) Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any proceedings set
forth within this code provided a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with this
subsection.
(h) The planning commission shall recommend such conditions relating to the granting of said
“NUP” as they deem necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of the code or
recommend that the request be denied. The planning commission’s recommendation and
the city staff’s report and recommendation shall be forwarded to the city council.
(i) The city council shall not grant a “NUP” until they have received a report and
recommendation from the planning commission and the city staff. The planning
commission shall reach a decision not later than the second regular meeting following the
first regular meeting at which the request for a “NUP” is considered by the commission.
(j) Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the planning commission and the city
staff, the “NUP” request shall be placed on the agenda for the next regular city council
meeting, but no sooner than 20 days. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered
in and made part of the permanent written record of the city council meeting.
(k) Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the planning commission and city staff,
the city council shall have the option to set and hold a public hearing if deemed necessary
and may impose any additional conditions it considers necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
(l) Approval of a “NUP” shall require passage by 4/5 vote of the full city council as set forth
by city charter.
(m) The NUP shall be deemed effective on the date of issuance unless the council determines
that, for good cause shown by the applicant, the NUP should be effective as of an earlier
date.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.081, Subd. 1(n)
(Rev. 2009)
(n) Upon issuance of a “NUP”, the use or structure to which the permit relates shall be deemed
a lawful nonconforming use or structure and shall be subject to all of the provisions of this
code regulating such uses or structures.
(o) The city clerk shall notify the “NUP” applicant of the council’s decision in writing and
place a copy of the decision in the central property file.
Subd. 2. Performance bond.
(a) Except in the case of single family detached residential property, upon approval of a
“NUP” the city shall be provided with a performance bond prior to the issuing of building
permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or development. Said bond
shall guarantee conformance and compliance with the conditions of the “NUP” and the
codes and ordinances of the city. (Amended, Ord. No. 09-03)
(b) The performance bond shall consist of a bond, cash escrow deposit or irrevocable letter of
credit and be in the amount of the city engineer’s estimated costs of labor and materials for
the proposed improvements or developments. (Amended, Ord. No. 09-03)
(c) The city shall hold the performance bond until completion of the proposed improvements
or development and a certificate indicating compliance with the non-conforming use permit
and codes and ordinances of the city has been issued by the city building inspector.
(Amended, Ord. No. 09-03)
(d) Failure to comply with the conditions of the “NUP” or the codes and ordinances of the city
or both shall result in forfeiture of the bond.
510.09. Lots. Subdivision 1. Single family. Any vacant lot of record at the time of the adoption of this
code within an R district which does not meet the requirements of this code as to lot area or lot width may
be utilized for a single family detached dwelling provided the lot area and lot width are within 80% of said
requirements. All other setbacks and open space required by this code shall be met. Should said vacant lot
fail to meet these requirements it shall be classified as having insufficient lot area or lot width as a buildable
site and no building permit shall be issued unless sufficient land is added to the lot consistent with section
500 of the city code. An existing single family dwelling on a lot which is within an R district and with lot
area or lot width below 80% of said requirements, may be expanded provided the entire expansion meets the
current zoning regulations. (Amended, Ord. No. 91-03, Sec. 3)
Subd. 2. Buildings per lot. Except in the case of planned unit development as provided for in
subsection 530.05 of this code, not more than one principal building shall be located in a lot. The words
"principal building" shall be given their common, ordinary meaning. In case of doubt or on any question or
interpretation the decision of the building inspector shall be final, subject to the right of appeal to the
planning commission and city council.
Subd. 3. Through lots. On a through lot which is a lot fronting on two parallel streets, both street
lines shall be front lot lines for applying the yard and parking regulations of this code.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.11
Rev. 2003)
510.11. Accessory structures, uses & equipment.
Subd. 1. Accessory buildings permitted or conditionally permitted. All accessory buildings are
subject to the following restrictions:
(a) No accessory building shall be permitted on any lot prior to the time of the issuance of the
building permit for the construction of a principal building.
(b) Accessory buildings in the rear yard shall not be closer than 1-1/2 feet to any lot line.
(c) Accessory buildings in a side yard shall not be any closer than five feet to the lot line. If an
accessory building is located in a corner side yard, then the required setback shall be the
same as what is required for the principal building.
(d) No accessory building shall be built within six feet of the principal building unless it is
connected to the principal building by a living space.
(e) No detached accessory building shall be placed in the front yard.
(f) Accessory buildings shall be setback from any alley right-of-way a minimum of two feet.
(g) Garages with vehicular access to and from an alley or street right-of-way and with the
vehicular entrance fronting the street right-of-way shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet
from the property line. Garages with vehicular access to and from an alley with the
vehicular entrance fronting the alley shall be set back a minimum of 16 feet from the
property line. (Amended, Ord. No. 03-33)
(h) Garages not covered under subsection 510.11, subdivision 1(f) and (g) shall be set back a
minimum of two feet for every additional ten degrees of angle from the alley right-of-way.
(i) In no case shall an accessory building exceed the height of the principal building.
(j) Accessory buildings shall not exceed 16 feet in height.
(k) No accessory building shall at any time be used as a dwelling unit (temporarily or
permanently) or for a home occupation.
(l) Attached garages shall be included in the calculation for the total amount of accessory
building square foot coverage.
(m) Any second accessory building(s) that exceeds 240 square feet in size shall require a
conditional use permit.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.11, Subd. 1(n)
(Rev. 2006)
(n) The chart below sets forth the maximum size for a single accessory building and the total of
all accessory buildings allowed:
Lot Width
Maximum Size for a
Single Building
Total Coverage of All
Accessory Buildings
Allowed on a Lot
0 - 49 feet 800 square feet 1000 square feet
50 - 59 feet 860 square feet 1060 square feet
60 - 79 feet 920 square feet 1120 square feet
80 - 99 feet 1000 square feet 1200 square feet
100 plus feet 1200 square feet 1400 square feet
(o) In no case shall the floor area of an accessory building exceed 100% of the main floor area
of the principal structure.
(p) In R-1 and R-2 zones, accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 25% of the rear yard
area. Where a platted alley exists in the rear of the lot, 1/2 of the width of the platted alley
may be included for the purpose of calculating rear yard coverage.
(q) In R-1 and R-2 zones, only one accessory structure without a permanent foundation
(concrete) shall be constructed or placed on a lot. (Subsec. Repealed, Ord. No. 99-05;
Subsec. Added, Ord. No. 99-05)
Subd. 2. Accessory structures, uses and equipment. No accessory structure, use or equipment
which generates noise (such as air conditioning cooling condensers) may be located in a side yard in a
residential district, except a corner lot side yard abutting a street, unless the following conditions are met:
(a) the equipment is not within the required side yard, except that air conditioner condensers
may be located in the required side yard if the following conditions are met:
(1) There is no encroachment into any drainage or utility easement;
(2) Placement of the equipment is approved by the city engineer to ensure it does not
obstruct drainage or access around the equipment; and
(3) Equipment installation and performance is consistent with 510.11, subdivision 2(c)
and (d). (Amended, Ord. No. 06-06)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.11, Subd. 2(b)
(Rev. 2006)
(b) the equipment is not adjacent to the neighbor's side yard, except if the adjacent property
meets one of the following conditions:
(1) the adjacent property is currently occupied by a principal building which is
equipped with central air conditioning serving the entire building (full house air
conditioning); or (Amended, Ord. No. 06-06)
(2) the adjacent property is currently occupied by a principal building which is to be
equipped with central air conditioning serving the entire building (full house air
conditioning) concurrently with the subject property; or (Amended, Ord. No. 06-
06)
(3) the adjacent property is currently occupied by a principal building which has no
windows or doors in the wall immediately abutting the yard in question or is
separated from the yard in question by a detached accessory building or by an
attached garage; or (Amended, Ord. No. 06-06)
(4) the adjacent property is currently occupied by a principal building which is at least
20 feet from the proposed location of the equipment. (Amended, Ord. No. 06-06)
(c) the equipment operates at noise levels of 74 decibels (dB) or less according to
manufacturer's specifications; and (Amended, Ord. No. 06-06)
(d) the equipment is muffled so that it emits no more than 50 decibels at the nearest lot line.
Acceptable muffling includes:
(1) a six foot high solid wood fence constructed along the side lot line running from
front yard to back yard; or (Amended, Ord. No. 06-06)
(2) an acoustical fence constructed around the air conditioner; or (Amended, Ord. No.
06-06)
(3) landscaping installed around the air conditioning unit approved by staff.
Furthermore, such accessory uses shall not be located in any front, side, or rear yard in a business district if
that yard abuts a residential district.
Subd. 3. Vehicle storage. The open storage of unlicensed and or inoperable passenger vehicles,
trucks and recreational vehicles does not qualify for an accessory use.
Subd. 4. Swimming pools. All swimming pools shall have fences or walls at least six feet in height
around the perimeter with a self-closing gate.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.13
(Rev. 2012)
510.13. Yards. Subdivision 1. Exceptions. The following shall not be considered as encroachments on
required yard setback requirements:
(a) In any rear yard or front yard: terraces, awnings, canopies, steps, chimneys, flag poles,
egress window wells, and roof overhangs of 12 inches on an accessory use structure and 24
inches on a principal use structure; and air conditioning or heating equipment provided that
when placed in front yard, such equipment is screened with landscaping of sufficient height
and thickness so as to render it as inconspicuous as is reasonably practical from the street.
(Amended, Ord. No. 10-10, Sec. 1)
(b) In side or rear yards: off-street open parking spaces in R-1 and R-2 districts.
(c) In rear yards: recreational and laundry drying equipment, arbors and trellises, balconies,
breezeways, detached outdoor living rooms, and garages.
(d) Side yards: stoops and awnings which may be folded flat against the building, and roof
overhangs of 12 inches on an accessory use structure and 24 inches on a principal use
structure; cantilevered bump-out or boxed windows, chimneys, chimney flues may
encroach the side yard setback up to 24 inches so long as said cantilevered appurtenance is
above ground; egress window wells subject to the following conditions: (Amended, Ord.
No. 10-10, Sec. 1, Amended Ord. 12-07, Sec. 1)
(1) Egress window wells located within side yards shall not obstruct drainage patterns
nor cause stormwater to drain onto adjoining properties. (Added, Ord. No. 10-10,
Sec. 1)
(2) Approval by the City Engineer is required for egress window wells that are less
than two feet from the side lot line. (Added, Ord. No. 10-10, Sec. 1)
(3) Egress window well walls closer than 1.5 feet to the side lot line will require a
conditional use permit. (Added, Ord. No. 10-10, Sec. 1)
Subd. 2. Vestibules. On existing structures, vestibules may extend not more than five feet into any
required yard provided it is only one story, does not exceed 50 square feet, and does not extend nearer than
25 feet from a front property line or ten feet from any rear property line.
Subd. 3. Decks. A deck or open porch no higher than 30 inches may extend not more than ten feet
into any required yard provided it does not extend nearer than 20 feet from any front property line and five
feet from any side or rear property line. Setbacks affecting decks and platforms exclusively associated with
ramps for handicapped access may be waived by the city planner, whose decision may be appealed to the
city council. Any such deck or platform having had applicable setbacks previously waived must be
removed within 30 days of written notification by the community development department, that said deck or
platform no longer meets the requirements for waiver. (Amended, Ord. 07-09)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.15
Rev. 2008)
510.15. General building requirements. Subdivision 1. Height limitations.
(a) Exceptions: The building height limits established herein for districts shall not apply to the
following:
(i) belfries
(ii) chimneys or flues
(iii) church spires
(iv) cooling towers
(v) cupolas and domes which do not contain usable space
(vi) elevator penthouses
(vii) flag poles
(viii) monuments
(ix) parapet walls extending not more than three feet above the limiting height of the
building
(x) water towers
(xi) poles, towers and other structures for essential services
(xii) necessary mechanical and electrical appurtenances
(xiii) television antennas not exceeding 20 feet
(xiv) telecommunications tower and facilities (Added, Ord. No. 97-06)
(xv) telecommunications facilities on antenna support structures (added, Ord. 97-06)
(b) No excluded roof equipment or structural element extending beyond the limited height of a
building may occupy more than 25 percent of the area of such roof.
Subd. 2. Dwelling unit restrictions. No basement, garage, tent, mobile home or accessory building
shall at any time be used as a residence or dwelling unit, temporarily or permanently.
Subd. 3. Drainage plans. In the case of all apartment, business and industrial developments, the
drainage plans shall be submitted to the city engineer for the engineer’s comments and the final drainage
plan shall have the engineer’s approval.
Subd. 4. (Added, Ord. 08-09) Erosion control requirements. All land alteration or site grading in
any district that results in the extraction of more than 25 cubic yards of material, or that disturbs an area of
more than 100 square feet, or causes any stockpile in excess of five cubic feet of material shall require the
following measures:
(a) The entire perimeter of all disburbed or stockpiled areas shall be enclosed by silt fencing or
other materials approved by the city engineer to contain the run off from soil or stockpiled
materials.
(b) All catch basins, curbs, manholes, storm drain inlets and other applicable infrastructure
shall be protected during construction with straw bales, silt fence or other equivalent barrier
approved by the city engineer to eliminate the infiltration of non-stormwater run off
generated or associated with the site alteration activities.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.15, Subd 4(c)
(Rev. 2008)
(c) When vegetation is removed during construction, the exposed condition of the land shall be
kept to the shortest practical period of time, but no longer than 60 days. Areas left denuded
for periods in excess of five days may be required to have temporary vegetation, seeding,
mulch and to be stabilized with erosion control netting or blanket as required by the city
engineer.
(d) Streets must be cleaned and swept whenever tracking or spillage of sediment occurs and
before sites are left idle for weekends and holidays.
(e) Dust must be controlled in a manner approved by the city engineer.
(f) Permanent vegetation and structures shall be installed within 30 days after completion of
initial grading. If grading is not completed erosion measures, including dormant seeking
and mulching shall be implemented.
(g) If the soil is not stabilized through landscaping when a certificate of occupancy is issued,
the city may require financial security, not to exceed 150% of the estimated cost of erosion
and sediment control on the site. The financial security will be returned when the
landscaping is approved by the city engineer.
(h) Any person, firm, corporation, agency or other party who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects
or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
code is subject to enforcement and penalties described in section 535.09, subdivision 1.
510.17. Off-street parking. Subdivision 1. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to alleviate or
prevent congestion of public rights-of-way and to promote the safety and general welfare of the public, by
establishing minimum requirements for off-street parking of motor vehicles in accordance with the
utilization of various parcels of land or structures or both.
Subd. 2. General provisions.
(a) Existing off-street parking spaces and loading spaces upon the effective date of this code
shall not be reduced in number unless said number exceeds the requirements set forth
herein for a similar new use.
(b) Off-street parking facilities accessory to residential uses shall be utilized solely for the
parking of licensed and operable passenger vehicles, licensed and operable recreational
vehicles as regulated in subsection 515.01, subdivisions 3 and 4. Off-street parking
facilities accessory to residential uses may be utilized for the parking of not more than one
licensed and operable truck not exceeding a gross vehicle weight of 9,000 pounds. Under
no circumstances shall facilities accessory to residential structures be used for the parking
or storage of semi-truck tractors or semi-truck tractor-trailer combinations, for the storage
of commercial vehicles, or to provide off-street parking or storage facilities for nonresidential
uses.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.17, Subd. 2(c)
(c) Calculating spaces. When determining the number of off-street parking spaces results in a
fraction, each fraction of one-half or more shall constitute another space. In stadiums,
sports arenas, churches, and other places of public assembly in which patrons or spectators
occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities, each 22 inches of such seating
facilities shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining requirements for
off-street parking facilities under this code.
(d) Stall and aisle or driveway design.
(1) (i) Standard size vehicles. Each parking space shall not be less than 8-1/2 feet
wide and 18 feet in length exclusive of an adequately designed system of
access.
(ii) Compact parking spaces. Each compact space shall not be less than 7-1/2
feet wide and 16 feet in length and shall be provided at a rate of 25% of the
total required off-street parking.
(2) The required parking spaces serving one and two family dwellings may be
designed for parking not more than two vehicles in a tandem arrangement for each
dwelling unit in order to comply with the requirements of this code.
(3) Parking areas of five spaces or more shall be designed so that circulation between
parking bays or aisles occurs within the designated parking lot and does not depend
upon a public street or alley.
(4) Driveways serving four or less parking spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet in
width.
(5) Parking areas of five spaces or more and their aisles or driveways shall be
developed in compliance with Table I.
(i) Table I
Wall to Wall Wall to Interlock Interlock to Interlock
Bay Width Aisle Width Bay Width Aisle Width Bay Width Aisle Width
(minimum) (minimum) (minimum)
45 51.0' 14.0' 49.0' 14.0' 46.0' 14.0'
60 56.0' 16.0' 54.0' 16.0' 52.0' 16.0'
90 62.0' 25.0' 62.0' 25.0' 62.0' 25.0'
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.17, Subd. 2(d)(5)
Notes:
Standard size vehicle spaces
Stall Width: 8-1/2 feet
Stall Length: 18 feet
Compact or sub-compact size vehicle spaces
Stall Width: 7-1/2 feet
Stall Length: 16 feet
Handicapped size vehicle spaces
Stall Width: 12 feet
Stall Length: 18 feet
(6) Parallel space design. All on-street and off-street parallel parking spaces shall not
be less than nine feet wide and 22 feet in length exclusive of an adequately
designed system of access.
(7) Handicapped stalls. Each parking space shall not be less than 12 feet wide and 18
feet in length and shall be provided at a rate of one space per 50 standard or
compact spaces, or both, or any fraction thereof.
(8) All parking areas providing five or more spaces shall be double striped.
(e) Access. Driveways shall be provided for all off-street parking and shall be designed so as
to provide adequate means of access to a public alley or street. Such access shall be located
as to cause least interference with traffic movement and minimum traffic hazards.
(1) No driveway in any district shall exceed 25 feet in width unless travel lanes are
properly stenciled and no curb cut in any district shall exceed 22 feet in a
residentially zoned district or 35 feet in a commercially zoned district. Detailed
plans shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval for all curb cuts or
driveway openings before a permit will be obtained therefore.
(2) Driveway access curb opening on a public street, except for single and two-family
dwellings, shall not be located less than 25 feet from one another.
(f) Signs.
(1) No sign shall be so located as to restrict the orderly operation and traffic movement
within any parking area.
(2) All compact and handicapped parking spaces shall be individually signed or
stenciled.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.17, Subd. 2(g)
(Rev. 2003)
(g) Surfacing.
(1) In all R-3, R-B, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 and B-W districts, areas intended to be utilized
for self-propelled vehicle parking spaces and driveways shall be surfaced with
blacktop, concrete, other hard surface material approved by the city, to control dust
and drainage. Plans for parking lots in these districts shall be submitted to the city
engineer for review
(2) and the final drainage plan shall be subject to the city engineer's approval.
Compliance with the hard surfacing requirement may be scheduled over a period of
time, not to exceed five years, if approved by the city council.
(3) For new construction of new garages and/or homes in all R-1 and R-2 districts,
areas intended to be used for self-propelled vehicle parking spaces and driveways
shall be surfaced with blacktop, concrete and/or other hard surfaced material
approved by the city. Parking areas and driveways for existing garages and/or
homes shall be surfaced with a material suitable to control dust and drainage. A
grass covering does not constitute an acceptable surfacing material. (Amended,
Ord. No. 03-33)
(h) Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so arranged as
to reflect the light away from adjoining property, abutting residential uses and public rightsof-
way and be in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 5.
(i) Curbing, screening, and landscaping.
(1) All open off-street parking areas of five spaces or more designed to have head-in
parking along the property line shall provide a bumper curb not less than five feet
from the side property line or a guard of normal bumper height not less than one
foot from the side property line. A fence or evergreen planting of three feet in
height shall be erected along the front yard setback line with grass, planting, or
surfaced material occupying the space between the sidewalk and curb, fence or
evergreen planting.
(2) All open off-street parking areas of five or more spaces shall be screened and
landscaped from abutting or surrounding residential uses in compliance with
subparagraph (1) above and subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code.
(j) Maintenance of off-street parking. It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the
operator and owner of the principal use, uses, or building, or both, to maintain, in a neat and
adequate manner, the parking space, accessways, landscaping, and required fences.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.17, Subd. 3
(Rev. 2000)
Subd. 3. Location. All accessory off-street parking facilities required by this code shall be located
and restricted as follows:
(a) Space accessory to one and two family dwellings shall be on the same lot or on a directly
adjacent lot under the same ownership as the principal use served.
(b) Ninety degrees (90°) head in parking, directly off of and adjacent to a public street or alley,
with each stall having its own direct access to the public street or alley, shall be prohibited.
However, the city council may approve sixty degree (60°) head in angle parking, directly
off and adjacent to a public street or alley, with each stall having its own direct access to a
public street or alley, as a conditional use as regulated by subsection 535.01. (Amended,
Ord. No. 00-04).
(c) There shall be no off-street parking within five feet of any street right-of-way in a
commercially zoned district (B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, and B-W) and no off-street parking within
15 feet of any street right-of-way in a residentially zoned district (R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-B)
as measured from the property line.
(d) For one and two-family dwellings no more than one of the required parking spaces for each
unit may be located in the front yard. This requirement shall not apply to approved
combination residential and commercial projects as regulated by subsections 515.07 and
520.03 of this code. Said type of parking spaces shall not be enclosed within a building or
structure.
(e) Spaces accessory to multiple family dwellings shall be on the same lot as the principle use
served or within 200 feet of the main entrance to the principal building served.
(f) Except as additionally limited above, spaces accessory to uses located in any use district
shall be within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal building served unless
otherwise authorized by conditional use permit.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.17, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2000)
Subd. 4. Off-site parking.
(a) Public property, including public right-of-way or private property, or both, may be utilized
to meet the parking requirements of this code, provided that:
(1) Any off-site parking which utilizes private property to meet the requirements of
this code shall be a conditional use as regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code.
Any off-site parking which utilizes public property to meet the requirements of this
code shall be approved by motion of the city council.
(2) Such off-site parking shall comply with all parking standards stated in this code.
(3) Reasonable access from off-site parking facilities to the use served shall exist.
(4) Use of public right-of-way to meet the requirements of this code shall be a
conditional use as regulated by subsection 535.01.
(b) Any use which depends upon off-site parking to meet the requirements of this code shall
maintain the minimum number of required parking spaces or cease operation and use until
such time as there is full compliance with the requirements of this code.
(c) Whenever required parking facilities are on land, a lot or parcel other than the principal
building which is to be served, a properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties
concerned, duly approved as to form and manner of execution by the city attorney, shall be
filed with the city clerk.
(d) Any use which depends upon off-site parking to meet the requirements of this code shall
require a certificate of zoning compliance, renewable annually, as regulated by section
535.07.
Subd. 5 . Within structures. The off-street parking requirements may be furnished by providing a
space so designed within the principal building or one attached thereto as defined herein; however, if
provisions are so made, no building permit shall be issued to convert said space into a dwelling unit or living
area unless other adequate provisions are made to comply with the required off-street parking provisions of
this code.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.17, Subd. 6
Subd. 6. Joint facilities.
(a) Except in the R-1 and R-2 districts and as herein provided, required off-street parking
facilities serving two or more uses may be located on the same lot or in the same structure
provided that the total number of parking spaces furnished shall not be less than the total
sum of the separate requirements for each use.
(b) The city council may, after receiving a report and recommendation from the planning
commission, approve a conditional use permit for one or more businesses to provide the
required off-street parking facilities by joint use of one or more sites where the total number
of spaces provided are less than the sum of the total required for each business should they
provide them separately. When considering a request for such a permit, the planning
commission shall not recommend that such permit be granted nor the council approve such
a permit except when the following conditions are found to exist.
(1) Up to 50% of the parking facilities required for a theatre, bowling alley, dance hall,
bar or restaurant may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by
types of uses specified as primarily daytime uses in paragraph 4 below.
(2) Up to 50% of the off-street parking facilities required for any use specified under
paragraph 4 below as primary daytime uses may be supplied by the parking
facilities provided by the following nighttime or Sunday uses: auditoriums
incidental to a public or parochial school, churches, bowling alleys, dance halls,
theaters, bars or restaurants.
(3) Up to 80 percent of the parking facilities required by this section for a church or for
an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be supplied by the
off-street parking facilities provided by uses specified under paragraph 4 below as
primarily daytime uses.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.17, Subd. 7
(Rev. 2008)
Subd. 7. Number of spaces required. The following minimum areas shall be provided and
maintained by ownership, easement, or lease or combination thereof for and during the life of the respective
uses as hereinafter set forth:
(a) single family, two family, and townhouse sites: two spaces per unit;
(b) multiple family dwellings: one and one-half fee-free spaces per unit;
(c) motels, motor hotels, hotels: one space per each rental unit plus one additional space for
each ten units;
(d) boarding and rooming houses: at least one fee-free parking space for each person for which
accommodations are provided for sleeping;
(e) hospitals: 1.9 spaces per bed;
(f) medical, dental, or hospital out-patient clinics: one space for each 110 square feet of net
floor area or seven and one-half spaces per doctor, whichever number of parking spaces is
greater;
(g) sanitarium, convalescent home, rest home or nursing home: at least one parking space for
each six occupants for which accommodations are offered plus one additional parking
space for each 15 occupants;
(h) senior housing: one-half space per unit; (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
(i) churches, theatres, and other places of public assembly: at least one parking space for each
five seats based upon the design capacity of the main assembly hall;
(j) drive-in establishment and convenience food: at least one parking space per 15 square feet
of gross area excluding kitchen and dining area, or the parking demand required by
subdivision 7(1), or a minimum of eight spaces where there is no interior ordering area,
whichever is greater. (Amended, Ord. No. 93-13)
(k) motor fuel station: at least four off-street parking spaces plus two off-street parking spaces
for each service stall. Those facilities designed for sale of other items than strictly
automotive products, parts or service or both shall be required to provide additional parking
in compliance with other applicable sections of this code;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.17, Subd. 7(l)
(Rev. 2001)
(l) restaurants, cafes, private clubs serving food and drinks, taverns: at least one space for
each four seats based upon design or where there is no design layout, one space for each 30
square feet of gross floor area;
(m) retail sales and service business: one space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area; if
located within the Downtown Architectural Design Guidelines Overlay District, one space
for every 400 square feet of gross floor area. (Amended, Ord. No. 01-07)
(n) warehousing, storage, or industry, or combination thereof: at least one space for every 500
square feet of gross floor area or one space for each employee on the maximum shift,
whichever is greater. Where uses, as outlined in this section, constitute at least 50% of
gross floor area and are combined with retail service uses, parking requirements shall be
calculated through appropriate application of both subdivision 7(m) and (n) of this
subsection;
(o) general office uses in all B zones: one space for every 250 gross square feet;
(p) general office uses in RB zones: one space for every 200 gross square feet;
(q) handicap housing: one-half space per unit;
(r) state licensed residential care facilities: two spaces per dwelling unit, plus one space per
support vehicle, plus one-half space for every support staff of the dwelling on the
maximum shift.
(s) medical centers greater than 100,000 square feet and part of a planned unit development:
the number of spaces shall be determined by independent study based upon existing
procedures used by the Institute of Transportation Engineering (ITE) or equivalent.
Furthermore, a study, paid for by applicant and conducted by a consultant of city's choice,
will be required one year after completion, before additional phases are to be constructed,
to determine if adequate parking needs are met. Any parking shortage identified by the
parking study must be mitigated. After each phase of the planned unit development, the
parking will be evaluated for its efficiency before any further phases of construction are
approved. (Added, Ord. No. 93-13)
Subd. 8. Shared parking.
(a) The city may reduce, by conditional use permit, the amount of off-street parking required
when an off-street parking facility serves two or more individual land uses and when
certain other conditions as set forth in paragraph (b) below are met. In these uses the
parking requirement shall be equal to the combined peak parking demand of the individual
land uses determined by using subsection 510.17, subdivision 7 for number of spaces
required and the following table for the percentage of peak parking demand for various
time periods:
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.17, Subd. 8 (a)(1)
(1) Table II.
Percentage of Parking Occupied as Compared to
Peak Parking Demand for Individual Land Uses,
By Day and Hour of Day
(i) Weekday.
Hour
Res.
Off.
Ret.
Rest.
Theater
Hotel/
Motel
7 90 20 6 — -- 85
8 80 60 15 6 -- 65
9 74 92 31 10 -- 55
10 68 100 52 20 -- 45
11 60 100 65 30 — 35
12 Noon 60 88 74 50 30 30
1 60 92 75 70 60 30
2 60 96 74 60 60 35
3 61 94 72 56 60 35
4 65 76 66 50 60 45
5 78 48 60 70 60 60
6 85 25 62 90 68 70
7 94 8 68 100 78 75
8 96 5 65 100 84 90
9 98 4 44 100 84 95
10 100 2 22 95 84 100
(ii) Saturday.
Hour
Res.
Off.
Ret.
Rest.
Theater
Hotel/
Motel
7 95 4 4 — -- 85
8 88 10 10 3 -- 65
9 80 14 29 5 -- 55
10 74 15 45 8 -- 45
11 72 18 72 10 — 35
12 Noon 71 19 83 30 32 30
1 70 14 94 45 70 30
2 70 10 100 45 70 35
3 74 8 98 45 70 35
4 76 5 90 45 70 45
5 82 4 75 63 70 60
6 88 3 63 88 80 70
7 94 — 60 100 90 75
8 96 -- 54 100 100 90
9 98 -- 40 99 100 95
10 100 -- 37 93 100 100
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.17, Subd. 8(b)
(Rev. 2014)
(b) The following conditions must be met before the city may allow shared parking:
(1) The building or use for which application is being made to utilize the off-street
parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be located within
300 feet of such parking facilities.
(2) The off-street parking facility shall be located in a development of at least two
acres in size or shall accommodate at least 100 cars.
(3) A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties concerned for shared
use of off-street parking facilities, duly approved as to form and manner of
execution by the city attorneys shall be filed with the city clerk and recorded with
the register of deeds, Hennepin county.
(4) The site shall be located in B-3 or B-4 zones.
Subd. 9. Proof of Parking Required: Permitted or conditional uses shall be capable of providing the
number of on-site parking spaces required by Section 510.17, Subd. 7 at any time said parking is needed.
Parking sufficient in quantity to meet the ordinance requirement shall be shown on the official site plan for
which a building permit request is made. However, all such required parking spaces need not be constructed
initially if, to the satisfaction of the City in its sole discretion, it is demonstrated by the owner, based upon
actual demand at similar uses, to be in excess of the initial parking demand. The balance of the required
parking shall be constructed at a later date by the owner when the City in its sole discretion determines it to
be needed. A conditional use permit is required for proof of parking. (Added, Ord. No. 14-04)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.19
510.19. Offstreet loading. Subdivision 1. Design and maintenance.
(a) Location.
(1) All required loading berths shall be off-street and located on the same lot as the
building or use to be served.
(2) A loading berth shall not be located less than 40 feet or two-thirds of the lot width
from the intersection of two public streets.
(3) No loading berth shall be located closer than 50 feet from a residential district
unless within a structure.
(4) Loading berths shall not occupy the front yard setbacks.
(5) Loading berths located at the front or at the side of buildings on a corner lot shall
require a conditional use permit.
(i) loading berths shall not conflict with pedestrian movement.
(ii) loading berths shall not obstruct the view of the public right-of-way from
off-street parking access.
(iii) loading berths shall comply with all other requirements of this section.
(b) Size. Unless otherwise specified in this code, a required loading berth shall be not less than
ten feet in width, 25 feet in length and 14 feet in height, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering
space.
(c) Access. Each required loading berth shall be located with appropriate means of vehicular
access to a street or public alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic.
(d) Surfacing. All loading berths and accessways shall be improved with a durable material to
control the dust and drainage according to a plan approved by the city engineer.
(e) Accessory use. Any space allocated as a loading berth or access drive so as to comply with
the terms of this code shall not be used for the storage of goods, inoperable vehicles or be
included as a part of the space requirements necessary to meet the off-street parking area.
(f) All loading areas shall be screened and landscaped from abutting and surrounding
residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.19, Subd. 2
Subd. 2. Required loading berths. Subdivision 1. Off-street loading. In connection with any
structure which is to be erected or substantially altered and which requires the receipt or distribution of
materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, and which will have a gross floor area of 10,000
square feet or more, there shall be provided off-street loading space on the basis of the minimum
requirements set forth in subdivision 3:
Subd. 3. Table III.
Square Feet of Aggregate Minimum Required
Gross Floor Area Number of Berths
10,000 up to and including 16,000 1
16,000 up to and including 40,000 2
40,000 up to and including 70,000 3
70,000 up to and including 100,000 4
For each additional 40,000 1 additional
Multiple dwellings 10,000 square feet and up 1 berth
510.21. Land reclamation. Subdivision 1. Permit required. Under this code, land reclamation is the
reclaiming of land by depositing of material so as to elevate the grade in which 400 cubic yards or more of
fill is deposited. Land reclamation shall not be interpreted as the depositing of fill from a building
excavation on the same property. Land reclamation shall be permitted by conditional use permit in all
districts as regulated by subsection 535.01.
Subd. 2. Permit requirements. The permit shall include, as a condition thereof, a finished grade
plan which will not adversely affect the adjacent land and as conditions thereof shall regulate the type of fill
permitted, program for rodent control, plan for fire control and general maintenance of the site, controls of
vehicular ingress and egress, and for control of material disbursed from wind or hauling of material to or
from the site.
Subd. 3. Concurrent permits. The restrictions, conditions and requirements of the granting of an
excavation permit, as regulated by section 800 of the city code, shall pertain to and be considered
concurrently with an application for land reclamation conditional use permit and shall be concurrently
granted or denied. In such cases, the application fee for the excavation permit shall be waived.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.23
510.23. Building permits. Subdivision 1. Permit required. No construction shall commence until a
building permit has been issued 'indicating that the existing or proposed structure and the use of the land
comply with this code and all building codes.
Subd. 2. Applications, site plans. All applications for building permits, which will affect the
outside dimensions of a structure, shall be accompanied by three copies of a site plan.
(a) If the site consists of (1) land not a part of a subdivision, (2) land composed of partial lots,
or (3) an existing structure where no survey showing existing structures is available, the site
plan shall be attached to a certificate of survey or a registered land survey showing the
actual dimensions of the lot, lots or parcel to be built upon and any existing structures. The
site plan shall also show dimensions of existing or proposed structures to be erected or
structurally altered or both, their location on the site in relation to the outside boundary, the
required off-street parking plan, proposed and existing grades, which indicate drainage
considerations, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the
enforcement of these regulations. The city may waive the certificate of survey requirement
for minor additions such as stoops, chimneys, and decks provided the addition is well
within the setback requirements.
(b) Site plans submitted for all uses except one and two family dwellings shall contain lighting
and landscape plans, and all site improvements are to be bonded at the rate of one and onehalf
times their estimated cost, guaranteed by cash, letter of credit or bond to the city based
on the city's discretion.
(c) The council may waive the bond requirement, but a performance agreement is then
required from the landowner. The performance agreement shall require the work to be
done within a reasonable time, to be fixed in the agreement, and shall further provide that if
such improvements are not completed within the time specified, the city may enter onto the
property and construct or complete such improvements and assess the cost against the
landowner.
Subd. 3. Construction plans. No building permit will be issued unless sufficient construction plans
or written description of construction, grading, excavating and filling as required by the city to assure
reasonable structural safety and adequacy of building and finished grades for the proposed use have been
submitted and approved.
Subd. 4. New construction. For new construction, other than additions and accessory buildings in
R-1 and R-2 districts, once construction of the foundation has been completed, a certificate of survey
showing the location of the foundation shall be required before the framing of the structure is begun.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.23, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2009)
Subd. 5. Parking lots. All institutional, multiple dwelling, commercial and industrial developments
must obtain a parking lot permit before paving may begin on any parking lot built or added on to, that is not
a part of a building permit. A plan for the parking lot shall be submitted to the city for approval. This plan
shall show the proposed site, structures, access drives, off-street loading spaces, screening, lighting, stacking
spaces, curbing, drainage, striping, landscaping, parking spaces, existing structures within 100 feet of the
site and paving specifications. If the proposed plan meets all city and state requirements, a parking lot
expansion permit shall be issued.
Subd. 6. Expiration. Every permit issued by the city under the provisions of this code shall expire
by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced
within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before such
work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained so to do, and the fee therefore shall be
one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will
be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further that such suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded one year.
510.25. General performance standards. Subdivision 1. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to
establish general development performance standards. These standards are intended and designed to assure
compatibility of uses; to prevent urban blight; deterioration and decay; and to enhance the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of the community.
Subd. 2. Screening and landscaping.
(a) Required screening and landscaping is as follows:
(1) Where landscaping or screening, or both, is required under the provisions of this
ordinance, the person responsible for the proposed actions must submit to the
construction coordinator or city planner, or both, a detailed landscaping plan,
identifying design, size, and type of all planting or screening materials, or both.
(2) Performance bonds.
(i) The city shall be provided with a performance bond, cash escrow,
certificate of deposit, securities, or cash deposit prior to approval of the
landscaping plan or initiation of work on the proposed improvement or
development. Said security shall guaranty conformance and compliance
with the provisions of this section, and where applicable, the conditions of
the conditional use permit. (Amended, Ord. No. 09-03)
(ii) The security shall be in an amount to be determined by the city planner or
construction coordinator, or both, but no less than one and one-half times
nor, more than twice the amount determined by the city planner or
construction coordinator, or both, for completion of the required screening
or landscaping, or both.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.25, Subd. 2 (a)(2)(iii)
(iii) The security shall be in force for at least two growing seasons subsequent
to the completion of the required landscaping and to insure proper planting
and growth.
(3) The screening required herein shall consist of a solid fence or wall constructed
from masonry, brick, wood, or steel, or combination thereof. Such fence or wall
shall not exceed six feet in height or be less than four feet in height. Screening
shall not extend within 15 feet of any street and shall be placed along the property
line or in the case of screening along a street, 15 feet from the street with
landscaping, trees, shrubs, grass, or other planting between the screening and the
boulevard.
(4) Earth mounds, compact evergreen, or dense deciduous hedge five to six feet in
height, together with over and under story trees or other plantings may be required
in addition to or in lieu of screening. Where required, such landscaping shall
consist of the following:
(i) Earth mounds not greater than four feet in height and shall not exceed a
1:1.5 slope.
(ii) Planting materials measuring at the time of planting:
Balled and
Potted/Bare Root* Burlapped
Shade trees 1 3/4 in. dia. 2 in. dia.
Half trees (flowering crab, 6-7 ft. 1 1/2 in.
russian olive, hawthorn, etc.) dia.
Evergreen trees 3-4 ft.
Tall shrubs and hedge 3-4 ft.
material (evergreen or
deciduous)
Low shrubs (evergreen or 18-24 in.
deciduous)
*Mode is dependent upon time of planting season, availability, and site conditions.
Includes both natural (soils, climate, ground water, etc.) and man-made (irrigation,
grading, etc.) influences). Consult the city landscape architect or the city's
qualified representative as to correct procedure.
(5) Trees, shrubs, or ground covers shall meet the standards of the American
association of nurserymen.
(6) Regular maintenance of said landscaping, as dictated by the site conditions (soils,
climate, ground water, etc.) shall be required. Failure of said landscaping to
consistently comply with and meet the intent of this section shall constitute a
violation of this code.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.25, Subd. 2(b)
(Rev. 2004)
(b) General screening and landscaping.
(1) No fence shall exceed six feet in height and in the case of grade separation such as
the division of properties by a retaining wall, the height shall be determined on the
basis of measurement from the average point between the highest and lowest
grades.
(2) Fences located in a front yard may not exceed four feet in height.
(3) All exposed areas surrounding or within a principal or accessory use, including
street boulevards which are not devoted to parking, drives, sidewalks, patios or
other such uses, shall be landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees, or other ornamented
landscape material. Such landscaping shall conform with the planting plan
submitted within the building plans approved by the city, unless subsequent
alterations in the landscaping plan have been approved by the city planner or
construction coordinator, or both.
(4) All outdoor swimming pools shall have fences or walls at least six feet in height
around the perimeter with self-closing gates.
(5) Fence height limits may be increased by the city council for public facilities
requiring additional security or safety measures. (Added, Ord. No. 95-14)
(c) Fences adjacent to property lines. Every fence hereinafter erected within five feet of a
property line shall be erected in the following manner: posts, supporting rails and other
supporting elements, when located to one side of the wire mesh or other screening
materials, shall be located on and face the fence owner's property.
(d) Hazardous fences. No person shall place, construct or maintain or cause to be placed or
constructed any electric fence within the city nor shall any person install or permit to be
installed, any wire or chain-link type fence with the cut or selvage end or the fencing
exposed at the top, when such exposed top is less than six feet above the ground level.
Further, no person shall construct, use or maintain any barb-wire fence on residentially
zoned or used property. On all property zoned other than residential, barb-wire may be
permitted on the top of a fence, provided that no strand of barbed wire is less than six and
one-half feet above the ground level below.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.25, Subd. 2 (e)
(Rev. 1999)
(e) Plantings or other structures/features in streets, alleys, sidewalks, or boulevard easements.
No structures/features, fences, walls, posts, trees, bushes, or any plant life other than grass
shall be placed or replaced, or planted or replanted, in any combination thereof, within any
of the public easements for right-of-way for streets, alleys, sidewalks, and boulevards
within the city unless authorized by a written permit from the city as set forth in Section
800.23 of the city code. Any unauthorized structure/feature, planting, etc. may be deemed
a nuisance and abated as set forth in Section 2020, Subdivision 2-5. The above provisions
shall not prohibit planting or replanting and maintenance of trees in accordance with
Section 820.02 of the city code, nor shall such provisions be deemed to prohibit the
installation or maintenance by the city of any fence, wall, post or other structure on public
right-of-way. (Amended Ordinance No. 04-01)
(f) Visibility at intersections. In addition to the restriction of subsection 510.25, subdivision
2(e), and in order to preserve and promote the public safety, nothing shall be erected,
placed, planted, maintained, or allowed to grow on a corner lot in any district in such a
manner as materially to impede vision between a height of three feet and ten feet above the
centerline grades of the intersection streets in the triangle bounded by the curb lines of such
corner lot and a straight line joining points on such curb lines 35 feet from their
intersection; however, for developments located in Section 521 – Zoning: downtown
district, this curbline dimension may be reduced to 20 feet. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-15)
(g) Visibility at alleys.
(1) Nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, maintained, or allowed to grow on a lot
in any district in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of
three feet and ten feet above the centerline grade of the intersection of any street
and alley or two alleys in the triangle bounded by the property lines of such lot and
a straight line adjoining points on such property lines five feet from their
intersection of the property.
(2) No fence or wall may be installed within 24 inches of an alley right-of-way.
(3) No shrub, tree, or hedge may extend over the alley driving surface, and further, no
shrub, tree or hedge may be planted in the alley right-of-way.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.25, Subd. 2 (h)
(Rev. 1999)
(h) Mechanical equipment screening.
(1) For all zoning districts except R-1 and R-2 districts all mechanical equipment
mounted on a roof shall be physically screened completely or partially as
determined by 510.25 2(h)(3) or (4). For the purpose of this subsection, mechanical
equipment requiring screening includes but is not limited to exposed and/or
protruding fans, grills, pipes, tubes, wires, vents; unfinished metal covering,
exposed rivets, exposed seams. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-16)
(2) Materials used for screening shall include factory prefinished metal, wood
laminated with metal, or other building material in a manner architecturally integral
to the building of buildings on site. The use of wood as a screening material shall
not be considered as being architecturally integral unless the building is constructed
with a wood exterior. All screening materials must be securely fastened to the
structure. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-16) (Amended, Ord. No. 99-16)
(3) Any new construction shall be required to screen all rooftop equipment that is
setback closer than 10 feet to the edge of the rooftop and two feet higher than the
roof parapet on all sides of the building. In some cases the city may allow low
profile equipment to be painted to blend in with background materials and color.
(Added, Ord. No. 99-16)
(4) The city council at their discretion may waive rear and side screening requirements
for existing buildings being substantially renovated for reasons including but not
limited to:
(a) the building consists of a multiple tenant building where the tenant doesn’t
have control over the rest of the buildings;
(b) the screening would lack architectural continuity;
(c) there is screening already provided on the front portion of the building;
and
(d) the property/building is located on a double fronted lot. (Added, Ord. No.
99-16)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.25, Subd. 2 (h)(5)
(Rev. 1999)
(5) All mechanical equipment located on the ground and possessing one or more of the
characteristics listed below in 510.25, subdivision 2(h)(6) shall be physically
screened from public view and adjacent residential land uses with either plant
material approved by the city or factory prefinished metal, wood laminated with
metal, or other building material in a manner architecturally integral to the building
or buildings on site or ground. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-16)
(6) Irregular in size and shape; exposed and/or protruding fans, grills, pipes, tubes,
wires, vents; unfinished metal covering, exposed rivets, exposed seams. (Added,
Ord. No. 95-14; Amended, Ord. No. 99-16)
Subd. 3. Exterior storage. All materials and equipment except as provided for in this section shall
be stored within a building or fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties, except for the
following:
(a) laundry equipment;
(b) recreational equipment and vehicles;
(c) construction and landscaping material currently being used on the premises;
(d) off-street parking of passenger vehicles and trucks not exceeding a gross capacity of 9,000
pounds.
Subd. 4. Refuse.
(a) All waste materials, debris, refuse or garbage shall be subject to section 605 of the code.
(b) Passenger vehicles and trucks in an inoperative state or unlicensed or unregistered, or
combination thereof, shall not be parked or stored in an outside location for a period
exceeding 30 days; inoperative shall mean incapable of movement under their own power
and in need of repairs or junk yard. All exterior storage not included as a permitted
accessory use, a permitted use, or included as part of a conditional use, or otherwise
permitted by provisions of this code shall be considered as refuse.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.25, Subd. 5
Subd. 5. Glare. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area, sign or other structure,
shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining residential zone or from the public streets.
Direct or sky-reflected glare, where from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as combustion
or welding shall not be directed into any adjoining property. The source of lights shall be hooded or
controlled in some manner so as not to light adjacent property. Bare incandescent light bulbs shall not be
permitted in view of adjacent property or public right-of-way. Any light or combination of lights which cast
light on a public street shall not exceed one foot candle meter reading as measured from the center line of
said street. Any light or combination of lights which cast light on residential property shall not exceed 0.4
foot candles meter reading as measured from said property.
Subd. 6. Smoke. The emission of smoke by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by
the state of Minnesota pollution control standards, Minnesota regulation APC 1-15 and as subsequently
expanded, modified or amended.
Subd. 7. Dust and other particulated matter. The emission of dust, fly ash or other particulated
matter by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the state of Minnesota pollution control
standards, Minnesota regulation APC 1-15 and as subsequently expanded, modified or amended.
Subd. 8. Odors. The emission of odorous matter in such quantity as to be offensive, shall not be
permitted. The emission of odor by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the state of
Minnesota pollution control standards, Minnesota regulation APC 1-15 and as subsequently expanded,
modified or amended.
Subd. 9. Noise standards.
(a) These standards describe the limiting levels of sound established on the basis of present
knowledge for the preservation of public health and welfare. These requirements are
consistent with speech, sleep, annoyance, and hearing conservation requirements for
receivers within areas grouped according to land activities by the land use districts herein
described. However, these standards do not, by themselves, identify the limiting levels of
impulsive noise, needed for the preservation of public health and welfare.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.25, Subd. 9(b)
(Rev. 1993)
(b) Table IV.*
Land Use District Day (7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.) Night (10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m.)
L50 L10 L50 L10
Rl, R2, R3, NG 6OdBA 5OdBA 5OdBA 55dBA
RB, BI, B2, B3, B4 65dBA 7OdBA 65dBA 7OdBA
BW 75dBA 8OdBA 75dBA 8OdBA
* L50, L10, dBA are defined in Chapter 7010 of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Air Quality
Division Noise Pollution Control Rules. These definitions are incorporated by reference herein.
(c) Exceptions to standards established in subdivision 9 (a) and (b) above.
(1) noises not directly under the control of the property owner;
(2) noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities between 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m;
(3) the noise of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves;
(4) transient noises of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, airplanes and
railroads.
Subd. 10. Procedures. In order to assure compliance with the performance standards set forth
above, the city council may require the owner or operator of any permitted use to have made such
investigation and tests as may be required to show adherence to the performance standards. Such
investigation and tests as are required to be made shall be carried out by an independent testing organization
as may be agreed upon by all parties concerned, or if there is failure to agree, by such independent testing
organization as may be selected by the council after 30 days notice. The costs incurred in having such
investigations or tests conducted shall be shared equally by the owner or operator and the city, unless the
investigation and tests disclose noncompliance with the performance standards, in which event the entire
investigation or testing cost shall be paid by the owner or operator. The procedure above shall not preclude
the city from making any tests and investigations it finds appropriate to determine compliance with these
performance standards.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.25, Subd. 11
(Rev. 1993)
Subd. 11. (Added, Ord. No. 93-01) Performance standards. All planned unit developments in R-B
districts will be required to adhere to performance standards required of similar uses in this code, but also
subject to additional provisions as provided by the city.
(a) Bufferyards.
The purpose of a bufferyard is to reduce the undesirable impact of a use on a neighboring
property.
Where bufferyard requirements conflict with any other portion of the city ordinance, the
stricter requirements shall apply.
These bufferyard standards may be adjusted by the city through the PUD process to allow
for the overall benefit of the adjacent neighborhood.
(b) Determination of required bufferyard.
Bufferyards shall be required for all new buildings within a residential business planned
unit development (R-B PUD) which are adjacent to an R-1 or R-2 district.
Residential single-family and two family uses within the R-B PUD shall be exempt from
the requirements of bufferyards.
For purposes of this ordinance adjacent shall mean abutting or across a street or right-ofway.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.25, Subd. 11
(Rev. 1993)
(c) Determination of bufferyard width.
When a bufferyard is required, the width of the bufferyard shall be equal to or greater than
2.5 (two and one half) times the height of the proposed new building. This buffer width
shall be measured from the building wall of the proposed dissimilar use. When calculating
this distance, roads shall be considered as follows:
(1) One-half of the width of a local street may be used to meet the required buffer
distance if at least 25 feet of land is owned on both sides of the right-of-way and
can meet the other requirements set forth in this ordinance for bufferyard space. In
all other cases local streets may not be used to meet the required buffer distance.
(2) One half of the width of a collector street may be used to meet the requirements of
the buffer distance.
(3) The entire width of an arterial street may be used to meet the requirements of
buffer distance.
If the proposed dissimilar use causes significant increased traffic, noise, or light
glare to an adjacent residential street or adjacent residential neighborhood,
additional bufferyard width, screening, baffling, landscaping, or noise walls, may
be required to mitigate the effects of the increased impact on the immediate
neighborhood.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.25, Subd. 11(d)
(Rev. 1993)
(d) Where required bufferyard width encompasses city owned land, the city may allow the land
to be used to fulfill the bufferyard requirements. If city-owned land is used to fulfill
bufferyard requirements, the city may require one or more of the following:
(1) A fee equivalent to the amount of landscaping that would otherwise be required
under this ordinance for that portion of land owned by the city.
(2) The equivalent amount of landscaping that would otherwise be required under this
ordinance for that portion of land owned by the city to be installed at a location
deemed appropriate by the city.
(3) An increase in the amount of bufferyard on other areas contiguous to the proposed
bufferyard, up to an amount equal to the area of city-owned land used for
bufferyard. Streets and other rights-of-way may be considered as contiguous
buffer areas.
(e) Reducing bufferyard width requirements.
The bufferyard width requirement may be reduced to a buffer width of two times the
building height if the city council finds that the impact of the proposed use on the
neighborhood is mitigated by one or more of the following:
(1) Architectural designs which break structural mass into neighborhood scale, either
vertically or horizontally.
(2) Building materials and/or colors that are consistent with neighborhood structures.
(3) Roof lines that are consistent with neighborhood roof lines.
(4) Lighting cast at the property line of residential uses does not exceed three foot
candles.
(f) Accessory uses allowed.
Within required bufferyards the following uses shall be allowed; walks, utilities, essential
services, traffic control and regulatory signs, directional and governmental signs, lights,
driveways, and canopies.
(g) Accessory uses prohibited.
Within required bufferyard the following uses shall be specifically prohibited; loading and
parking.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.25, Subd. 11(h)
(Rev. 1993)
(h) Required landscaping.
Where a bufferyard is required, the following minimum landscaping requirements shall
apply for every 100 feet, or fraction thereof, of horizontal length of the elevation of the
proposed building facing the neighboring use.
(1) For buildings 30 feet in height and less, three shade trees and three evergreens.
(2) In addition to (1), for every 10 feet additional building height or fraction thereof one
additional shade tree, one additional evergreen tree and one ornamental tree are
required.
(3) In addition to (1) and (2), for each 1,000 square feet of building above grade (except
for parking structures), 0.2 additional evergreen tree and 0.2 additional ornamental
tree are required.
(4) For parking structures, square footage shall be calculated as one level per 10 feet
above grade. In addition to (1) and (2), for each 1,000 square feet of parking area,
0.2 additional evergreen tree and 0.2 additional ornamental tree are required unless
sufficient light screening as determined by the city council is provided in which
case this requirement may be reduced to 0.1 additional evergreen tree and 0.1
additional ornamental tree.
(i) Required locations for bufferyard landscaping.
Bufferyard landscaping shall be located in yards along and within the outer perimeter of a
lot wherever two dissimilar land uses abut one another. In all instances landscaping and
required screening shall be located to screen the neighboring use in the most effective way.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 510.25, Subd. 11(j)
(Rev. 1993)
(j) Bufferyard plantings.
Plantings in required bufferyards must meet the following minimum standards at time of
planting.
Shade trees 3 inches in diameter
Evergreens 8 feet tall
Ornamentals 1.5 inches in diameter
Plants larger than the required minimum size shown above may be used at the city council's
discretion to reduce the required number of plantings by up to 40%.
Species: All trees used shall be indigenous to the appropriate hardiness zone and physical
characteristics of the site. All deciduous trees proposed to satisfy the requirements of this
ordinance shall be of the long-lived hardwood species.
Walls, berms, and fences may be used to replace 30% of the required number of plantings
if the city council finds that such devices are effective in protecting and maintaining the
residential character of a neighborhood.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01 (Rev. 1999)
Section 515 - Zoning: residential districts
(R-1, R-2, R-3, R-B, townhouse, cooperative
and condominium development)
515.01. R-1, single family residential district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to provide for low density
single family detached residential dwellings and directly related complimentary uses.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in an R-1 district are:
(a) single family detached dwellings;
(b) public parks and playgrounds;
(c) essential services;
(d) licensed day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons with adequate screening from
adjacent uses;
(e) state licensed residential facilities serving six or fewer persons provided all zoning
requirements are met including adequate off-street parking as required by subsection
510.17 and provided there are no other residential facilities within 1,320 feet;
(f) state licensed nonresidential facilities serving 12 or fewer persons with adequate parking
and screening from adjacent uses.
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in an R-1 district are:
(a) private garages and car ports as regulated by subsection 510.11 of this code. (Amended,
Ord. No. 99-05)
(b) off-street parking as regulated by subsection 510.17 of this code, for the following:
(1) licensed and operable passenger cars or trucks not exceeding a gross weight of
9,000 pounds,
(2) licensed and operable recreational vehicles not longer than 30 feet and not higher
than 11 feet, provided that:
(i) an RV may not be parked within 15 feet of a street curb or surface, nor
within a street or alley right-of-way, except for temporary on-street
parking in compliance with this code;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 3(b)(2)(ii)
(Rev. 2016)
(ii) an RV longer than 22 feet may not be parked in a front yard;
(iii) an RV higher than six feet may not be parked within three feet of a side or
rear lot line or in a required side yard except corner side yards;
(iv) an RV over 22 feet long that is parked in a corner side yard must be parked
perpendicular to the side lot line or screened by a six foot high fence or
hedge or other landscaping acceptable to the city; (Amended, Ord. No.
99-05)
(v) the total area devoted to RV storage shall not exceed 300 square feet on
any lot.
(c) home occupations provided that:
(1) all activity related to the home occupation is contained within the principal
structure and not in an accessory building or garage whether it be attached or
detached from the principal structure;
(2) only persons residing on the premises shall be employed in the home occupation;
(3) there are no internal or external alterations or construction features of the structure
not customarily found in dwellings;
(4) no physical products or inventory shall be displayed or sold on the premises except
such that are incidental to the permitted home occupation, such as hair products
sold as part of a haircutting business;
(5) there shall be no separate entrance to the space devoted to such occupations on the
exterior of the dwelling;
(6) there shall be no exterior display, or exterior signs except as allowed in the sign
regulations for the zoning district in which such home occupation is located;
(7) there shall be no exterior storage of equipment or rubbish or waste generated by or
used in the home occupations;
(8) all parking associated with the home occupation shall be in conformance with the
off-street parking standards of the zoning ordinance, and no more than one
commercial vehicle associated with the home occupation is allowed on the site;
(9) examples of permissible home occupations include, but are not limited to the
following: art studio; business by mail; clothing alterations or repair; computer
repair; dressmaking; internet business; professional offices of a clergyman, lawyer,
physician, dentist, architect, engineer or accountant, when located in a dwelling
unit occupied by the same; and teaching with instruction limited to one pupil at a
time;
(10) prohibited home occupations shall not include distribution, manufacturing,
processing or primarily retail or wholesale businesses, warehousing or storage;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 3(c)(11)
(Rev. 2016)
(11) home occupations shall not include distribution, manufacturing, processing or
primarily retail or wholesale businesses, warehousing or storage;
(12) any activity that may cause glare, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odors,
noise, waste management needs exceeding accepted common residential quantities
or other nuisances that may be detrimental to the health, safety or enjoyment of the
public are prohibited.
(Added, Ord. No. 16-06)
(d) non-commercial greenhouses and conservatories;
(e) swimming pools, tennis courts and other recreational facilities which are operated for the
enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their guests. All
swimming pools must be fenced in accordance with subsection 510.11, subdivision 4 of
this code; (Amended, Ord. No. 99-05)
(f) tool houses, sheds and similar accessory buildings for storage of domestic supplies and
non-commercial recreational equipment, provided that the total area of all accessory
structures allowed is in accordance with subsection 510.11 of this code; (Amended, Ord.
No. 99-05)
(g) boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two persons;
(h) signs and bulletin boards as regulated by section 410 of the city code;
(i) solar energy devices that are an integral part of the principal structure;
(j) bingo as an activity related to a civic celebration or by an organization, which conducts four
or fewer bingo occasions in a calendar year, subject to approval of city permit.
(k) satellite dish antennas one meter in diameter or less provided they are not within the front
yard setback and provided the top of the dish is no more than five feet above the peak of the
roof of the principal building upon which the dish is located. (Added, Ord. No. 10-16)
(l) food trucks in city parks during park hours subject to the requirements of Section 520.05
Subd. 3(c) and authorization by city council (Added, Ord. 15-09).
(m) Robbinsdale has opted out of the requirements of Minnesota Statutes 462.3593 related to
temporary Family Health Care Dwellings via city ordinance 16-10. (Added, Ord. No. 16-
10)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2010)
Subd. 4. Conditional use. The uses listed in this subdivision, require conditional use permits based
upon procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code and are the following:
(a) Residential planned unit development as regulated by subsection 530.05 of this code.
(Amended, Ord. No. 97-06)
(b) Private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior high and senior high schools;
colleges or universities; museums; religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples,
and synagogues; and seminaries or monasteries provided that:
(1) any such principal building shall be located 30 feet or more from any other lot in a
residential district;
(2) adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is provided in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(3) adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots directly
abutting or directly across a public street or alley from the principal use in
compliance with subsection 510.17 of this code and that such parking is adequately
screened and landscaped from surrounding and abutting residential uses in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code; (Amended, Ord.
No. 97-06)
(4) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive is provided;
(5) adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and regulated where
applicable by subsection 510.19 of this code;
(6) the site of the principal use and related parking is served by an arterial or collector
street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be generated;
(Amended, Ord. 97-06)
(c) Boarding, house or home boarding -foster children provided that:
(1) the requirements and conditions of the Minnesota department of public welfare,
Public Welfare Manual II 3110 as adopted, amended or changed are satisfactorily
met;
(2) a written indication of preliminary, pending or final license approval from the
regulatory welfare agency is supplied to the city; (Amended, Ord. No. 97-06)
(d) A second accessory structure on a lot if it contains more than 240 square feet of gross floor
area. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-06)
(e) Solar energy devices not an integral part of the principal structure. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-
06)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 4(f)
(Rev. 1997)
(f) Satellite dish antennas exceeding one meter in diameter provided they are located in the rear
yard and screened from public view. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-06; Ord. No. 10-16)
(g) Land reclamation involving 400 cubic yards or more of fill. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-06)
(h) Licensed day-care facility serving more than 12 persons as an accessory use to a church,
provided that:
(1) the lot area is double the minimum established for this district;
(2) side yards are double the minimum requirement established for this district and are
screened in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(3) an off-street drop-off and pick-up location is provided;
(4) the site shall be served by an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to
accommodate traffic which will be generated;
(5) the site shall have an outdoor play area which is adequate in size and in a location
which is not disruptive to adjacent permitted uses and which is fenced and screened
in compliance with subsection 510.25, subd. 2;
(6) the use shall not cause the structure to be in non-compliance with any applicable
fire or building code;
(7) no addition to the facility shall be constructed to accommodate the use;
(8) all provisions of the Minnesota public welfare licensing act, Minnesota Statutes,
sections 245.781 to 245.85, as well as all rules or regulations promulgated by the
Minnesota commissioner of human services related thereto, are met;
(9) a written indication of preliminary, pending or final license approval from the
regulatory welfare agency is supplied to the city. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-06)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 4(i)
(Rev. 2017)
(i) recreational vehicles greater than 30 feet in length provided that:
(1) the lot is a minimum of 50 feet wide;
(2) the RV is positioned and screened in a manner that will minimize the visual impact
on adjacent properties; and
(3) there is complete compliance with subsection 515.01, Subd. 3(b)(2). (Amended,
Ord. No. 97-06, Ord. No. 13-03)
(j) egress window well walls closer than 1.5 feet of a side lot line provided that:
(1) egress window wells shall not obstruct drainage patterns nor cause stormwater to
drain onto adjoining properties.
(2) approval of the City Engineer is required to ensure that drainage is directed away
from the house and does not impact adjacent property. (Added, Ord. No. 10-10,
Sec. 2)
(k) Agriculture provided that:
(1) Tools, equipment and materials related to the use must be stored within an
enclosed structure subject to subsection 510.11.
(2) Non-retail commercial greenhouses are subject to the following yard setbacks:
(a) Front yard depth: not less than 30 feet.
(b) In a block where a lot fronts on a side street next to a lot which has its
side facing the same side street, the setback on each lot shall be 15 feet
from the side street (right-of-way).
(c) Where adjacent structures within the same block have front yard setbacks
different from those required, the front yard minimum setback shall be
the average of the adjacent structures. If there is only one adjacent
structure, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the
required setback and the setback of the adjacent structure. In no case
shall the minimum front yard setback exceed 30 feet.
(d) Side yard width and rear yard depth: 5 feet.
(3) Farm or other animals are prohibited except in accordance with Section 915.
(4) Retail sales are prohibited. (Added, Ord. No. 15-06)
(l) New wireless support structures within the public right of way of the R-1, single family
residential district as long as all the following criteria are met:
(1) No less than 5 feet from the street curb;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 4(l)(2)
(Rev. 2017)
(2) No more than 5 feet from the side lot line extended to the street;
(3) Constructed from durable materials approved by the City Engineer with an earthtone
finish consistent with the character of the neighborhood;
(4) Required application materials shall include a detailed survey provided by a
registered land surveyor showing all existing aerial, surface, and underground utilities within a fifty
(50) foot radius of the proposed wireless support structure to identify possible conflicts with
existing utility infrastructure. The City Engineer shall have the authority to deny the proposed
wireless support structure location in the event of a conflict with existing utility infrastructure is
identified.
(Added, Ord. No. 17-07)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2013)
Subd. 5. Lot requirements and setbacks. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
in an R-1 district subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this and other
sections of this code:
(a) lot area: 6,000 square feet.
(b) lot width: 50 feet.
(c) setbacks:
(1) front yard depth:
(i) not less than 30 feet. However, a one story covered porch may be up 24
feet from the front property line; (Amended, Ord. No. 03-33)
(ii) in a block where a lot fronts on a side street next to a lot which has its side
facing the same side street, the setback on each lot shall be 15 feet from the
side street (right-of--way);
(iii) where adjacent structures within the same block have front yard setbacks
different from those required, the front yard minimum setback shall be the
average of the adjacent structures. If there is only one adjacent structure,
the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the required
setback and the setback of the adjacent structure. In no case shall the
minimum front yard setback exceed 30 feet.
(2) side yard width:
(i) five feet;
(ii) side yards abutting a public right-of-way (street) shall not be less than 15
feet from the right-of-way except in the case of 40 foot lots the side yard
may be reduced to not less than five feet from the right-of-way;
(iii) a side yard that contains a driveway shall be at least 15 feet on houses
constructed after April 2, 1991 or an unobstructed 10 feet on houses
constructed prior to that date. (Amended, Ord. No. 91-03, Sec. 1)
(3) rear yard depth:
(i) 20 percent of lot depth.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 6
(Rev. 2013)
Subd. 6. Building requirements.
(a) Height: No structure shall exceed three stories or 30 feet in height, except as provided in
subsection 510.15, subdivision 1 of this code.
(b) Minimum floor area per dwelling unit:
(1) one bedroom: 720 square feet;
(2) two bedroom: 820 square feet;
(3) three bedroom: 920 square feet;
(4) four bedroom: 1,050 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 6,000 square feet.
515.03. R-2, single and two-family residential district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to provide for
low to medium density one and two unit and townhouse dwellings and directly related complimentary uses.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses: Permitted uses in an R-2 district are:
(a) All permitted uses allowed in an R-1 district except as hereinafter modified;
(b) Townhouse developments for which a conditional use permit was granted prior to August
23, 1986.
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in an R-2 district are:
(a) All accessory uses as allowed in an R-1 district.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.03, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2010)
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The uses listed in this subdivision requires a conditional use permit
based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code and are the following:
(a) All conditional uses subject to the same conditions as allowed in an R-1 district except:
515.01, subdivision 4(b) and as hereinafter modified. (Amended, Ord. No. 10-17)
(b) Nursing homes provided that:
(1) side yards are double the minimum requirement established for this district and are
screened in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(2) the lot area is double the minimum established for this district;
(3) the front yard depth shall be a minimum of 35 feet;
(4) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive is provided;
(5) adequate off-street parking and access is provided in compliance with subsection
510.17 of this code;
(6) adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided in compliance with
subsection 510.19 of this code;
(7) the site and related parking and service shall be served by an arterial or collector
street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be generated;
(8) all signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with the section 410 of the city code and shall not impact surrounding
and abutting residential;
(c) Licensed day care refers to a facility serving more than 12 persons provided that:
(1) side yards are double the minimum requirement established for this district and are
screened in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(2) the lot area is double the minimum established for this district;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.03, Subd. 4 (c)(3)
(Rev. 1996)
(3) only the rear yard shall be used for a play area. It shall be fenced and screened in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(4) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up shall be provided;
(5) the site shall be served by an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to
accommodate traffic which will be generated;
(6) all provisions of the Minnesota public welfare licensing act, Minnesota Statutes,
section 245.781 to 245.85, as amended as well as all rules or regulations
promulgated by the Minnesota commissioner of human services related thereto, are
met;
(7) a written indication of preliminary pending or final license approval from the
regulatory welfare agency is supplied to the city.
(d) Two-family dwellings provided that:
(1) the minimum required lot width and square footage are met;
(2) the driveway is hard surfaced;
(3) the property has adequate off-street parking;
(4) that all garage doors be equipped with automatic door openers operable by remote
control.
(e) Existing two-family dwellings may be converted to condominiums, cooperatives or
townhouses as regulated by subsection 530.05 of this code. (Added, Ord. No. 96-02)
(i) not less than 30 feet;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.03, Subd. 5
(Rev. 1991)
Subd. 5. Lot requirements and setbacks. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
in an R-2 district subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this code:
(a) Lot area: 6,000 square feet, except as otherwise provided in this subsection.
(b) Lot width:
(1) single family dwelling unit: 50 feet, except as otherwise provided in this section;
(2) two-family dwelling unit: 60 feet except as otherwise provided in this section.
(c) Setbacks:
(1) front yard depth:
(ii) in a block where a lot fronts on a side street next to a lot which has its side
facing the same street, the setback on each lot shall be 15 feet from the side
street (right-of-way);
(iii) Where adjacent structures within the same block have front yard setbacks
different from those required, the front yard minimum setback shall be the
average of the adjacent structures. If there is only one adjacent structure,
the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the required
setback and the setback of the adjacent structure. In no case shall the
minimum front yard setback exceed 30 feet.
(2) side yard width:
(i) five feet, except as provided in subsection 515.03, subd. 5(c)(2)(iv) of this
code;
(ii) side yards abutting a public right-of-way shall not be less than 15 feet from
the right-of-way except in the case of 40 foot lots, the side yard may be
reduced to no less than five feet from the right-of-way;
(iii) a side yard that contains a driveway must be at least 15 feet on houses
constructed after April 2, 1991 or an unobstructed ten feet on houses
constructed prior to that date; (Amended, Ord. No. 91-03, Sec. 2)
(iv) in the case of two-family, double bungalow dwellings, zero side yard
setbacks shall be permitted on the common boundary line, if each portion
of the double bungalow sits on its own lot which is at least 40 feet wide
and consists of at least 4,840 square feet. Such zero side yard setbacks are
only permissible when separate sanitary sewer and water service is provide
to each unit of the double bungalow.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.03, Subd. 5(c)(3)
(Rev. 1999)
(3) rear yard depth:
(i) 20% lot depth.
Subd. 6. Building requirements:
(a) Height: No structure shall exceed three stories or 30 feet in height, except as provided in
subsection 510.15, subdivision 1 of this code.
(b) Minimum floor area per dwelling unit:
Single Two
Unit Size Family Unit Family_Unit Townhouse
(1) One bedroom 720 sq. ft. 600 sq. ft. 720 sq. ft.
(2) Two bedroom 820 sq. ft. 800 sq. ft. 820 sq. ft.
(3) Three bedroom 920 sq. ft. 900 sq. ft. 920 sq. ft.
(4) Four bedroom 1050 sq. ft 1000 sq. ft. 1050 sq. ft.
(5) Add 120 square feet for each additional bedroom
(c) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit:
(1) Single family: 6000 sq. ft.
(2) Townhouse: 4200 sq. ft.
(3) Two-family: 3750 sq. ft.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.05
(Rev. 1991)
515.05. R-3, medium density residential district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to provide for medium
density housing in one, two and multiple dwelling unit structures and townhouses and directly related
complimentary uses.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in an R-3 district are:
(a) all permitted uses allowed in an R-2 district except as hereinafter modified;
(b) two-family dwellings.
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in an R-3 district are:
(a) all accessory uses, structures, and buildings pertaining to single and two-family units in the
R-3 zoning district are subject to subsection 510.11 of this code. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-
05)
(b) parking garage and garage structures of adequate size to handle the required parking for the
principal use. The parking requirements shall be satisfied by the combination of garage and
unenclosed spaces; (Added, Ord. No. 99-05)
(c) maintenance, management or recreational buildings incidental to the principal use; (Added,
Ord. No. 99-05)
(d) privately owned recreational facilities including swimming pools and tennis courts,
intended solely for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and
their guests; (Added, Ord. No. 99-05)
(e) accessory uses for tenants provided they are intended for only the residents of the principal
use and their guests and have no advertising or display visible from the outside of the
building. Not more than 10% of the gross floor area of a structure may be devoted to these
accessory uses. (Added, Ord. No. 99-05)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.05, Subd. 4(b
(Rev. 1999)
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The uses listed in this subdivision require a conditional use permit
based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code and are the following:
(a) All conditional uses, subject to the same conditions as allowed in an R-2 district except as
hereinafter modified.
(b) Multiple dwelling units provided that:
(1) there is adequate off-street parking in compliance with subsection 510.17 of this
code;
(2) parking areas are screened and landscaped from abutting and surrounding
residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(3) the site of the principal use and its related parking is served by an arterial or
collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be
generated;
(4) all signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with section 410 of the city code and shall not impact surrounding and
abutting residential uses;
(5) the grades and topography of the site shall not restrict the use of yards and open
space;
(6) each multiple unit dwelling site shall contain at least 300square feet of usable open
space as defined in subsection 505.09, subdivision 110 of this code for each
dwelling unit contained thereon;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.05, Subd. 4(c)
(c) Boarding houses and rooming houses provided that:
(1) there is adequate off-street parking in compliance with subsection 510.17 of this
code;
(2) parking areas contain five or more spaces screened and landscaped from abutting
and surrounding residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision
2 of this code;
(3) the site of the principal use and its related parking is served by an arterial or
collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be
generated;
(4) the grades and topography of the site shall not restrict use of yards and open space;
(d) Senior housing, provided that:
(1) parking areas are screened and landscaped from view of surrounding and abutting
residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(2) the site of the principal use and its related parking is served by an arterial or
collector street;
(3) usable open space as defined in subsection 505.09, subdivision 110 of this code at
a minimum is equal to 20 percent of the gross lot area;
(4) the site of the principal use is served or is located within 400 feet of regular transit
service;
(5) the site of the principal use is within 400 feet of commercial shopping development
or adequate provision for access to such facilities is provided;
(6) the requirements of subsection 505.09, subdivision 40 are satisfied.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.05, Subd. 4 (e)
(Rev. 1997)
(e) Handicap housing provided that:
(1) parking areas are screened and landscaped from view of surrounding and abutting
residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(2) the site of the principal use and its related parking is served by an arterial or
collector street;
(3) usable open space as defined in subsection 505.09, subdivision 110 of this code at
a minimum is equal to 20% of the gross lot area;
(4) the site of the principal use is served or is located within 400 feet of regular transit
service;
(5) the site of the principal use is within 400 feet of commercial shopping development
or adequate provision for access to such facilities is provided;
(6) the housing development is operated in compliance with subsection 505.09,
subdivision 58.
(f) State licensed residential facilities serving seven to 16 persons.
(g) State licensed nonresidential facilities serving 13 to 16 persons.
(h) Telecommunications facilities located on antenna support structures provided they comply
with section 720 of the Robbinsdale city code. (Added, Ord. No. 97-06)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.05, Subd. 5
Subd. 5. Lot requirements and setbacks. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
in an R-3 district subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this and other
sections of this code.
(a) Lot area: 6,000 square feet, except as otherwise provided in this section.
(b) Lot width:
(1) single family dwelling unit: 50 feet;
(2) two-family dwelling unit: 60 feet except as otherwise provided in this subsection;
(3) multi-family or townhouse dwelling unit: 60 feet.
(c) Setbacks:
(1) Front yards:
(i) not less than 30 feet;
(ii) in a block where a lot fronts on a side street next to a lot which has its side
facing the same side street, the setback on each lot shall be 15 feet from the
side street (right-of-way);
(iii) where adjacent structures within the same block have front yard setbacks
different from those required, the front yard minimum set back shall be the
average of the adjacent structures. If there is only one adjacent structure,
the front yard minimum setback shall be the setback of the adjacent
structure. In no case shall the minimum front yard setback exceed 30 feet.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.05, Subd. 5(c)(2)
(2) Side yards:
(i) five feet except as provided in subsection 515.05, subdivision 5(c)(2)(v) of
this code;
(ii) a side yard abutting a public right-of-way (street) shall not be less than 15
feet from the right-of-way except in the case of 40 foot lots, the side yard
may be reduced to not less than five feet from the right-of-way;
(iii) side yards of one and two family dwellings which contain a private
driveway shall be a minimum of ten feet;
(iv) side yards which contain a private driveway for uses other than single or
two family dwellings shall be a minimum of 15 feet if three is one-way
traffic movement and 20 feet if there is two-way traffic movement and
shall be screened and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25,
subdivision 2 of this code;
(v) in the case of two-family, double bungalow dwellings, zero side yard
setbacks shall be permitted on the common boundary line, if each portion
of the double bungalow sits on its own lot which is at least 40 feet wide
and consists of at least 4,840 square feet. Such zero side yard setbacks are
only permissible when separate sanitary sewer and water service is
provided to each unit of the double bungalow.
(3) Rear yards: 20% of lot depth.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.05, Subd. 6
(Rev. 2008)
Subd. 6. Building requirements:
(a) Height: no structure shall exceed three stories or 30 feet in height, whichever is 1ess,
except as provided in subsection 510.15, subdivision 1 of this code.
(b) Minimum floor area per dwelling unit:
TYPE
SINGLE
FAMILY UNIT
TWO FAMILY
UNIT
TOWNHOUSE
UNIT
MULTIFAMILY
UNIT
(1) efficiency apt. 440 sq. ft.
(2) one bedroom 720 sq. ft. 600 sq. ft. 720 sq. ft. 520 sq. ft.
(3) two bedroom 820 sq. ft. 800 sq. ft. 820 sq. ft. 750 sq. ft.
(4) three bedroom 920 sq. ft. 900 sq. ft. 920 sq. ft. 850 sq. ft.
(5) four bedroom 1050 sq. ft. 1000 sq. ft. 1050 sq. ft. 1000 sq. ft.
(6) add 120 sq. ft. for each additional bedroom.
(7) except for senior and handicap housing, efficiency apartments shall not exceed 10% of the total
apartments in a structure. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
(c) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit:
(1) single family: 6000 square feet
(2) townhouse: 4200 square feet
(3) two-family 3750 square feet
(4) multi-family (three
story or less): 1500 square feet
(5) multi-family senior and
handicap housing (three
story or less) 500 square feet
(Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
(d) Usable open space: except for senior and handicap housing, each multiple family dwelling
site shall contain at least 300 square feet of usable open space, as defined in this code, for
each dwelling unit contained thereon. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
Robbinsdale Citz Code (Zoning) 515.07
(Rev. 2011)
515.07. R-B residential-business district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to provide for the transition in
land use from residential to business and to allow for the intermixing of high density residential and office
use. (Amended, Ord. No. 10-18)
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in an R-B district are:
(a) multiple family dwellings;
(b) public and non-profit organizational, recreational and social facilities;
(c) governmentally-owned open parking lots and parking ramps.
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in an R-B district are:
(a) all accessory uses which are allowed in an R-3 district except as hereinafter modified;
(b) off-street parking but not including semi-truck tractors or trailers;
(c) off-street loading.
(d) therapeutic massage services provided in a hospital available only to hospital employees
and patients receiving care provided said services are under the supervision of a physician
at the hospital and in conformance with Section 613 of the City Code. (Added, Ord. No.
11-03)
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The uses listed in this subdivision require a conditional use permit
based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code and are the following:
(a) All those conditional uses, subject to the same conditions as allowed in an R-3 district,
except as hereinafter modified.
(b) One and two-family dwellings and townhouses provided that:
(1) development is compatible with existing and planned use of the area and does not
create conflicts with higher uses or endanger or impair, or both, the residents and
their use of one and two-family dwellings and townhouses;
(2) the grades, topography, drainage or character of the developed lot shall not
unreasonably restrict the amount of usable open space or create a hazard;
(3) a safe and direct access is available to parks and public open space;
(4) the lot requirements and setbacks outlined in subsection 515.05, subdivision 5 of
this code and building requirements outlined in subsection 515.05, subdivision 6 of
this code are satisfactorily met;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 4(c)
(Rev. 2007)
(c) Hospitals, medical offices and clinics, dental offices and clinics, professional offices,
commercial leased offices, counseling or training services, real estate agencies, and funeral
homes and mortuaries provided that: (Amended, Ord. No. 07-06)
(1) the site and related parking and service entrances are served by an arterial or
collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be
generated;
(2) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive and entrance is provided;
(3) adequate off-street parking is provided in compliance with subsection 510.17 of
this code;
(4) adequate off-street loading is provided in compliance with subsection 510.19 of
this code;
(5) vehicular entrances to parking or service areas shall create a minimum of conflict
with through traffic movement;
(6) when abutting an R-1 or R-2 district a buffer area with screening and landscaping
in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code shall be provided;
and (Amended, Ord. No. 07-06)
(7) all signing and information or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with section 410 of the city code and shall not impact surrounding or
abutting residential uses;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 4 (d)
(Rev. 2011)
(d) Retail commercial activity provided that:
(1) merchandise is sold at retail and is directly related to the principal use or is
provided for the comfort and convenience of those using the principal use or
activity;
(2) the retail activity is located within a structure whose principal use is not
commercial sales;
(3) the retail activity shall not occupy more than 15% of the gross floor area of the
building;
(4) no directly or indirectly illuminated sign or sign in excess of ten square feet
identifying the name of the business shall be visible from the outside of the
building;
(5) no signs or posters of any type advertising products for sale shall be visible from
the outside of the building;
(e) Privately owned parking ramps as a principal or accessory use and privately owned open
parking lots as a principal use, provided that:
(1) access is from and onto a collector or arterial street;
(2) entrances and exists create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement;
(3) sufficient magazine space is provided in the structure or on the site to minimize or
eliminate the blocking of traffic in the public right-of-way;
(4) parking spaces and aisle and driveways shall be developed in compliance with
subsection 510.17 of this code and are subject to the review and approval of the
city engineer or city planner, or both.
(5) the location is at least 60 feet from the boundary of an R-1 or R-2 residential
district;
(6) the lot area is double the minimum established for this district;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 4 (e)(7)
(Rev. 2011)
(7) when abutting an R-2 or R-2 district a buffer area with screening and landscaping
in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code shall be provided;
(8) when abutting a residential use which is not related to the parking ramp or open
parking lot, a setback of at least 30 feet shall be provided from the property line
and this area shall be maintained as open space and screening and landscaping shall
be provided in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(9) all signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with subsection 410 of the city code and shall not impact surrounding
or abutting residential uses;
(f) Buildings combining R-B conditional uses and residential uses provided that:
(1) the residential and non-residential uses shall not conflict in any manner;
(2) the residential building standards as outlined in subsection 515.07 of this code are
met;
(g) Buildings in excess of three stories or 40 feet provided that:
(1) the site is capable of accommodating the increased intensity of use;
(2) the increased intensity of use does not cause an increase in traffic volumes beyond
the capacity of the surrounding streets;
(3) public utilities and services are adequate;
(4) except for senior public housing for each additional story over three stories or for
each additional ten feet above 40 feet, front and side yard setback requirements
shall be increased by five feet; (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
(h) Senior housing provided that:
(1) parking areas are screened and landscaped from view of surrounding and abutting
residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(2) the site of the principal use and its related parking is served by an arterial or
collector street;
(3) usable open space as defined in subsection 505.09, subdivision 110 of this code at
a minimum is equal to 20% of the gross lot area;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 4 (h)(4)
(Rev. 2008)
(4) the site of the principal use is served or is located within 400 feet of regular transit
service;
(5) the site of the principal use is within 400 feet of commercial shopping development
or adequate provision for access to such facilities is provided.
(i) Handicap housing provided that:
(1) parking areas are screened and landscaped from view of surrounding and abutting
residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(2) the site of the principal use and its related parking is served by an arterial or
collector street;
(3) usable open space as defined in subsection 505.09, subdivision 110 of this code at
a minimum is equal to 20% of the gross lot area;
(4) the site of the principal use is served or is located within 400 feet of regular transit
service;
(5) the site of the principal use is within 400 feet of commercial shopping development
or adequate provision for access to such facilities is provided;
(6) the housing development is operated in compliance with subsection 510.09,
subdivision 58.
(j) Apartment density bonus: Except for senior housing, a maximum 25 percent reduction in
square feet of lot area per unit as required in subsection 515.07, subdivision 6(c)(1) of this
code based upon the following bonus features and square foot reduction factors.
(Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
Square
Foot
Reduction
(1) Exceptional site design: a deduction up to 150
in site area requirement will be permitted sq. ft.
for exceptional site design. The amount of
that reduction will be recommended by an
architectural review board comprised of
professional architects, city staff, or
both, if a professional board cannot be
assembled. The elements of site design to
be considered towards obtaining maximum
reductions are as noted below:
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 4(j)(i)
(i) separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic;
(ii) development of landscaped berms between areas of conflicting activities
(for example, play areas vs. parking or private parties vs. joint recreational
areas);
(iii) development of dense hedges as screening elements;
(iv) extensive use of large caliper trees and shrubs of both coniferous and
deciduous species to enhance the appearance of buildings and grounds and
to control erosion;
(v) preservation of existing trees and shrubs;
(vi) extensive development of free exterior recreational facilities of both
passive and active nature, in such a manner that such areas are easily
accessible but present no conflict in use for example, walkways,
Structures, tennis courts, pools, waterways, docking facilities;
(vii) site lighting of drives, parking, walks, steps, and other facilities;
(viii) immediate access to public open spaces and provision for maintenance of
that access, for example, school playgrounds, public parks, public beaches;
(ix) properly located screened garbage and refuse storage areas of a permanent
nature, for example, stone, wood, or block;
(x) appropriateness of site elevations and gradients to building: design, land
improvements, drainage and safe, easy circulation by occupants.
(2) Two-thirds of the required fee free parking 150 sq. ft.
is provided underground or within the
principal structure (not including
attached or detached garages).
(3) Type two construction. 150 sq. ft.
(4) Elevator serving each floor. 100 sq. ft.
(5) Transit service available within 300 feet of 75 sq. ft.
entrance, via direct public access.
(6) Indoor or outdoor recreation facilities, or 75 sq. ft.
both, equal to 25 square feet per unit or
750 square feet total, whichever is greater.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 4 (j)(7)
(Rev. 2010)
(7) The provisions of subsection 535.01 of this code are considered and satisfactorily
met.
(k) Residential/business planned unit development. (Added, Ord. No. 93-02)
(l) Hospitality houses accessory to and adjacent to a Level-One Trauma Center hospital
provided that:
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided to serve the guest rooms with a minimum of
one space per room in accordance with the standards of section 510.17 (parking).
(2) Parking areas shall be screened and landscaped from view of surrounding and
abutting residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code.
(3) When abutting an R-1 or R-2 district, a buffer area with screening and landscaping
in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code shall be provided.
(Added, Ord. No. 07-15)
(m) Private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior high and senior high schools;
colleges or universities; museums; religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples,
and synagogues; and seminaries or monasteries provided that: (Added, Ord. No. 10-18)
(1) any such principal building shall be located 30 feet or more from any other lot in
residential district; (Added, Ord. No. 10-18)
(2) adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is provided in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code; (Added, Ord. No.
10-18)
(3) adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots directly
abutting or directly across a public street or alley from the principal use in
compliance with subsection 510.17 of this code and that such parking is adequately
screened and landscaped from surrounding and abutting residential uses in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code; (Added, Ord. No.
10-18)
(4) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive is provided; (Added, Ord. No. 10-18)
(5) adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and regulated where
applicable by subsection 510.19 of this code; (Added, Ord. No. 10-18)
(6) the site of the principal use and related parking is served by an arterial or collector
street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be generated.
(Added, Ord. No. 10-18)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 4(n)
(Rev. 2013)
(n) Art studios where art is produced and displayed provided that:
(1) The site faces or fronts on an arterial or collector street with access approved by the
City Engineer if vehicular access is to an alley;
(2) The site shall have adequate off-street parking based upon one space per 200 gross
square feet and shall be screened in accordance with Section 510.25;
(3) Events or showings shall be concluded by 10 p.m. on weeknights.
(4) Limited display of artwork such as statues may be permitted provided that:
(a) retail sales of artwork is prohibited in front yards;
(b) a plan for exterior display is approved by the Community Development
Coordinator to ensure appropriateness for the character of the
neighborhood;
(5) The Site shall be reviewed after one year for compliance with the conditions.
(Added, Ord. No. 13-05)
(o) Supportive housing with services offering a range of options from independent living,
assisted living and residential hospice provided that:
(1) The site and related parking and service entrances are serviced by an arterial or
collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be
generated;
(2) An off-street rider dropp-off and pick-up drive and entrances is provided which
may be combined with required parking
(3) Adequate off-street parking is provided at a minimum of one half space per
dwelling unit;
(4) When abutting an R-1 or R-2 district a buffer area with screening and landscaping
in compliance with subsection 510.25, Subd. 2 of this code shall be provided;
(5) Rooms dedicated for community, meetings, recreation and/or social activities for
the residents may substitute for required useable open space.
Added Ord. No. 13-07)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2008)
Subd. 5. Lot requirements and setbacks. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
in an R-B district subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this code.
(a) Lot area: 6,000 square feet.
(b) Lot width:
(1) single family dwelling unit: 50 feet;
(2) two-family dwelling unit: 60 feet;
(3) multiple family or townhouse dwelling unit: 60 feet;
(4) other R-B permitted uses: 50 feet;
(5) R-B conditional uses: the least restrictive lot width requirement where the use is
permitted.
(c) Setbacks:
(1) Front yards:
(i) not less than 25 feet;
(ii) in a block where a lot fronts on a side street next to a lot which has its side
facing the same street, the setback on each lot shall be 15 feet from the side
street (right-of-way);
(iii) where adjacent structures within the same block have front yard setbacks
different from those required, the front yard minimum setback shall be the
average of the adjacent structures. If there is only one adjacent structure,
the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the required
setback and the setback of the adjacent structure. In no case shall the
minimum front yard setback exceed 30 feet.
(2) Side yards: 10 feet, except:
(i) a side yard abutting a public right-of-way (street) shall be not less than 15
feet from the right-of-way except in the case of 40 foot lots, the side yard
may be reduced to less than five feet from the right-of-way;
(ii) a side yard which contains a private drive with one-way traffic movement
shall be 15 feet or with two-way traffic movement shall be 20 feet;
(iii) side yard which abuts an R-1 or R-2 district shall be screened and
landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this
code.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 5 (c)(3)
(Rev. 2008)
(3) Rear yard: 20% of lot depth and if abutting an R-1 or R-2 district shall be screened
and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code.
Subd. 6. Building requirements.
(a) Height: No structure shall exceed three stories or 40 feet in height except as provided in
subsections 510.15, subdivision 1 and 515.07, subdivision 4(g) of this code.
(b) Minimum floor area per dwelling unit:
UNIT SIZE
MULTIFAMILY
UNIT
(1) efficiency apt. 440 sq. ft.
(2) one bedroom 520 sq. ft.
(3) two bedroom 750 sq. ft.
(4) three bedroom 850 sq. ft.
(5) four bedroom 1000 sq. ft.
(6) add 120 square feet for each additional bedroom.
(7) Except for senior and handicap housing, efficiency apartments shall not exceed
10% of the total apartments in a structure. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
(c) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit:
(1) Multiple family:
(a) three stories or less: 1500 sq. ft.
(b) four stories: 1400 sq. ft.
(c) five stories: 1300 sq. ft.
(d) six stories: 1200 sq. ft.
(2) Multi-family - senior and handicap housing = 500 square feet. (Amended, Ord.
No. 08-02)
(d) Usable open space: Except for senior and handicap housing, each multiple family dwelling
site shall contain at least 300 square feet of usable open space as defined by this code for
each dwelling unit contained thereon. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.09
(Rev. 2008)
515.09. Townhouse, cooperative, condominium development. Subdivision 1. Purpose and intent. The
purpose of this subsection is to provide for and encourage advances in housing design, changes in types of
dwellings, more flexibility in layout and site planning, and the efficient use and conservation of land and
open space.
Subd. 2. Property control.
(a) In order that the purposes of this subsection may be achieved, the property shall be in single
ownership or under the management and supervision of a central authority or otherwise
subject to such supervisory lease or ownership control as may be necessary to carrry out the
provisions of this code.
(b) Prior to the use or occupancy or sale or execution of contracts for sale of an individual
condominium or cooperative unit, apartment, townhouse, parcel, tract or common area, or
combination thereof, a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or an equivalent
document or a document such as specified by Laws of Minnesota 1963, chapter 457,
section 11 and a set of floor plans such as specified by Laws of Minnesota 1953, chapter
457, section 13 shall be filed with the city, said filing with the city to be made prior to the
filings of said declaration or document or floor plans with the recording officers of
Hennepin County, Minnesota.
(c) Approval of the city shall be secured as to the documents described in paragraph (b) above.
(d) The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or equivalent document shall
specify that deeds, leases or documents of conveyance affecting units, parcel, tracts,
townhouses or apartments shall subject said properties to the terms of said declaration.
(e) The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall provide that an owner's
association or corporation shall be formed and that all owners shall be members of said
association or corporation which shall maintain all properties and common areas in good
repair and which shall assess individual property owners proportionate shares of joint or
common costs. This declaration shall be subject to the review and approval of the city
attorney. The intent of this subsection is to protect the property value of the individual
owner.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.09, Subd. 2(f)
(f) The declaration shall additionally, amongst other things, provide that in the event the
association or corporation fails to maintain properties in accordance with then applicable
rules and regulations of the city or fails to pay taxes or assessments on properties as they
become due and in the event the said incurs any expenses in enforcing its rules and
regulations which said expenses are not immediately reimbursed by the association or
corporation, then the city shall have the right to assess each property its pro rata share of
said expenses.
Such assessments, together with interest thereon and costs of collection, shall be a lien on
each property against which each such assessment is made and, in addition, each such
assessment, together with such interest thereon and such costs of collection thereof, shall
also, be a personal obligation of the person who was the owner of such property at the time
when the assessment became payable.
Subd. 3. Procedures for application, review and approval.
(a) An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed and processed based upon
preocedures established by subsection 535.01 of this code.
(b) Preliminary development plan. The conditional use permit application shall be
accompanied by a preliminary development plan drawn to a scale of not more than 50 feet
per inch, showing the following:
(1) General area-wide development (general outline of the site and surrounding area).
(i) uses;
(ii) zoning;
(iii) streets;
(iv) grades and topography;
(v) densities.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.09, Subd. 3(b)(2)
(2) Specific site plan.
(i) the entire outline, overall dimensions and area of the tract described in the
application;
(ii) the use, zoning and ownership of all adjacent properties within 100 feet of
the tract boundaries including the location of all structures thereon and the
right-of-way width and traveled width of all adjacent public roadways;
(iii) the existing and proposed topography of the tract with contour intervals
not greater than five feet;
(iv) the location, general exterior dimensions, and approximate gross floor
areas of all proposed buildings;
(v) the proposed location, arrangement and number of automobile parking
stalls;
(vi) the location and dimensions of all vehicular entrances, exits and driveways
and their relationship to all existing or proposed public streets;
(vii) the location and dimensions of pedestrian entrances, exits, and walks;
(viii) he general drainage system;
(ix) the location and dimensions of all walls, fences, and plantings designed to
screen the proposed district from adjacent uses;
(x) the types of all ground covers;
(xi) standards for exterior finish, exterior lighting, location and type of exterior
signs, architectural style, and any other variables which will be controlled
in the design of buildings in the development area.
(c) Development schedule. The applicant shall submit a proposed schedule of construction. If
the construction of the proposed townhouses, cooperatives or condominiums is to be in
stages, then the components contained in each stage must be clearly delineated. The
development schedule shall indicate the starting date and completion date of the complete
development plan.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.09, Subd. 3(d)
(d) Review and evaluation criteria. The evaluation of the proposed plan and development shall
include but not be limited to the following criteria:
(1) adequate property control is provided to protect the individual owners' rights and
property values and the public responsibility for maintenance and upkeep;
(2) the interior circulation plan plus access from and onto public right-of-ways does
not create congestion or dangers and is adequate for the safety of the project,
residents, and general public;
(3) a sufficient amount of usable open space is provided;
(4) the arrangement of buildings, structures and accessory uses does not unreasonably
disturb the privacy or property values of the surrounding residential uses;
(5) the architectural design of the project is compatible with the surrounding area;
(6) the drainage and utility system plans submitted to the city engineer for his
conunents and the final drainage and utility plans must have his approval;
(7) the development schedule insures a logical development of the site which will
protect the public interest and conserve land;
(8) minimum lot frontage shall be not less than 20 feet;
(9) dwelling unit and accessory use requirements are in compliance with the zoning
district provisions in which the development is planned;
(e) Council action.
(1) If the council finds that the preliminary development plan meets all of the
requirements, the council shall approve the same as the final development plan and
the applicant's conditional use permit shall be approved and granted.
(2) If the council finds that the preliminary development plan contains conditions that
must be amended, they shall return said application, together with a statement of
the necessary changes and upon receipt of an amended, altered, and changed plan
meeting the requirements of the city council, the council shall approve said plan as
the final development plan and thereupon the applicant shall be eligible to obtain
the necessary building permits.
(3) The final development plan, together with such covenants, deed restrictions,
reservations, controls, or variances as a part thereof, shall become a part of the
official file of the city.
????
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????????????????????????????????????
??????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????????????????? ???????? ?????????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????? ?????? ?????? ???????????? ???????????????? ?????????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????? ??????????
??????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????? ???????? ?????? ???????????? ???????????????? ?????????????????? ???????? ??????????????
?????????????????????????? ???????? ???????? ???????????????????? ?????????????????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????? ??????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????? ?????????????????? ?????????????????????????????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????? ?????? ?????? ???????????? ???????????????? ?????????? ?????????????????? ????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????????????????? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????? ?????????? ?????? ?????????????? ???????? ???????????????????? ???? ???????????? ?????????????? ??????
??????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????? ???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ?????????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????
?????????????? ???? ?????????????? ?????? ???????????? ???????????????????????????? ?????????????? ???????? ???????????????????? ????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????
??
?????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????????? ?????? ???????????? ???????????????????????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ???????? ???????????? ?? ???????????????????? ?????????? ????????
??????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ???????????????????? ?????????????? ???????? ????????????????????
???????????????????? ???????? ???????? ?????? ?????? ???????????????????? ?????????????????? ?????? ?????????????? ???????????????? ?????? ?????? ?????????????????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????? ?????????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ???????? ???????????????????? ?????????? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ?????? ?????????? ??????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????????? ?????????????????????? ???????? ?????? ?????????? ?????????? ????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????????????????? ?????? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ???????????????????????? ?????????????????? ???????? ???????? ???????? ???????????????? ?????? ????????
?????????????????????? ???????? ???????????????? ?????????????????? ?????? ???????????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????????? ?????? ???????????????? ??????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????????????????? ?????????????????? ?????????????????????? ?????????????????? ?????? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ???????????????? ?????? ???? ??????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????
??
?????????? ?????????????????????? ?????????? ???????????????????????? ???????????? ???????? ???????????????? ???????????????????????????? ??????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 3(c)(11)
(Rev. 2016)
(11) home occupations shall not include distribution, manufacturing, processing or
primarily retail or wholesale businesses, warehousing or storage;
(12) any activity that may cause glare, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odors,
noise, waste management needs exceeding accepted common residential quantities
or other nuisances that may be detrimental to the health, safety or enjoyment of the
public are prohibited.
(Added, Ord. No. 16-06)
(d) non-commercial greenhouses and conservatories;
(e) swimming pools, tennis courts and other recreational facilities which are operated for the
enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their guests. All
swimming pools must be fenced in accordance with subsection 510.11, subdivision 4 of
this code; (Amended, Ord. No. 99-05)
(f) tool houses, sheds and similar accessory buildings for storage of domestic supplies and
non-commercial recreational equipment, provided that the total area of all accessory
structures allowed is in accordance with subsection 510.11 of this code; (Amended, Ord.
No. 99-05)
(g) boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two persons;
(h) signs and bulletin boards as regulated by section 410 of the city code;
(i) solar energy devices that are an integral part of the principal structure;
(j) bingo as an activity related to a civic celebration or by an organization, which conducts four
or fewer bingo occasions in a calendar year, subject to approval of city permit.
(k) satellite dish antennas one meter in diameter or less provided they are not within the front
yard setback and provided the top of the dish is no more than five feet above the peak of the
roof of the principal building upon which the dish is located. (Added, Ord. No. 10-16)
(1) food trucks in city parks during park hours; for special events in off-street parking areas for
multiple dwellings of more than 3 units, private and public educational institutions,
colleges, or universities, museums and religious institutions subject to the requirements of
Section 520.05 Subd. 3(c) and authorization by city council (Added, Ord. 15-09; amended,
Ord. 19-05, Sec. 1).
(m) Robbinsdale has opted out of the requirements of Minnesota Statutes 462.3593 related to
temporary Family Health Care Dwellings via city ordinance 16-10. (Added, Ord. No. 16-
10)
???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ????????????????????????????????
?? ????????????????????????
??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????????????? ???????????????? ?????????? ???????????????????????? ?????? ???????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ?????????????? ?????? ?????????? ??????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????? ?????????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ???????? ???????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????????????????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????? ???????? ?????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????? ?????? ?????? ?????????? ??????????????????
?????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????????? ???? ?????????????? ?????????????? ?????? ???????????? ?????????? ???????? ???????????????????? ???????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????????????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ?????????? ???????????????????????? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ?????????????????? ?????? ???????????????????????? ???????? ???????????????? ???????????? ?????????? ?????? ????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ?????????????????????????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ???????? ???????????????????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????? ??????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????
??
???????? ???? ???????????????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????????? ???????????????? ?????? ???????????? ???????????????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????
?? ??
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????????????????????????????????????
?? ????????????????????????
????
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????????????????? ?????????????????? ?????????????????? ???????????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????? ???????????????? ?????? ?????? ???????????????????? ???????? ?????? ???? ????????????????
??????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ?????????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????????? ?????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????? ???????????????????? ?????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ?????????????????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ???????? ???????????????????? ?????????????? ???????????????? ???????????????????? ?????????? ???????????????????? ????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???? ???????????????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????????? ???????????????? ?????? ???????????? ???????????????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????????????????????????????????????
?? ????????????????????????
????
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?? ?????????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????? ?????????????????????? ?????????????? ???????? ?????????????? ???????????? ?????? ???????? ?????? ???????? ?????????? ?????????????? ??????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????
???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????????? ???????????????????? ???????????? ???????????????? ???? ?????????????????? ?????????????? ?????????????????? ?????? ????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????? ?????????? ?????????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????????????? ?????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????? ??????????
?????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????????????????????????? ?? ???????? ?????????? ?????????????????? ???????????? ?????????? ???????? ???????????????????? ?????? ?????????? ???????? ??????????????????
?????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????????????? ?????????????????? ?????? ???????? ???????????? ?????? ???? ?????????????????? ?????????? ?????????????????? ???????????????? ?????????????????????????????? ??????
????????????????????????
??
????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
??
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ????????????????????????????????
?? ????????????????????????
??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????? ???????????? ?????????? ???????????????? ???????????????? ???????????? ?????? ???????? ???????????????? ?????? ???????? ??????????????????
???????????????? ???????? ???????? ???????????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????????????? ?????????????????????? ?? ?????? ?????? ?????????? ???????????? ????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????
??
?????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????????? ???? ?????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????????????????? ???? ?????????????????? ???????????? ?????? ?????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??????????????
???????????????????????? ???????????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????? ?????? ?????? ?????????????????????????? ?????? ?????????? ?????? ??????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ????????????????????????????????
?? ????????????????????????
??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????
????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01 (Rev. 1999)
Section 515 - Zoning: residential districts
(R-1, R-2, R-3, R-B, townhouse, cooperative
and condominium development)
515.01. R-1, single family residential district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to provide for low density
single family detached residential dwellings and directly related complimentary uses.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in an R-1 district are:
(a) single family detached dwellings;
(b) public parks and playgrounds;
(c) essential services;
(d) licensed day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons with adequate screening from
adjacent uses;
(e) state licensed residential facilities serving six or fewer persons provided all zoning
requirements are met including adequate off-street parking as required by subsection
510.17 and provided there are no other residential facilities within 1,320 feet;
(f) state licensed nonresidential facilities serving 12 or fewer persons with adequate parking
and screening from adjacent uses.
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in an R-1 district are:
(a) private garages and car ports as regulated by subsection 510.11 of this code. (Amended,
Ord. No. 99-05)
(b) off-street parking as regulated by subsection 510.17 of this code, for the following:
(1) licensed and operable passenger cars or trucks not exceeding a gross weight of
9,000 pounds,
(2) licensed and operable recreational vehicles not longer than 30 feet and not higher
than 11 feet, provided that:
(i) an RV may not be parked within 15 feet of a street curb or surface, nor
within a street or alley right-of-way, except for temporary on-street
parking in compliance with this code;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 3(b)(2)(ii)
(Rev. 2016)
(ii) an RV longer than 22 feet may not be parked in a front yard;
(iii) an RV higher than six feet may not be parked within three feet of a side or
rear lot line or in a required side yard except corner side yards;
(iv) an RV over 22 feet long that is parked in a corner side yard must be parked
perpendicular to the side lot line or screened by a six foot high fence or
hedge or other landscaping acceptable to the city; (Amended, Ord. No.
99-05)
(v) the total area devoted to RV storage shall not exceed 300 square feet on
any lot.
(c) home occupations provided that:
(1) all activity related to the home occupation is contained within the principal
structure and not in an accessory building or garage whether it be attached or
detached from the principal structure;
(2) only persons residing on the premises shall be employed in the home occupation;
(3) there are no internal or external alterations or construction features of the structure
not customarily found in dwellings;
(4) no physical products or inventory shall be displayed or sold on the premises except
such that are incidental to the permitted home occupation, such as hair products
sold as part of a haircutting business;
(5) there shall be no separate entrance to the space devoted to such occupations on the
exterior of the dwelling;
(6) there shall be no exterior display, or exterior signs except as allowed in the sign
regulations for the zoning district in which such home occupation is located;
(7) there shall be no exterior storage of equipment or rubbish or waste generated by or
used in the home occupations;
(8) all parking associated with the home occupation shall be in conformance with the
off-street parking standards of the zoning ordinance, and no more than one
commercial vehicle associated with the home occupation is allowed on the site;
(9) examples of permissible home occupations include, but are not limited to the
following: art studio; business by mail; clothing alterations or repair; computer
repair; dressmaking; internet business; professional offices of a clergyman, lawyer,
physician, dentist, architect, engineer or accountant, when located in a dwelling
unit occupied by the same; and teaching with instruction limited to one pupil at a
time;
(10) prohibited home occupations shall not include distribution, manufacturing,
processing or primarily retail or wholesale businesses, warehousing or storage;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 3(c)(11)
(Rev. 2016)
(11) home occupations shall not include distribution, manufacturing, processing or
primarily retail or wholesale businesses, warehousing or storage;
(12) any activity that may cause glare, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odors,
noise, waste management needs exceeding accepted common residential quantities
or other nuisances that may be detrimental to the health, safety or enjoyment of the
public are prohibited.
(Added, Ord. No. 16-06)
(d) non-commercial greenhouses and conservatories;
(e) swimming pools, tennis courts and other recreational facilities which are operated for the
enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their guests. All
swimming pools must be fenced in accordance with subsection 510.11, subdivision 4 of
this code; (Amended, Ord. No. 99-05)
(f) tool houses, sheds and similar accessory buildings for storage of domestic supplies and
non-commercial recreational equipment, provided that the total area of all accessory
structures allowed is in accordance with subsection 510.11 of this code; (Amended, Ord.
No. 99-05)
(g) boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two persons;
(h) signs and bulletin boards as regulated by section 410 of the city code;
(i) solar energy devices that are an integral part of the principal structure;
(j) bingo as an activity related to a civic celebration or by an organization, which conducts four
or fewer bingo occasions in a calendar year, subject to approval of city permit.
(k) satellite dish antennas one meter in diameter or less provided they are not within the front
yard setback and provided the top of the dish is no more than five feet above the peak of the
roof of the principal building upon which the dish is located. (Added, Ord. No. 10-16)
(l) food trucks in city parks during park hours subject to the requirements of Section 520.05
Subd. 3(c) and authorization by city council (Added, Ord. 15-09).
(m) Robbinsdale has opted out of the requirements of Minnesota Statutes 462.3593 related to
temporary Family Health Care Dwellings via city ordinance 16-10. (Added, Ord. No. 16-
10)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2010)
Subd. 4. Conditional use. The uses listed in this subdivision, require conditional use permits based
upon procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code and are the following:
(a) Residential planned unit development as regulated by subsection 530.05 of this code.
(Amended, Ord. No. 97-06)
(b) Private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior high and senior high schools;
colleges or universities; museums; religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples,
and synagogues; and seminaries or monasteries provided that:
(1) any such principal building shall be located 30 feet or more from any other lot in a
residential district;
(2) adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is provided in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(3) adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots directly
abutting or directly across a public street or alley from the principal use in
compliance with subsection 510.17 of this code and that such parking is adequately
screened and landscaped from surrounding and abutting residential uses in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code; (Amended, Ord.
No. 97-06)
(4) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive is provided;
(5) adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and regulated where
applicable by subsection 510.19 of this code;
(6) the site of the principal use and related parking is served by an arterial or collector
street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be generated;
(Amended, Ord. 97-06)
(c) Boarding, house or home boarding -foster children provided that:
(1) the requirements and conditions of the Minnesota department of public welfare,
Public Welfare Manual II 3110 as adopted, amended or changed are satisfactorily
met;
(2) a written indication of preliminary, pending or final license approval from the
regulatory welfare agency is supplied to the city; (Amended, Ord. No. 97-06)
(d) A second accessory structure on a lot if it contains more than 240 square feet of gross floor
area. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-06)
(e) Solar energy devices not an integral part of the principal structure. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-
06)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 4(f)
(Rev. 1997)
(f) Satellite dish antennas exceeding one meter in diameter provided they are located in the rear
yard and screened from public view. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-06; Ord. No. 10-16)
(g) Land reclamation involving 400 cubic yards or more of fill. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-06)
(h) Licensed day-care facility serving more than 12 persons as an accessory use to a church,
provided that:
(1) the lot area is double the minimum established for this district;
(2) side yards are double the minimum requirement established for this district and are
screened in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(3) an off-street drop-off and pick-up location is provided;
(4) the site shall be served by an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to
accommodate traffic which will be generated;
(5) the site shall have an outdoor play area which is adequate in size and in a location
which is not disruptive to adjacent permitted uses and which is fenced and screened
in compliance with subsection 510.25, subd. 2;
(6) the use shall not cause the structure to be in non-compliance with any applicable
fire or building code;
(7) no addition to the facility shall be constructed to accommodate the use;
(8) all provisions of the Minnesota public welfare licensing act, Minnesota Statutes,
sections 245.781 to 245.85, as well as all rules or regulations promulgated by the
Minnesota commissioner of human services related thereto, are met;
(9) a written indication of preliminary, pending or final license approval from the
regulatory welfare agency is supplied to the city. (Amended, Ord. No. 97-06)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 4(i)
(Rev. 2017)
(i) recreational vehicles greater than 30 feet in length provided that:
(1) the lot is a minimum of 50 feet wide;
(2) the RV is positioned and screened in a manner that will minimize the visual impact
on adjacent properties; and
(3) there is complete compliance with subsection 515.01, Subd. 3(b)(2). (Amended,
Ord. No. 97-06, Ord. No. 13-03)
(j) egress window well walls closer than 1.5 feet of a side lot line provided that:
(1) egress window wells shall not obstruct drainage patterns nor cause stormwater to
drain onto adjoining properties.
(2) approval of the City Engineer is required to ensure that drainage is directed away
from the house and does not impact adjacent property. (Added, Ord. No. 10-10,
Sec. 2)
(k) Agriculture provided that:
(1) Tools, equipment and materials related to the use must be stored within an
enclosed structure subject to subsection 510.11.
(2) Non-retail commercial greenhouses are subject to the following yard setbacks:
(a) Front yard depth: not less than 30 feet.
(b) In a block where a lot fronts on a side street next to a lot which has its
side facing the same side street, the setback on each lot shall be 15 feet
from the side street (right-of-way).
(c) Where adjacent structures within the same block have front yard setbacks
different from those required, the front yard minimum setback shall be
the average of the adjacent structures. If there is only one adjacent
structure, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the
required setback and the setback of the adjacent structure. In no case
shall the minimum front yard setback exceed 30 feet.
(d) Side yard width and rear yard depth: 5 feet.
(3) Farm or other animals are prohibited except in accordance with Section 915.
(4) Retail sales are prohibited. (Added, Ord. No. 15-06)
(l) New wireless support structures within the public right of way of the R-1, single family
residential district as long as all the following criteria are met:
(1) No less than 5 feet from the street curb;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 4(l)(2)
(Rev. 2017)
(2) No more than 5 feet from the side lot line extended to the street;
(3) Constructed from durable materials approved by the City Engineer with an earthtone
finish consistent with the character of the neighborhood;
(4) Required application materials shall include a detailed survey provided by a
registered land surveyor showing all existing aerial, surface, and underground utilities within a fifty
(50) foot radius of the proposed wireless support structure to identify possible conflicts with
existing utility infrastructure. The City Engineer shall have the authority to deny the proposed
wireless support structure location in the event of a conflict with existing utility infrastructure is
identified.
(Added, Ord. No. 17-07)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2013)
Subd. 5. Lot requirements and setbacks. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
in an R-1 district subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this and other
sections of this code:
(a) lot area: 6,000 square feet.
(b) lot width: 50 feet.
(c) setbacks:
(1) front yard depth:
(i) not less than 30 feet. However, a one story covered porch may be up 24
feet from the front property line; (Amended, Ord. No. 03-33)
(ii) in a block where a lot fronts on a side street next to a lot which has its side
facing the same side street, the setback on each lot shall be 15 feet from the
side street (right-of--way);
(iii) where adjacent structures within the same block have front yard setbacks
different from those required, the front yard minimum setback shall be the
average of the adjacent structures. If there is only one adjacent structure,
the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the required
setback and the setback of the adjacent structure. In no case shall the
minimum front yard setback exceed 30 feet.
(2) side yard width:
(i) five feet;
(ii) side yards abutting a public right-of-way (street) shall not be less than 15
feet from the right-of-way except in the case of 40 foot lots the side yard
may be reduced to not less than five feet from the right-of-way;
(iii) a side yard that contains a driveway shall be at least 15 feet on houses
constructed after April 2, 1991 or an unobstructed 10 feet on houses
constructed prior to that date. (Amended, Ord. No. 91-03, Sec. 1)
(3) rear yard depth:
(i) 20 percent of lot depth.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.01, Subd. 6
(Rev. 2013)
Subd. 6. Building requirements.
(a) Height: No structure shall exceed three stories or 30 feet in height, except as provided in
subsection 510.15, subdivision 1 of this code.
(b) Minimum floor area per dwelling unit:
(1) one bedroom: 720 square feet;
(2) two bedroom: 820 square feet;
(3) three bedroom: 920 square feet;
(4) four bedroom: 1,050 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 6,000 square feet.
515.03. R-2, single and two-family residential district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to provide for
low to medium density one and two unit and townhouse dwellings and directly related complimentary uses.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses: Permitted uses in an R-2 district are:
(a) All permitted uses allowed in an R-1 district except as hereinafter modified;
(b) Townhouse developments for which a conditional use permit was granted prior to August
23, 1986.
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in an R-2 district are:
(a) All accessory uses as allowed in an R-1 district.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.03, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2010)
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The uses listed in this subdivision requires a conditional use permit
based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code and are the following:
(a) All conditional uses subject to the same conditions as allowed in an R-1 district except:
515.01, subdivision 4(b) and as hereinafter modified. (Amended, Ord. No. 10-17)
(b) Nursing homes provided that:
(1) side yards are double the minimum requirement established for this district and are
screened in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(2) the lot area is double the minimum established for this district;
(3) the front yard depth shall be a minimum of 35 feet;
(4) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive is provided;
(5) adequate off-street parking and access is provided in compliance with subsection
510.17 of this code;
(6) adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided in compliance with
subsection 510.19 of this code;
(7) the site and related parking and service shall be served by an arterial or collector
street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be generated;
(8) all signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with the section 410 of the city code and shall not impact surrounding
and abutting residential;
(c) Licensed day care refers to a facility serving more than 12 persons provided that:
(1) side yards are double the minimum requirement established for this district and are
screened in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(2) the lot area is double the minimum established for this district;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.03, Subd. 4 (c)(3)
(Rev. 1996)
(3) only the rear yard shall be used for a play area. It shall be fenced and screened in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(4) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up shall be provided;
(5) the site shall be served by an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to
accommodate traffic which will be generated;
(6) all provisions of the Minnesota public welfare licensing act, Minnesota Statutes,
section 245.781 to 245.85, as amended as well as all rules or regulations
promulgated by the Minnesota commissioner of human services related thereto, are
met;
(7) a written indication of preliminary pending or final license approval from the
regulatory welfare agency is supplied to the city.
(d) Two-family dwellings provided that:
(1) the minimum required lot width and square footage are met;
(2) the driveway is hard surfaced;
(3) the property has adequate off-street parking;
(4) that all garage doors be equipped with automatic door openers operable by remote
control.
(e) Existing two-family dwellings may be converted to condominiums, cooperatives or
townhouses as regulated by subsection 530.05 of this code. (Added, Ord. No. 96-02)
(i) not less than 30 feet;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.03, Subd. 5
(Rev. 1991)
Subd. 5. Lot requirements and setbacks. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
in an R-2 district subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this code:
(a) Lot area: 6,000 square feet, except as otherwise provided in this subsection.
(b) Lot width:
(1) single family dwelling unit: 50 feet, except as otherwise provided in this section;
(2) two-family dwelling unit: 60 feet except as otherwise provided in this section.
(c) Setbacks:
(1) front yard depth:
(ii) in a block where a lot fronts on a side street next to a lot which has its side
facing the same street, the setback on each lot shall be 15 feet from the side
street (right-of-way);
(iii) Where adjacent structures within the same block have front yard setbacks
different from those required, the front yard minimum setback shall be the
average of the adjacent structures. If there is only one adjacent structure,
the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the required
setback and the setback of the adjacent structure. In no case shall the
minimum front yard setback exceed 30 feet.
(2) side yard width:
(i) five feet, except as provided in subsection 515.03, subd. 5(c)(2)(iv) of this
code;
(ii) side yards abutting a public right-of-way shall not be less than 15 feet from
the right-of-way except in the case of 40 foot lots, the side yard may be
reduced to no less than five feet from the right-of-way;
(iii) a side yard that contains a driveway must be at least 15 feet on houses
constructed after April 2, 1991 or an unobstructed ten feet on houses
constructed prior to that date; (Amended, Ord. No. 91-03, Sec. 2)
(iv) in the case of two-family, double bungalow dwellings, zero side yard
setbacks shall be permitted on the common boundary line, if each portion
of the double bungalow sits on its own lot which is at least 40 feet wide
and consists of at least 4,840 square feet. Such zero side yard setbacks are
only permissible when separate sanitary sewer and water service is provide
to each unit of the double bungalow.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.03, Subd. 5(c)(3)
(Rev. 1999)
(3) rear yard depth:
(i) 20% lot depth.
Subd. 6. Building requirements:
(a) Height: No structure shall exceed three stories or 30 feet in height, except as provided in
subsection 510.15, subdivision 1 of this code.
(b) Minimum floor area per dwelling unit:
Single Two
Unit Size Family Unit Family_Unit Townhouse
(1) One bedroom 720 sq. ft. 600 sq. ft. 720 sq. ft.
(2) Two bedroom 820 sq. ft. 800 sq. ft. 820 sq. ft.
(3) Three bedroom 920 sq. ft. 900 sq. ft. 920 sq. ft.
(4) Four bedroom 1050 sq. ft 1000 sq. ft. 1050 sq. ft.
(5) Add 120 square feet for each additional bedroom
(c) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit:
(1) Single family: 6000 sq. ft.
(2) Townhouse: 4200 sq. ft.
(3) Two-family: 3750 sq. ft.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.05
(Rev. 1991)
515.05. R-3, medium density residential district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to provide for medium
density housing in one, two and multiple dwelling unit structures and townhouses and directly related
complimentary uses.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in an R-3 district are:
(a) all permitted uses allowed in an R-2 district except as hereinafter modified;
(b) two-family dwellings.
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in an R-3 district are:
(a) all accessory uses, structures, and buildings pertaining to single and two-family units in the
R-3 zoning district are subject to subsection 510.11 of this code. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-
05)
(b) parking garage and garage structures of adequate size to handle the required parking for the
principal use. The parking requirements shall be satisfied by the combination of garage and
unenclosed spaces; (Added, Ord. No. 99-05)
(c) maintenance, management or recreational buildings incidental to the principal use; (Added,
Ord. No. 99-05)
(d) privately owned recreational facilities including swimming pools and tennis courts,
intended solely for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and
their guests; (Added, Ord. No. 99-05)
(e) accessory uses for tenants provided they are intended for only the residents of the principal
use and their guests and have no advertising or display visible from the outside of the
building. Not more than 10% of the gross floor area of a structure may be devoted to these
accessory uses. (Added, Ord. No. 99-05)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.05, Subd. 4(b
(Rev. 1999)
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The uses listed in this subdivision require a conditional use permit
based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code and are the following:
(a) All conditional uses, subject to the same conditions as allowed in an R-2 district except as
hereinafter modified.
(b) Multiple dwelling units provided that:
(1) there is adequate off-street parking in compliance with subsection 510.17 of this
code;
(2) parking areas are screened and landscaped from abutting and surrounding
residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(3) the site of the principal use and its related parking is served by an arterial or
collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be
generated;
(4) all signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with section 410 of the city code and shall not impact surrounding and
abutting residential uses;
(5) the grades and topography of the site shall not restrict the use of yards and open
space;
(6) each multiple unit dwelling site shall contain at least 300square feet of usable open
space as defined in subsection 505.09, subdivision 110 of this code for each
dwelling unit contained thereon;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.05, Subd. 4(c)
(c) Boarding houses and rooming houses provided that:
(1) there is adequate off-street parking in compliance with subsection 510.17 of this
code;
(2) parking areas contain five or more spaces screened and landscaped from abutting
and surrounding residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision
2 of this code;
(3) the site of the principal use and its related parking is served by an arterial or
collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be
generated;
(4) the grades and topography of the site shall not restrict use of yards and open space;
(d) Senior housing, provided that:
(1) parking areas are screened and landscaped from view of surrounding and abutting
residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(2) the site of the principal use and its related parking is served by an arterial or
collector street;
(3) usable open space as defined in subsection 505.09, subdivision 110 of this code at
a minimum is equal to 20 percent of the gross lot area;
(4) the site of the principal use is served or is located within 400 feet of regular transit
service;
(5) the site of the principal use is within 400 feet of commercial shopping development
or adequate provision for access to such facilities is provided;
(6) the requirements of subsection 505.09, subdivision 40 are satisfied.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.05, Subd. 4 (e)
(Rev. 1997)
(e) Handicap housing provided that:
(1) parking areas are screened and landscaped from view of surrounding and abutting
residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(2) the site of the principal use and its related parking is served by an arterial or
collector street;
(3) usable open space as defined in subsection 505.09, subdivision 110 of this code at
a minimum is equal to 20% of the gross lot area;
(4) the site of the principal use is served or is located within 400 feet of regular transit
service;
(5) the site of the principal use is within 400 feet of commercial shopping development
or adequate provision for access to such facilities is provided;
(6) the housing development is operated in compliance with subsection 505.09,
subdivision 58.
(f) State licensed residential facilities serving seven to 16 persons.
(g) State licensed nonresidential facilities serving 13 to 16 persons.
(h) Telecommunications facilities located on antenna support structures provided they comply
with section 720 of the Robbinsdale city code. (Added, Ord. No. 97-06)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.05, Subd. 5
Subd. 5. Lot requirements and setbacks. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
in an R-3 district subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this and other
sections of this code.
(a) Lot area: 6,000 square feet, except as otherwise provided in this section.
(b) Lot width:
(1) single family dwelling unit: 50 feet;
(2) two-family dwelling unit: 60 feet except as otherwise provided in this subsection;
(3) multi-family or townhouse dwelling unit: 60 feet.
(c) Setbacks:
(1) Front yards:
(i) not less than 30 feet;
(ii) in a block where a lot fronts on a side street next to a lot which has its side
facing the same side street, the setback on each lot shall be 15 feet from the
side street (right-of-way);
(iii) where adjacent structures within the same block have front yard setbacks
different from those required, the front yard minimum set back shall be the
average of the adjacent structures. If there is only one adjacent structure,
the front yard minimum setback shall be the setback of the adjacent
structure. In no case shall the minimum front yard setback exceed 30 feet.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.05, Subd. 5(c)(2)
(2) Side yards:
(i) five feet except as provided in subsection 515.05, subdivision 5(c)(2)(v) of
this code;
(ii) a side yard abutting a public right-of-way (street) shall not be less than 15
feet from the right-of-way except in the case of 40 foot lots, the side yard
may be reduced to not less than five feet from the right-of-way;
(iii) side yards of one and two family dwellings which contain a private
driveway shall be a minimum of ten feet;
(iv) side yards which contain a private driveway for uses other than single or
two family dwellings shall be a minimum of 15 feet if three is one-way
traffic movement and 20 feet if there is two-way traffic movement and
shall be screened and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25,
subdivision 2 of this code;
(v) in the case of two-family, double bungalow dwellings, zero side yard
setbacks shall be permitted on the common boundary line, if each portion
of the double bungalow sits on its own lot which is at least 40 feet wide
and consists of at least 4,840 square feet. Such zero side yard setbacks are
only permissible when separate sanitary sewer and water service is
provided to each unit of the double bungalow.
(3) Rear yards: 20% of lot depth.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.05, Subd. 6
(Rev. 2008)
Subd. 6. Building requirements:
(a) Height: no structure shall exceed three stories or 30 feet in height, whichever is 1ess,
except as provided in subsection 510.15, subdivision 1 of this code.
(b) Minimum floor area per dwelling unit:
TYPE
SINGLE
FAMILY UNIT
TWO FAMILY
UNIT
TOWNHOUSE
UNIT
MULTIFAMILY
UNIT
(1) efficiency apt. 440 sq. ft.
(2) one bedroom 720 sq. ft. 600 sq. ft. 720 sq. ft. 520 sq. ft.
(3) two bedroom 820 sq. ft. 800 sq. ft. 820 sq. ft. 750 sq. ft.
(4) three bedroom 920 sq. ft. 900 sq. ft. 920 sq. ft. 850 sq. ft.
(5) four bedroom 1050 sq. ft. 1000 sq. ft. 1050 sq. ft. 1000 sq. ft.
(6) add 120 sq. ft. for each additional bedroom.
(7) except for senior and handicap housing, efficiency apartments shall not exceed 10% of the total
apartments in a structure. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
(c) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit:
(1) single family: 6000 square feet
(2) townhouse: 4200 square feet
(3) two-family 3750 square feet
(4) multi-family (three
story or less): 1500 square feet
(5) multi-family senior and
handicap housing (three
story or less) 500 square feet
(Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
(d) Usable open space: except for senior and handicap housing, each multiple family dwelling
site shall contain at least 300 square feet of usable open space, as defined in this code, for
each dwelling unit contained thereon. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
Robbinsdale Citz Code (Zoning) 515.07
(Rev. 2011)
515.07. R-B residential-business district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to provide for the transition in
land use from residential to business and to allow for the intermixing of high density residential and office
use. (Amended, Ord. No. 10-18)
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in an R-B district are:
(a) multiple family dwellings;
(b) public and non-profit organizational, recreational and social facilities;
(c) governmentally-owned open parking lots and parking ramps.
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in an R-B district are:
(a) all accessory uses which are allowed in an R-3 district except as hereinafter modified;
(b) off-street parking but not including semi-truck tractors or trailers;
(c) off-street loading.
(d) therapeutic massage services provided in a hospital available only to hospital employees
and patients receiving care provided said services are under the supervision of a physician
at the hospital and in conformance with Section 613 of the City Code. (Added, Ord. No.
11-03)
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The uses listed in this subdivision require a conditional use permit
based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code and are the following:
(a) All those conditional uses, subject to the same conditions as allowed in an R-3 district,
except as hereinafter modified.
(b) One and two-family dwellings and townhouses provided that:
(1) development is compatible with existing and planned use of the area and does not
create conflicts with higher uses or endanger or impair, or both, the residents and
their use of one and two-family dwellings and townhouses;
(2) the grades, topography, drainage or character of the developed lot shall not
unreasonably restrict the amount of usable open space or create a hazard;
(3) a safe and direct access is available to parks and public open space;
(4) the lot requirements and setbacks outlined in subsection 515.05, subdivision 5 of
this code and building requirements outlined in subsection 515.05, subdivision 6 of
this code are satisfactorily met;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 4(c)
(Rev. 2007)
(c) Hospitals, medical offices and clinics, dental offices and clinics, professional offices,
commercial leased offices, counseling or training services, real estate agencies, and funeral
homes and mortuaries provided that: (Amended, Ord. No. 07-06)
(1) the site and related parking and service entrances are served by an arterial or
collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be
generated;
(2) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive and entrance is provided;
(3) adequate off-street parking is provided in compliance with subsection 510.17 of
this code;
(4) adequate off-street loading is provided in compliance with subsection 510.19 of
this code;
(5) vehicular entrances to parking or service areas shall create a minimum of conflict
with through traffic movement;
(6) when abutting an R-1 or R-2 district a buffer area with screening and landscaping
in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code shall be provided;
and (Amended, Ord. No. 07-06)
(7) all signing and information or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with section 410 of the city code and shall not impact surrounding or
abutting residential uses;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 4 (d)
(Rev. 2011)
(d) Retail commercial activity provided that:
(1) merchandise is sold at retail and is directly related to the principal use or is
provided for the comfort and convenience of those using the principal use or
activity;
(2) the retail activity is located within a structure whose principal use is not
commercial sales;
(3) the retail activity shall not occupy more than 15% of the gross floor area of the
building;
(4) no directly or indirectly illuminated sign or sign in excess of ten square feet
identifying the name of the business shall be visible from the outside of the
building;
(5) no signs or posters of any type advertising products for sale shall be visible from
the outside of the building;
(e) Privately owned parking ramps as a principal or accessory use and privately owned open
parking lots as a principal use, provided that:
(1) access is from and onto a collector or arterial street;
(2) entrances and exists create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement;
(3) sufficient magazine space is provided in the structure or on the site to minimize or
eliminate the blocking of traffic in the public right-of-way;
(4) parking spaces and aisle and driveways shall be developed in compliance with
subsection 510.17 of this code and are subject to the review and approval of the
city engineer or city planner, or both.
(5) the location is at least 60 feet from the boundary of an R-1 or R-2 residential
district;
(6) the lot area is double the minimum established for this district;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 4 (e)(7)
(Rev. 2011)
(7) when abutting an R-2 or R-2 district a buffer area with screening and landscaping
in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code shall be provided;
(8) when abutting a residential use which is not related to the parking ramp or open
parking lot, a setback of at least 30 feet shall be provided from the property line
and this area shall be maintained as open space and screening and landscaping shall
be provided in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(9) all signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with subsection 410 of the city code and shall not impact surrounding
or abutting residential uses;
(f) Buildings combining R-B conditional uses and residential uses provided that:
(1) the residential and non-residential uses shall not conflict in any manner;
(2) the residential building standards as outlined in subsection 515.07 of this code are
met;
(g) Buildings in excess of three stories or 40 feet provided that:
(1) the site is capable of accommodating the increased intensity of use;
(2) the increased intensity of use does not cause an increase in traffic volumes beyond
the capacity of the surrounding streets;
(3) public utilities and services are adequate;
(4) except for senior public housing for each additional story over three stories or for
each additional ten feet above 40 feet, front and side yard setback requirements
shall be increased by five feet; (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
(h) Senior housing provided that:
(1) parking areas are screened and landscaped from view of surrounding and abutting
residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(2) the site of the principal use and its related parking is served by an arterial or
collector street;
(3) usable open space as defined in subsection 505.09, subdivision 110 of this code at
a minimum is equal to 20% of the gross lot area;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 4 (h)(4)
(Rev. 2008)
(4) the site of the principal use is served or is located within 400 feet of regular transit
service;
(5) the site of the principal use is within 400 feet of commercial shopping development
or adequate provision for access to such facilities is provided.
(i) Handicap housing provided that:
(1) parking areas are screened and landscaped from view of surrounding and abutting
residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(2) the site of the principal use and its related parking is served by an arterial or
collector street;
(3) usable open space as defined in subsection 505.09, subdivision 110 of this code at
a minimum is equal to 20% of the gross lot area;
(4) the site of the principal use is served or is located within 400 feet of regular transit
service;
(5) the site of the principal use is within 400 feet of commercial shopping development
or adequate provision for access to such facilities is provided;
(6) the housing development is operated in compliance with subsection 510.09,
subdivision 58.
(j) Apartment density bonus: Except for senior housing, a maximum 25 percent reduction in
square feet of lot area per unit as required in subsection 515.07, subdivision 6(c)(1) of this
code based upon the following bonus features and square foot reduction factors.
(Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
Square
Foot
Reduction
(1) Exceptional site design: a deduction up to 150
in site area requirement will be permitted sq. ft.
for exceptional site design. The amount of
that reduction will be recommended by an
architectural review board comprised of
professional architects, city staff, or
both, if a professional board cannot be
assembled. The elements of site design to
be considered towards obtaining maximum
reductions are as noted below:
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 4(j)(i)
(i) separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic;
(ii) development of landscaped berms between areas of conflicting activities
(for example, play areas vs. parking or private parties vs. joint recreational
areas);
(iii) development of dense hedges as screening elements;
(iv) extensive use of large caliper trees and shrubs of both coniferous and
deciduous species to enhance the appearance of buildings and grounds and
to control erosion;
(v) preservation of existing trees and shrubs;
(vi) extensive development of free exterior recreational facilities of both
passive and active nature, in such a manner that such areas are easily
accessible but present no conflict in use for example, walkways,
Structures, tennis courts, pools, waterways, docking facilities;
(vii) site lighting of drives, parking, walks, steps, and other facilities;
(viii) immediate access to public open spaces and provision for maintenance of
that access, for example, school playgrounds, public parks, public beaches;
(ix) properly located screened garbage and refuse storage areas of a permanent
nature, for example, stone, wood, or block;
(x) appropriateness of site elevations and gradients to building: design, land
improvements, drainage and safe, easy circulation by occupants.
(2) Two-thirds of the required fee free parking 150 sq. ft.
is provided underground or within the
principal structure (not including
attached or detached garages).
(3) Type two construction. 150 sq. ft.
(4) Elevator serving each floor. 100 sq. ft.
(5) Transit service available within 300 feet of 75 sq. ft.
entrance, via direct public access.
(6) Indoor or outdoor recreation facilities, or 75 sq. ft.
both, equal to 25 square feet per unit or
750 square feet total, whichever is greater.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 4 (j)(7)
(Rev. 2010)
(7) The provisions of subsection 535.01 of this code are considered and satisfactorily
met.
(k) Residential/business planned unit development. (Added, Ord. No. 93-02)
(l) Hospitality houses accessory to and adjacent to a Level-One Trauma Center hospital
provided that:
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided to serve the guest rooms with a minimum of
one space per room in accordance with the standards of section 510.17 (parking).
(2) Parking areas shall be screened and landscaped from view of surrounding and
abutting residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code.
(3) When abutting an R-1 or R-2 district, a buffer area with screening and landscaping
in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code shall be provided.
(Added, Ord. No. 07-15)
(m) Private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior high and senior high schools;
colleges or universities; museums; religious institutions such as churches, chapels, temples,
and synagogues; and seminaries or monasteries provided that: (Added, Ord. No. 10-18)
(1) any such principal building shall be located 30 feet or more from any other lot in
residential district; (Added, Ord. No. 10-18)
(2) adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is provided in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code; (Added, Ord. No.
10-18)
(3) adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots directly
abutting or directly across a public street or alley from the principal use in
compliance with subsection 510.17 of this code and that such parking is adequately
screened and landscaped from surrounding and abutting residential uses in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code; (Added, Ord. No.
10-18)
(4) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive is provided; (Added, Ord. No. 10-18)
(5) adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and regulated where
applicable by subsection 510.19 of this code; (Added, Ord. No. 10-18)
(6) the site of the principal use and related parking is served by an arterial or collector
street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be generated.
(Added, Ord. No. 10-18)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 4(n)
(Rev. 2013)
(n) Art studios where art is produced and displayed provided that:
(1) The site faces or fronts on an arterial or collector street with access approved by the
City Engineer if vehicular access is to an alley;
(2) The site shall have adequate off-street parking based upon one space per 200 gross
square feet and shall be screened in accordance with Section 510.25;
(3) Events or showings shall be concluded by 10 p.m. on weeknights.
(4) Limited display of artwork such as statues may be permitted provided that:
(a) retail sales of artwork is prohibited in front yards;
(b) a plan for exterior display is approved by the Community Development
Coordinator to ensure appropriateness for the character of the
neighborhood;
(5) The Site shall be reviewed after one year for compliance with the conditions.
(Added, Ord. No. 13-05)
(o) Supportive housing with services offering a range of options from independent living,
assisted living and residential hospice provided that:
(1) The site and related parking and service entrances are serviced by an arterial or
collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be
generated;
(2) An off-street rider dropp-off and pick-up drive and entrances is provided which
may be combined with required parking
(3) Adequate off-street parking is provided at a minimum of one half space per
dwelling unit;
(4) When abutting an R-1 or R-2 district a buffer area with screening and landscaping
in compliance with subsection 510.25, Subd. 2 of this code shall be provided;
(5) Rooms dedicated for community, meetings, recreation and/or social activities for
the residents may substitute for required useable open space.
Added Ord. No. 13-07)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2008)
Subd. 5. Lot requirements and setbacks. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
in an R-B district subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this code.
(a) Lot area: 6,000 square feet.
(b) Lot width:
(1) single family dwelling unit: 50 feet;
(2) two-family dwelling unit: 60 feet;
(3) multiple family or townhouse dwelling unit: 60 feet;
(4) other R-B permitted uses: 50 feet;
(5) R-B conditional uses: the least restrictive lot width requirement where the use is
permitted.
(c) Setbacks:
(1) Front yards:
(i) not less than 25 feet;
(ii) in a block where a lot fronts on a side street next to a lot which has its side
facing the same street, the setback on each lot shall be 15 feet from the side
street (right-of-way);
(iii) where adjacent structures within the same block have front yard setbacks
different from those required, the front yard minimum setback shall be the
average of the adjacent structures. If there is only one adjacent structure,
the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the required
setback and the setback of the adjacent structure. In no case shall the
minimum front yard setback exceed 30 feet.
(2) Side yards: 10 feet, except:
(i) a side yard abutting a public right-of-way (street) shall be not less than 15
feet from the right-of-way except in the case of 40 foot lots, the side yard
may be reduced to less than five feet from the right-of-way;
(ii) a side yard which contains a private drive with one-way traffic movement
shall be 15 feet or with two-way traffic movement shall be 20 feet;
(iii) side yard which abuts an R-1 or R-2 district shall be screened and
landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this
code.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.07, Subd. 5 (c)(3)
(Rev. 2008)
(3) Rear yard: 20% of lot depth and if abutting an R-1 or R-2 district shall be screened
and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code.
Subd. 6. Building requirements.
(a) Height: No structure shall exceed three stories or 40 feet in height except as provided in
subsections 510.15, subdivision 1 and 515.07, subdivision 4(g) of this code.
(b) Minimum floor area per dwelling unit:
UNIT SIZE
MULTIFAMILY
UNIT
(1) efficiency apt. 440 sq. ft.
(2) one bedroom 520 sq. ft.
(3) two bedroom 750 sq. ft.
(4) three bedroom 850 sq. ft.
(5) four bedroom 1000 sq. ft.
(6) add 120 square feet for each additional bedroom.
(7) Except for senior and handicap housing, efficiency apartments shall not exceed
10% of the total apartments in a structure. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
(c) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit:
(1) Multiple family:
(a) three stories or less: 1500 sq. ft.
(b) four stories: 1400 sq. ft.
(c) five stories: 1300 sq. ft.
(d) six stories: 1200 sq. ft.
(2) Multi-family - senior and handicap housing = 500 square feet. (Amended, Ord.
No. 08-02)
(d) Usable open space: Except for senior and handicap housing, each multiple family dwelling
site shall contain at least 300 square feet of usable open space as defined by this code for
each dwelling unit contained thereon. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.09
(Rev. 2008)
515.09. Townhouse, cooperative, condominium development. Subdivision 1. Purpose and intent. The
purpose of this subsection is to provide for and encourage advances in housing design, changes in types of
dwellings, more flexibility in layout and site planning, and the efficient use and conservation of land and
open space.
Subd. 2. Property control.
(a) In order that the purposes of this subsection may be achieved, the property shall be in single
ownership or under the management and supervision of a central authority or otherwise
subject to such supervisory lease or ownership control as may be necessary to carrry out the
provisions of this code.
(b) Prior to the use or occupancy or sale or execution of contracts for sale of an individual
condominium or cooperative unit, apartment, townhouse, parcel, tract or common area, or
combination thereof, a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or an equivalent
document or a document such as specified by Laws of Minnesota 1963, chapter 457,
section 11 and a set of floor plans such as specified by Laws of Minnesota 1953, chapter
457, section 13 shall be filed with the city, said filing with the city to be made prior to the
filings of said declaration or document or floor plans with the recording officers of
Hennepin County, Minnesota.
(c) Approval of the city shall be secured as to the documents described in paragraph (b) above.
(d) The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or equivalent document shall
specify that deeds, leases or documents of conveyance affecting units, parcel, tracts,
townhouses or apartments shall subject said properties to the terms of said declaration.
(e) The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall provide that an owner's
association or corporation shall be formed and that all owners shall be members of said
association or corporation which shall maintain all properties and common areas in good
repair and which shall assess individual property owners proportionate shares of joint or
common costs. This declaration shall be subject to the review and approval of the city
attorney. The intent of this subsection is to protect the property value of the individual
owner.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.09, Subd. 2(f)
(f) The declaration shall additionally, amongst other things, provide that in the event the
association or corporation fails to maintain properties in accordance with then applicable
rules and regulations of the city or fails to pay taxes or assessments on properties as they
become due and in the event the said incurs any expenses in enforcing its rules and
regulations which said expenses are not immediately reimbursed by the association or
corporation, then the city shall have the right to assess each property its pro rata share of
said expenses.
Such assessments, together with interest thereon and costs of collection, shall be a lien on
each property against which each such assessment is made and, in addition, each such
assessment, together with such interest thereon and such costs of collection thereof, shall
also, be a personal obligation of the person who was the owner of such property at the time
when the assessment became payable.
Subd. 3. Procedures for application, review and approval.
(a) An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed and processed based upon
preocedures established by subsection 535.01 of this code.
(b) Preliminary development plan. The conditional use permit application shall be
accompanied by a preliminary development plan drawn to a scale of not more than 50 feet
per inch, showing the following:
(1) General area-wide development (general outline of the site and surrounding area).
(i) uses;
(ii) zoning;
(iii) streets;
(iv) grades and topography;
(v) densities.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.09, Subd. 3(b)(2)
(2) Specific site plan.
(i) the entire outline, overall dimensions and area of the tract described in the
application;
(ii) the use, zoning and ownership of all adjacent properties within 100 feet of
the tract boundaries including the location of all structures thereon and the
right-of-way width and traveled width of all adjacent public roadways;
(iii) the existing and proposed topography of the tract with contour intervals
not greater than five feet;
(iv) the location, general exterior dimensions, and approximate gross floor
areas of all proposed buildings;
(v) the proposed location, arrangement and number of automobile parking
stalls;
(vi) the location and dimensions of all vehicular entrances, exits and driveways
and their relationship to all existing or proposed public streets;
(vii) the location and dimensions of pedestrian entrances, exits, and walks;
(viii) he general drainage system;
(ix) the location and dimensions of all walls, fences, and plantings designed to
screen the proposed district from adjacent uses;
(x) the types of all ground covers;
(xi) standards for exterior finish, exterior lighting, location and type of exterior
signs, architectural style, and any other variables which will be controlled
in the design of buildings in the development area.
(c) Development schedule. The applicant shall submit a proposed schedule of construction. If
the construction of the proposed townhouses, cooperatives or condominiums is to be in
stages, then the components contained in each stage must be clearly delineated. The
development schedule shall indicate the starting date and completion date of the complete
development plan.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 515.09, Subd. 3(d)
(d) Review and evaluation criteria. The evaluation of the proposed plan and development shall
include but not be limited to the following criteria:
(1) adequate property control is provided to protect the individual owners' rights and
property values and the public responsibility for maintenance and upkeep;
(2) the interior circulation plan plus access from and onto public right-of-ways does
not create congestion or dangers and is adequate for the safety of the project,
residents, and general public;
(3) a sufficient amount of usable open space is provided;
(4) the arrangement of buildings, structures and accessory uses does not unreasonably
disturb the privacy or property values of the surrounding residential uses;
(5) the architectural design of the project is compatible with the surrounding area;
(6) the drainage and utility system plans submitted to the city engineer for his
conunents and the final drainage and utility plans must have his approval;
(7) the development schedule insures a logical development of the site which will
protect the public interest and conserve land;
(8) minimum lot frontage shall be not less than 20 feet;
(9) dwelling unit and accessory use requirements are in compliance with the zoning
district provisions in which the development is planned;
(e) Council action.
(1) If the council finds that the preliminary development plan meets all of the
requirements, the council shall approve the same as the final development plan and
the applicant's conditional use permit shall be approved and granted.
(2) If the council finds that the preliminary development plan contains conditions that
must be amended, they shall return said application, together with a statement of
the necessary changes and upon receipt of an amended, altered, and changed plan
meeting the requirements of the city council, the council shall approve said plan as
the final development plan and thereupon the applicant shall be eligible to obtain
the necessary building permits.
(3) The final development plan, together with such covenants, deed restrictions,
reservations, controls, or variances as a part thereof, shall become a part of the
official file of the city.

Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 517.01 (Rev. 2000)
Section 517 - P Zoning district regulations
(Added, Ord. No. 97-06, Sec. 1)
517.01. P, Public facilities district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to provide for public buildings,
facilities, land areas, waterways and water areas which are owned, controlled, regulated, used or proposed to
be used by the city of Robbinsdale or other governmental body. The district will also provide for
telecommunications towers and facilities.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in P districts:
(a) Public parks, playgrounds, and athletic fields. (Amended, Ord. No. 00-08)
(b) Municipal utilities including water storage, storm water ponding, treatment and sewer,
water and pumping facilities. (Amended, Ord. No. 00-08)
(c) Municipal buildings and structures, provided there is adequate screening from adjacent
uses. (Amended, Ord. No. 00-08)
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. The following are accessory uses in P districts:
(a) Telecommunications facilities on an antennae support structure provided they comply with
section 720 of the city code.
(b) Solar energy devices as an integral part of the principal structure.
(c) Off-street parking and loading as provided for by sections 510.17 and 510.19, but not
including park and ride or parking ramps. (Added, Ord. No. 00-08)
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The following are uses permitted with a conditional use permit in P
districts:
(a) Non-municipal public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or
community centers; public educational institutions limited to K-12 school, colleges or
universities; and museums provided that: (Amended, Ord. No. 00-08)
(1) any such principal building shall be located 30 feet or more from any other lot in a
residential district;
(2) adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is provided in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 517.01, Subd. 4(a)(3)
(Rev. 2012)
(3) adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots directly
abutting or directly across a public street or alley from the principal use in
compliance with subsection 510.17 of this code and that such parking is adequately
screened and landscaped from surrounding and abutting residential uses in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(4) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive is provided;
(5) adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and regulated where
applicable by subsection 510.19 of this code;
(6) the site of the principal use and related parking is served by an arterial or collector
street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be generated;
(7) there is no outside storage of any materials or equipment unless allowed by
conditional use; (Added, Ord. No. 00-08)
(8) not more than 120% of required parking for principal use unless allowed by
conditional use. (Added, Ord. No. 00-08)
(b) Use of a public school facility for any of the following uses: (Amended, Ord. No. 12-11)
(1) administrative offices by any public or nonprofit organization; counseling or
training services; community education instruction; instruction in music, art, dance,
language, self-improvement or business vocation; or places of assembly such as
religious institutions or community group productions, provided that: (Amended,
Ord. No. 00-08, Ord. No. 12-11)
(i) the facility has adequate parking to accommodate demand in conformance
with Section 510.17, taking into account the days and hours of operation
and the parking needs of other users of the facility; (Amended, Ord.
No. 12-11)
(ii) off-site impacts due to noise, light, odor, vibration or other similar matters
will not be disruptive to nearby permitted uses;
(iii) the use shall not cause the structure to be in non-compliance with any
applicable fire or building code;
(iv) no addition to the facility shall be constructed to accommodate the use.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 517.01, Subd. 4(b)(2)
(Rev. 2000)
(2) licensed day care facilities serving more than 12 persons at one time, provided that:
(Amended, Ord. No. 00-08)
(i) all provisions of the Minnesota public welfare licensing act, Minnesota
Statutes, sections 245.781 to 245.85, as well as all rules or regulations
related thereto, promulgated by the Minnesota commissioner of human
services are met;
(ii) a written indication of preliminary, pending or final license approval from
the regulatory welfare agency is supplied to the city;
(iii) an off-street drop-off and pick-up location is provided;
(iv) the site shall have an outdoor play area which is adequate in size and in a
location which is not disruptive to adjacent permitted uses;
(v) the use shall not cause the structure to be in non-compliance with any
applicable fire or building code;
(vi) no addition to the facility shall be constructed to accommodate the use.
(3) Office, processing, assembly or manufacturing for small for-profit businesses, not
including retail sales, provided that:
(i) no business shall occupy more than 2,000 square feet of space and the total
space occupied by all small businesses shall not exceed 20% of the gross
floor area of the facility;
(ii) hours of operation shall be limited to not longer than 6:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday;
(iii) there shall be no use of semi-trucks in connection with the business;
(Amended, Ord. No. 00-08)
(iv) the facility shall have adequate parking without the need to expand the
existing parking area;
(v) there shall be no noise, dust, odor, sound, vibration, or other environment
effect caused by the business which is disruptive to adjacent permitted
uses;
(vi) the use shall not cause the structure to be in non-compliance with any
applicable fire or building code;
(vii) no addition to the facility shall be constructed to accommodate the use.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 517.01, Subd. 4(c)
(Rev. 2000)
(c) Utility company transformers, pumping stations and substations subject to the following
minimum requirements; (Amended, Ord. No. 00-08)
(1) They must conform to neighborhood setbacks, open spaces and design;
(2) They must be screened from adjacent districts by solid fencing or appropriate
landscaping as approved by the zoning administrator;
(d) Wind generators and other tower mounted energy devices exceeding a height of 20 feet
above the structure roof.
(e) Solar energy devices NOT an integral part of the principal structure.
(f) Telecommunications tower provided that:
(1) the tower conforms with section 720 of the city code.
(2) it is determined that tower will not unreasonably adversely impact a unique
recreational area.
(3) it is determined that tower will not unreasonably adversely impact an identified
economic development area.
(g) Off-street parking in excess of 125% of the minimum specified in subdivision 517.07.
(Added, Ord. No. 00-08)
(h) Open or outdoor storage accessory to permitted or conditional uses provided it complies
with the standards set forth in section 520.05, subdivision 4(e). (Added, Ord. No. 00-08)
Subd. 5. Additional restrictions. For uses, other than permitted uses, requirements as to lot size,
setbacks, building, parking, landscaping, screening, etc., shall be at least comparable to similar uses in other
districts, but also subject to additional provisions as provided by the city.
Subd. 6. Uses excluded. Any use allowed or excluded in any other district unless specifically
allowed under permitted uses of this district is excluded in P districts.
517.03. Lot requirements and setbacks. All lot requirements and setbacks for permitted and conditional
uses in this district shall be comparable to other similar uses that are allowed in other districts as determined
by the city. (Amended, Ord. No. 00-08)
517.05. Building requirements. All building requirements for permitted and conditional uses in this district
shall be comparable to other similar uses that are allowed in other districts as determined by the city.
(Amended, Ord. No. 00-08)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 517.07
(Rev. 2000)
517.07. Parking requirements. All parking requirements for permitted and conditional uses in this district
shall be comparable to other similar uses that are allowed in other districts as determined by the city.
(Amended, Ord. No. 00-08)
517.09. Landscape requirements. All landscape requirements for permitted and conditional uses in this
district shall be comparable to other similar uses that are allowed in other districts as determined by the city.
(Amended, Ord. No. 00-08)
517.11. Performance standards. All performance standards for permitted and conditional uses in this
district shall be comparable to other similar uses that are allowed in other districts as determined by the city.
(Amended, Ord. No. 00-08)
517.13. Tower and telecommunications facilities requirements. All telecommunications facilities shall
comply with section 720 of the city code.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.01
(Rev. 2007)
Section 520 - Zoning: commercial districts
520.01. B-1, Neighborhood commercial district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to provide for the
establishment of local centers for convenient, limited retail or services outlets not larger than 5,000 square
feet of gross floor area, which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are furnished.
These centers are to provide services and goods only for the surrounding neighborhoods and are not
intended to draw customers from the entire community.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in B-1 districts provided they are less
than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area:
(a) barbershops;
(b) beauty parlors;
(c) drug stores;
(d) essential services;
(e) grocery stores;
(f) marine tropical fish sales and service;
(g) medical and general office excluding counseling or training services, less than 2,000 square
feet. (Added, Ord. No. 01-02; Ord. No. 07-06)
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in a B-1 district are:
(a) commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal use but
such use shall not exceed 30% of the floor space or require over 30% of the gross man
hours required to conduct the principal use;
(b) off-street parking as regulated by subsection 510.17 of this code;
(c) off-street loading as regulated by subsection 510.19 of this code;
(d) signs as regulated by section 410 of the city code;
(e) interior storage of merchandise solely intended to be retailed by the principal use;
(f) solar energy devices that are an integral part of the principal structure;
(g) bingo as an activity related to a civic celebration or by an organization which conducts four
or fewer bingo occasions in a calendar year, subject to approval of city permit.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.01, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2011)
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The uses described in this subdivision require a conditional use permit
based on procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code and are the following:
(a) (Amended, Ord. No. 97-06; Deleted, Ord. No. 11-07)
(b) General and medical offices excluding counseling or training services greater than 2,000
square feet but less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area provided that: (Amended,
Ord. No. 07-06)
(1) the services which are provided are for the local area rather than the community or
region;
(2) the traffic generated will not raise traffic volumes beyond the capacity of the
surrounding streets; and (Amended, Ord. No. 07-06)
(3) the architectural appearance of the building housing the office use shall reflect the
building character of the area and shall not be so dissimilar as to cause impairment
of property values or to constitute a blighting influence within the neighborhood.
(Amended, Ord. No. 01-02)
(c) Sales and installation of mobile electronics and accessories provided that:
(1) conformity with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks
are met;
(2) equipment and materials are completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no
outside storage and the architectural appearance of the structure housing the use
shall reflect the building character of the area and shall not be so dissimilar as to
cause impairment of property values or constitute blighting influence within the
neighborhood;
(3) the traffic generated will not increase traffic volumes beyond the traffic capacity of
surrounding streets;
(4) adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in
accordance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code.
(d) Grocery stores larger than 2,000 square feet but less than 5,000 square feet provided that:
(1) the property is a corner lot;
(2) all signs and lighting be subject to city approval.
(e) Buildings combining residential and permitted or conditional nonresidential uses allowed in
this district provided that:
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.01, Subd. 4 (e)(1)
(Rev. 2018)
(1) residential and nonresidential uses shall be in separate rooms and clearly defined
spaces;
(2) the residential and nonresidential uses shall not conflict in any manner.
(3) the residential building standards as outlined in subsection 515.07 of this code are
met.
(f) Retail sale of limited paperback book; new and used vinyl records; second hand, used or
consignment wearing apparel, accessories, costume jewelry, shoes, boots, furniture; and
antique sales provided that: (Amended, Ord. No. 18-08)
(1) the retail area be no larger than 1,500 gross square feet;
(2) there is no outside storage;
(3) adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in
accordance with subsection 515.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(4) all parking areas be hard surfaced and have six inch high poured concrete curb and
gutter installed around the perimeter;
(5) There is conformance with licensing requirements under Section 1135.05. (Added,
Ord. No. 18-08)
(g) On-site retail dry cleaning and shoe repair provided that:
(1) the dry cleaning and shoe repair operation be no larger than 1,800 gross square
feet;
(2) there is no outside storage;
(3) adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in
accordance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(4) all parking areas be hard surfaced and have six inch high poured concrete curb and
gutter installed around the perimeter.
(h) Off-site parking which uses private property to meet the parking requirements of this code.
(i) Use of public right-of-way to meet the parking requirements of this code.
(j) Wind generators and other tower mounted energy devices.
(k) Solar energy devices not an integral part of the principal structure.
(1) Satellite antennas provided they are located in the rear yard and screened from public view.
(m) Land reclamation involving 400 cubic yards or more of fill per section 510.21. (Amended,
Ord. No. 01-02)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.01, Subd. 4(n)
(Rev. 2002)
(n) Coffee house provided that:
(1) the coffee house operation be no larger than 1,500 gross square feet;
(2) there is no outside storage;
(3) adequate screening from residential uses and landscaping is provided in accordance
with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(4) all parking areas be hard surfaced and have six inch high poured concrete curb and
gutter installed around the perimeter;
(5) that any live entertainment be licensed per section 1100.07, that said entertainment
not use any amplification device of any kind or be audible at the property line;
(6) that there be no amusement devices; and
(7) that the hours of operation not be before 6:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. (Added,
Ord. No. 97-17)
(o) (Added, Ord. No. 02-01, Sec. 1) Townhouse, cooperative, condominium development per
section 515.09, provided that:
(1) the development is compatible with existing and planned use of the area and
conflicts are not created between commercial and residential use and activities;
(2) the development is located adjacent to mass transit service.
Subd. 5. Additional restrictions. For uses other than principal uses, requirements as to lot size,
setbacks, building, parking, landscaping, screening, etc., shall be at least comparable to similar uses in other
districts, but also subject to additional provisions as provided by the city.
Subd. 6. Lot and setback requirements. The following minimum requirements shall be observed in
a B-1 district subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this code.
(a) Lot area: 6,000 square feet. Lot area may be reduced to 1,500 square feet per unit for
townhouse, cooperative and condominium development if it is located adjacent to mass
transit service. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-01, Sec. 2)
(b) Lot width: 50 feet. Lot width may be reduced for townhouse, cooperative and
condominium development to 20 feet per section 515.09, subdivision 3(d)(8) if adjacent to
mass transit service. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-01, Sec. 2)
(c) Setbacks:
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.01, Subd. 6(c)(1)
(Rev. 2002)
(1) Front yards:
(i) not less than 10 feet; (Amended, Ord. No. 01-02)
(ii) in a block where a lot fronts on a side street next to a block which has its
side facing the same side street, the setback on each lot shall be 15 feet
from the side street (right-of-way).
(2) Side yards:
(i) five feet;
(ii) side yards abutting a public right-of-way (street) shall not be less than 15
feet from the right-of-way;
(iii) a side yard that contains a driveway shall be at least 15 feet if there is oneway
traffic movement or at least 20 feet if there is two-way traffic
movement;
(iv) a side yard that directly abuts a residential use or residential district shall
be increased five additional feet over the minimum stated above and shall
be screened and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25,
subdivision 2 of this code.
(v) rear yards: 20% of lot depth and if abutting a residential district, shall be
increased five feet and shall be screened and landscaped in compliance
with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code.
Subd. 7. Building requirements.
(a) Height. No structure shall exceed two stories or 25 feet except as provided in subsection
510.15, subdivision 1 of this code. Height may be increased to three stories or 30 feet for
townhouse, cooperative, or condominium development adjacent to mass transit service.
(Amended, Ord. No. 02-01, Sec. 3)
(b) Exterior materials. The type of building materials used on exterior walls shall be modular
brick, natural stone, and/or portland cement stucco. Accent materials may be tile, stone,
metal and/or wood. The city council may waive these exterior material requirements for
townhouse, cooperative and condominium development provided:
(1) the exterior materials are maintenance free and contain ornamental patterns;
(2) the development contains other architectural features (i.e. ornamental columns,
unique roof lines, special exterior spaces such as porches and decks). (Amended,
Ord. No. 02-01, Sec. 3)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.01, Subd. 8
(Rev. 2002)
Subd. 8. Parking requirements.
(a) Reduction of parking. Reduction of parking stalls may be allowed when the provision of
space required for parking stalls, due to the particular nature of the proposed use or other
considerations, would be an unnecessary hardship. Adequate open space shall be provided
to satisfy the total number of required parking stalls.
(b) Waiver of parking design, driveway and setback requirements. The city council may waive
some of the design, driveway, and setback requirements for parking areas of six or less
spaces which are affiliated with a townhouse, cooperative, or condominium development
adjacent to mass transit service. (Added, Ord. No. 02-01, Sec. 4)
(c) Additional parking. When the provisions for parking space required for specific district
uses is inadequate the city may require that additional off-street parking be provided.
(d) Parking ratio. At least one off-street parking space shall be provided for each 200 square
feet of gross floor area in the B-1 district, except: (Amended, Ord. No. 01-02)
(1) at least one off-street parking space shall be provided for each five seats for all
theaters, churches, lodges, and other assembly facilities;
(2) at least one off-street parking space shall be provided for each 250 square feet of
gross floor area for general office use; (Amended, Ord. No. 01-02)
(3) at least one off-street parking space shall be provided for each 110 net square feet
of gross floor area. (Amended, Ord. No. 01-02)
(4) at least one off-street parking stall shall be provided for each 200 square feet of
speculative gross floor area; (Amended, Ord. No. 01-02)
(5) at least one handicap off-street parking space shall be provided for each 50 spaces
or fraction thereof.
(6) at least one and one-half off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each
dwelling unit of a townhouse, cooperative, or condominium development. (Added,
Ord. No. 02-01, Sec. 5)
(e) Design requirements.
(1) Stall sizes:
(i) regular parking stalls shall be at least 8 1/2 feet wide and 18 feet long;
(ii) compact parking stalls shall be at least 7 1/2 feet wide and 16 feet long;
(iii) handicap parking stalls shall be at least 12 feet wide and 18 feet long;
(iv) only 25% of the required parking may be compact size.
(2) Drainage. All driveways and parking areas, except those for less than four
vehicles, shall be graded according to a drainage plan which has been approved by
the city.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.01, Subd. 8(e)(3)
(Rev. 2002)
(3) Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be
shielded (concealed light source). (Amended, Ord. No. 02-01, Sec. 6)
(4) Curbing. The entire perimeter of all parking areas in excess of four stalls, access
driveways, truck loading spaces or other hard surface areas that handle motor
vehicle traffic shall be curbed with a poured six inch high concrete curb.
(i) curbing shall be required around safety islands;
(ii) curb cuts and ramps for the handicapped shall be installed as required by
state law;
(iii) construction shall be in accordance with curbing specifications on file at
the city;
(iv) the city may exempt curbing where the parking lot directly abuts a
sidewalk which is sufficiently higher than the grade of the parking lot and
satisfies the curbing requirements, or where the city has approved future
expansion.
(f) Driveway requirements:
(1) a maximum driveway width of 35 feet at the curb opening, excluding the entrance
radii can be constructed;
(2) the parking aisle shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width for two-way traffic and
according to Table I, subsection 510.17, subdivision 2(d) of this code, for one-way
traffic;
(3) the edge of the curb opening shall not be closer to the nearest portion of a street
right-of-way intersection than 75 feet or two-thirds of the lot width, whichever is
smaller;
(4) where a T intersection exists, a driveway may be located opposite the end of the
intercepted street;
(5) the minimum driveway angle to the street shall be 60 degrees;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.01, Subd. 8(g)
(Rev. 2002)
(g) Parking setback requirements. (Amended, Ord. No. 02-01, Sec. 7)
(1) no closer than five feet from any street right-of-way. A direct parking access may
encroach in this five feet; (Amended, Ord. No. 01-02)
(2) no closer than five feet from any side lot line, or one foot if a guard rail approved
by the city is installed. A common drive approved by both adjoining property
owners may be allowed by the city; (Amended, Ord. No. 01-02)
(3) no closer than five feet from any rear lot line. A direct parking access may
encroach into the five feet; (Amended, Ord. No. 01-02)
(4) no closer than five feet from the main building or one foot if a guard rail approved
by the city is installed. (Amended, Ord. No. 01-02).
(h) Loading docks:
(1) outside loading docks shall be located in the rear or side yard and be properly
screened;
(2) the space needed for the loading docks must be adequate to handle the loading and
unloading needs, without obstructing the public right-of-way.
(i) Off-street parking shall be provided for all vehicles concerned with any use on the lot.
(j) Parking lots with more than four parking stalls shall be striped.
(k) Sufficient concrete areas may be required for motorcycle parking in addition to the required
vehicle parking stalls.
(l) Bike racks may be required by the city in an area that is convenient to each major building
entrance and will not disrupt pedestrian or vehicular traffic or fire lanes.
(m) Safety signs, markings and traffic control devices may be required to promote vehicular and
pedestrian safety.
Subd. 9. Landscape requirements:
(a) All open areas of any site, except for areas used for parking, driveways or storage shall be
landscaped and be incorporated in a landscape plan.
(b) The landscape plan shall be submitted for approval by the city and indicate the location,
size and species, and method and quantity of all proposed plants, including designation of
any existing vegetation which is to be removed or which will remain with construction.
(c) Underground lawn sprinkling systems or other provision for watering shall be provided to
maintain the lawns and landscaping within the boulevards, front, and side yard areas.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.01, Subd. 10
(Rev. 2002)
Subd. 10. Performance standards:
(a) Parking facilities: All driveways, parking areas, and loading docks shall be surfaced with
blacktop, concrete or other hard surface material approved by the city.
(b) Exterior storage: All materials and commercial equipment shall be kept in a building and
nothing shall be stored outside.
(c) Refuse: All waste materials, refuse or garbage shall be contained in closed containers as
required by section 605 of the city code.
(d) Screening:
(1) All required screening shall be according to subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code.
(2) Plantings shall not be placed so as to obstruct lines of sight at street corners and
driveways.
(3) Screening of off-street parking shall be required for:
(i) any off-street parking area requiring more than four spaces or adjoining a
residential district;
(ii) any driveway to a parking area of four or more spaces within 30 feet of an
adjoining residential district.
(4) All trash or garbage storage receptacles must be located in the rear or side yard and
be totally screened from view from any public right-of-way. Provisions must be
taken to protect screening from vehicle damage.
(5) All roof equipment, except alternate energy devices must be screened from public
view unless the equipment is designed as an integral part of the building and is
compatible with the lines of the building. The required screening must be
consistent with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2(h). (Amended, Ord. No. 01-02)
(e) Drainage and grade requirements: A finished ground grade shall be established such that
natural drainage away from all buildings is provided. The following minimum criteria shall
apply: (Amended, Ord. No. 02-01, Sec. 8)
(1) the minimum elevation of finished grade shall not be less than one-fourth inch rise
per horizontal foot of setback measured from curb grade;
(2) the city may specify a minimum finished ground grade for any structure in order to
allow proper drainage and connection to city utilities.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.01, Subd. 10(f)
(Rev. 2002)
(f) Landscaping: The following shall be minimum criteria for landscaping:
(1) it shall be the owner's responsibility to see that all required landscaping is
maintained in an attractive, well kept condition;
(2) all vacant lots, tracts or parcels shall be properly maintained in an orderly manner
free of litter and junk;
(3) all uses shall provide water facilities to yard areas for maintenance and
landscaping.
(g) Maintenance: It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that:
(1) Every exterior wall, foundation and roof of any building or structure shall be
reasonably watertight, weathertight, and rodentproof, and shall be kept in a good
state of maintenance and repair. Exterior walls shall be maintained free from
extensive dilapidation due to cracks, tears or breaks of deteriorated plaster, stucco,
brick, wood or other materials that gives evidence of long neglect.
(2) The protective surface on exterior walls of a building shall be maintained in good
repair and provide a sufficient covering and protection of the structural surface
against its deterioration. Without limiting the generality of this section, a
protective surface of a building shall be deemed to be out of repair if:
(i) more than 25% of the area of any plane or wall on which the protective
surface is blistered, cracked, flaked, scaled or chalked away; or
(ii) more than 25% of the pointing of any brick or stone wall is loose or has
fallen out.
(3) Every yard and all structures, walls, fences, walks, steps, driveways, landscaping
and other exterior developments shall be maintained in an attractive, well kept
condition.
(4) The boulevard area of a premise shall be properly maintained, groomed, and cared
for by the abutting property owner.
(h) Essential services: (Amended, Ord. No. 01-02)
(1) connection is required on each lot served by city sanitary sewer;
(2) connection is required on each lot served by city water line.
(i) Signs. All signs shall comply with section 410 of the city code and consistent with the
Downtown Robbinsdale Architectural Design Guidelines. (Added, Ord. No. 02-01, Sec. 9)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.03 (Rev. 2002)
520.03. B-2 limited commercial district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to provide for low density,
retail or service outlets which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are furnished.
The uses allowed in this district are to provide goods and services on a limited community market scale and
located in areas which are well served by street or highway facilities at the edge of residential districts.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in a B-2 district are:
(a) all permitted uses allowed in the B-1 neighborhood commercial district, except as
hereinafter modified;
(b) bakery goods and baking of goods for retail sale on the premises;
(c) bank or savings institutions;
(d) candy, ice cream, popcorn, nuts, frozen desserts, and soft drinks, but not of the drive-in or
convenience food type of service;
(e) commercial office space and professional offices;
(f) delicatessen;
(g) on-site retail dry cleaning, dry cleaning pick-up stations and laundry pick-up stations
including incidental repair and assembly but no fabricating or manufacturing;
(h) dry goods store;
(i) florist shop;
(j) frozen food store but not including locker plant;
(k) hardware store;
(l) hobby store including handicraft classes but not to exceed 15 students;
(m) ice sales with storage not to exceed five ton and coin operated machines;
(n) liquor (off-sale) stores;
(o) locksmith;
(p) meat market, but not including the processing for a locker plant;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.03, Subd. 2(q)
(Rev. 2019)
(q) medical and dental clinics;
(r) newsstand;
(s) paint and wallpaper sales;
(t) photographic studios;
(u) postal or telegraph substation;
(v) public utility collection office;
(w) real estate agencies;
(x) shoe repair;
(y) supermarkets;
(z) loan offices;
(aa) travel agency;
(bb) off-set duplication establishments provided the business neither ships out nor receives supplies
or materials in trucks with more than two axels;
(Added, Ord. No. 99-02; Amended, Ord. No. 08-03; Deleted, Ord. No. 10-18; Deleted, Ord. No. 19-
15)
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in a B-2 district are:
(a) all permitted accessory uses allowed in a B-1 district except as hereinafter modified;
(b) any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct a permitted principal use shall not
exceed 40% of the floor space nor 40% of the man hours required to conduct the principal
permitted use;
(c) off-street parking of trucks in excess of 9,000 pounds gross weight.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.03, Subd. 4
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The uses described in this subsection require a conditional use permit
based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code and are the following:
(a) Multiple family dwellings provided that:
(1) development is compatible with existing and planned use of the area and conflicts
are not created between commercial and residential use and activities;
(2) the lot requirements and setbacks outlines in subsection 515.05, subdivision 5 of
this code and building requirements outlined in subsection 515.05, subdivision 6 of
this code are complied with;
(3) at least 300 square feet of usable open space as defined by subsection 505.09,
subdivision 110 of this code is provided for each dwelling unit;
(4) adequate off-street parking is provided in compliance with subsection 510.17 of
this code;
(b) Buildings combining residential and nonresidential uses allowed in this district provided
that:
(1) residential and nonresidential uses shall not be contained on the same floor;
(2) the residential and nonresidential uses shall not conflict in any manner;
(3) the residential building standards as outlined in subsection 515.07 of this code are
met;
(c) Municipal and public utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and
general welfare of the community provided that:
(1) conformity with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks
and side yard requirements are met;
(2) equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside storage;
(3) adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in
accordance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.03, Subd. 4(d)
(Rev. 2008)
(d) Buildings in excess of three stories or 40 feet provided that:
(1) the site is capable of accommodating the increased intensity of the use;
(2) the increased intensity of use does not cause an increase in traffic volumes beyond
the capacity of the surrounding streets;
(3) public utilities and services are adequate;
(4) except for senior housing for each additional story over three stories or for each
additional ten feet above 40 feet, front and side yard setback requirements shall be
increased five feet; (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
(e) Theatres (not of the drive-in type) provided that:
(1) adequate off-street parking in compliance with subsection 510.17 of this code is
provided;
(2) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive and entrance is provided;
(3) when abutting a residential use or an R-1 or R-2 district a buffer area with
screening and landscaping in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code shall be provided;
(4) all signing and information or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with section 410 of the city code and shall not impact surrounding or
abutting residential uses;
(f) Commercial planned unit development as regulated by subsection 530.05 of this code.
(g) Senior housing provided that: (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
(1) development is compatible with existing and planned use of the area and conflicts
are not created between commercial and residential uses and activities;
(2) the conditions established in subsection 515.07, subdivision 4(h) of this code are
satisfactorily met;
(3) the lot and building standards as established in subsection 515.07, subdivisions 5
and 6 of this code are met;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.03, Subd. 4(h)
(Rev. 1995)
(h) Schools - music, dance, business, beauty, and barber provided that:
(1) development is compatible with the existing and planned uses of the area and
conflicts are not created between commercial and residential use and activities;
(2) adequate off-street parking in compliance with subsection 510.17 of this code is
provided;
(3) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive and entrance is provided;
(4) the site of the principal use and related parking is served by an arterial or collector
street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be generated;
(5) all signing and information or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with section 410 of this city code when directly abutting a residential
use or district;
(6) adequate screening is provided in conjunction with subsection 510.25, subdivision
2 of this code when directly abutting a residential use or district;
(i) Day Care accessory to a school or church; (Added, Ord. No. 94-11, Sec. 1)
(j) Mortuaries - provided that:
(1) there is no outside storage;
(2) adequate screening from residential uses and landscaping is provided in accordance
with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(3) all parking areas be hard surfaced and have six inch high poured concrete curb and
gutter installed around the perimeter;
(4) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive and entrance is provided;
(5) vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic
movement and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer or city planner
or both. (Added, Ord. No. 95-03)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.03, Subd. 5
(Rev. 1995)
Subd. 5. Lot requirements and setbacks. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
in a B-2 district subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this code.
(a) Lot area: 10,000
(b) Lot width: 60
(c) Setbacks:
(1) Front yards: five feet unless:
(i) in a block where a lot fronts on a side street next to a lot which has its side
facing the same side street, the setback on each lot shall be 15 feet from the
side street (right-of-way).
(2) Side yards: zero unless:
(i) side yard abutting a public right-of-way (street) shall be not less than 15
feet from the right-of-way except in the case of 40 foot lots, the side yard
may be reduced to not less than five feet from the right-of-way;
(ii) a side yard that contains a driveway shall be at least 15 feet if there is oneway
traffic movement or at least 20 feet if there is two-way traffic
movement;
(iii) a side yard that directly abuts a residential use or residential district shall
be increased ten additional feet over the minimums stated above and shall
be screened and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25,
subdivision 2 of this code.
(3) Rear yards. 12 feet and if abutting a residential use or residential district shall be
screened and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code.
Subd. 6. Building requirements.
(a) Height. No structure shall exceed three stories or 30 feet except as provided in subsections
510.15, subdivision 1 and 520.03, subdivision 4(d) of this code.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.05
(Rev. 2015)
520.05. B-3, highway commercial district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to provide for the
establishment of automobile oriented or dependent commercial and service activities.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in a B-3 district are:
(a) all permitted uses allowed in B-1 and B-2 districts except as hereinafter modified;
(b) auto accessory store;
(c) garden, farm and feed supply stores;
(d) motels, motor hotels, and hotels provided that the site shall contain not less than five
hundred square feet of lot area per unit;
(e) mortuary;
(f) municipal and public utility buildings and structures;
(g) restaurant, cafe, tea room, tavern and private clubs serving prepared food and beverages;
(h) taxi terminals;
(i) governmentally owned open parking lots and parking ramps.
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in a B-3 district are:
(a) all accessory uses allowed in B-1 and B-2 districts except as hereinafter modified;
(b) state licensed bingo in a church or club, limited to three occasions per week. (Amended,
Ord. No. 93-16, Sec. 2)
(c) Food trucks provided that:
(1) An application including a site plan and hours of operation is submitted and
approved by the city manager;
(2) The location shall abut and have access to an arterial or collector street;
(3) The use shall not be located within a public right-of-way;
(4) The use shall not cause congestion on the site or adjacent streets or block fire lanes;
(5) The use shall be on a paved surface and not shall displace required parking needed
to support the existing principal use(s) of the site;
(6) The use shall be subject to all applicable nuisance and general performance
standards in the city code and must be kept free of trash, rubbish, litter and debris;
(7) All tents, canopies, awnings or similar items and all water, electrical and lighting
facilities shall be in compliance with applicable codes;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.05, Subd. 3
(Rev. 2015)
(8) Signs used to advertise the food truck, not permanently affixed to the truck, shall
comply with temporary sign standards and permit requirements;
(9) The food truck shall be licensed by the State of Minnesota, Hennepin County and
the City of Robbinsdale, as required;
(10) The use shall have written permission from the property owner;
(11) The use shall not be located within 100 feet of the main entrance of any other
permanent food establishment; the setback shall be measured from the food truck
to the main entrance of the building; and
(12) The use at any site shall be limited to no more than 3 consecutive days and a total
of 10 days in a calendar year unless approved by the city council.
(Added, Ord. No. 15-09)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.05, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2015)
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The uses described in this subdivision require a conditional use permit
based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code and are the following:
(a) All conditional uses allowed in B-1 and B-2 districts except as hereinafter modified.
(b) Drive-in establishments and convenience food establishments provided that:
(1) the architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not
be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or area as to cause impairment in property
values or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the lot;
(2) at the boundaries of a residential use, a strip of not less than five feet shall be
landscaped and screened in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code. Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot landscaped
or covered;
(3) parking areas shall be screened from view of abutting residential uses in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(4) parking areas and driveways shall be curbed with continuous curbs not less than six
inches high above the parking lot or driveway grade;
(5) all lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source is not visible from
the public right-of-way or from an abutting residence and shall be in compliance
with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(6) the entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject to the approval of the
city engineer;
(7) the entire area other than occupied by buildings or structures or plantings shall be
surfaced with a material which will control dust and drainage and which is subject
to the approval of the city engineer;
(8) vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through-traffic
movement and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer or city planner,
or both;
(9) all signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with subsection 410 of the city code and shall not impact surrounding
or abutting residential uses;
(10) the provisions of subsection 535.01, subdivision 2(e) of this code are considered
and satisfactorily met.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.05, Subd. 4(c)
(c) Car washes (drive-through and self-service) provided that:
(1) the architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not
be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or area as to cause impairment in property
values or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the lot;
(2) off-street parking space is constructed to accommodate that number of vehicles
which can be washed during a maximum 30 minute period and shall be subject to
the approval of the city engineer or city planner, or both;
(3) at the boundaries of a residential use, a strip of not less than five feet shall be
landscaped and screened in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code. Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot landscaped
or covered;
(4) parking or car magazine storage space shall be screened from view of abutting
residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(5) the entire area other than occupied by the building or plantings shall be surfaced
with material which will control dust and drainage which is subject to the approval
of the city engineer;
(6) the entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject to the approval of the
city engineer;
(7) all lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source is not visible from
the public right-of-way or from an abutting residence and shall be in compliance
with subsection 510.25, subdivision 5 of this code;
(8) vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through-traffic
movement and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer or city planner,
or both;
(9) all signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with section 410 of the city code and shall not impact surrounding or
abutting residential uses;
(10) provisions are made to control and reduce noise;
(11) the provisions of subsection 535.01, subdivision 2(e) of this code are considered
and satisfactorily met.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.05, Subd. 4(d)
(d) Motor fuel station, auto repair - minor, and tire and battery stores provided that:
(1) the architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not
be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or area as to cause impairment in property
values or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the lot;
(2) the entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure or planting shall be
surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage which is subject to the
approval of the city engineer;
(3) a drainage system subject to the approval of the city engineer shall be installed;
(4) a curb not less than six inches above grade shall separate the public sidewalk from
motor vehicle service areas;
(5) the lighting shall be accomplished in such a way as to have no direct source of light
visible from adjacent land in residential use or from the public right-of-way and
shall be in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 5 of this code;
(6) wherever fuel pumps are to be installed, pump islands shall be installed;
(7) at the boundaries of a residential use, a strip of not less than five feet shall be
landscaped and screened in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code. Each light standard landscaped;
(8) parking or car magazine storage space shall be screened from view of abutting
residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(9) vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through-traffic
movement and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer or city planner,
or both;
(10) all signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with section 410 of the city code, and shall not impact surrounding or
abutting residential uses;
(11) provisions are made to control and reduce noise;
(12) no outside storage except as allowed in compliance with subsection 520.05,
subdivision 4(e) of this code;
(13) no outside sale or service except as allowed in compliance with subsection 520.05,
subdivision 4(f) of this code.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.05, Subd. 4(d)(14)
(14) all conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the council,
upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the general welfare and
public betterment can be served as well or better by modifying the conditions;
(15) the provisions of subsection 535.01, subdivision 2(e) of this code are considered
and satisfactorily met.
(e) open or outdoor storage provided that:
(1) the area is fenced and screened from view of neighboring residential uses or if
abutting an R district in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this
code;
(2) storage is screened from view from the public right-of-way in compliance with
subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(3) storage area is grassed or surfaced to control dust;
(4) all lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible
from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences and shall be in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(f) Open or outdoor service, sales and equipment rental as an accessory use or area of principal
use provided that:
(1) outside services, sales and equipment rental connected with the principal use is
limited to 30% of the floor area of the principal use;
(2) outside sales areas are fenced or screened from view of neighboring residential
uses or an abutting R district in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2
of this code;
(3) all lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not be visible
from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences and shall be in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 5 of this code;
(4) sales areas are grassed or surfaced to control dust;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.05, Subd. 4(g)
(g) Restricted production and repair limited to the following: art, needlework, clothing, custom
manufacturing and alteration, jewelry from precious metals, watches, dentures and optical
lenses, household appliances provided that:
(1) all activities are totally enclosed within a structure and provisions are made to
control and reduce noise. Noise control provisions shall be reviewed by the
construction coordinator and are subject to his approval;
(2) no outside storage will be allowed;
(3) all signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with section 410 of the city code and shall not impact surrounding or
abutting residential uses;
(4) the architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not
be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or areas as to cause impairment in
property values or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of
the lot;
(5) the entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure or planting shall be
surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage which is subject to the
approval of the city engineer;
(6) a drainage system subject to the approval of the city engineer shall be installed;
(7) the lighting shall be accomplished in such a way as to have no direct source of light
visible from adjacent land in residential use or from the public right-of-way and
shall be in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 5 of this code.
(8) at the boundaries of a residential use, a strip of not less than five feet shall be
landscaped and screened in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code. Each light standard landscaped;
(9) vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through-traffic
movement and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer or city planner,
or both;
(10) parking or car magazine storage space shall be screened from view of abutting
residential uses in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(11) the location of such use will not encourage traffic through a residential district;
(12) adequate off-street parking is provided in compliance with subsection 510.17 of
this code;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.05, Subd. 4(g)(13)
(13) no outside sale or service except as allowed in compliance with subsection 520.05,
subdivision 4(e) of this code;
(14) all conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the council,
upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the general welfare and
public betterment can be served as well or better by modifying the conditions;
(h) Retail fence sales and service provided that:
(1) no outside storage except as allowed in compliance with subsection 520.05,
subdivision 4(e) of this code;
(2) no open or outdoor sales or service except as allowed in compliance with
subsection 520.05, subdivision 4(f) of this code.
(i) Privately owned open parking lots as a principal use provided that:
(1) access is from and onto a collector or arterial street;
(2) entrances and exits create a minimum of conflict with through-traffic movement;
(3) sufficient magazine space is provided within the structure or on the site to
minimize or eliminate the blocking of traffic in the public right-of-way;
(4) parking spaces and aisle or driveways shall be developed in compliance with
subsection 510.17 of this code and are subject to the review and approval of the
city engineer or city planner, or both;
(5) the location is at least 60 feet from the boundary of an R-1 or R-2 district;
(6) when abutting an R-1 or R-2 district, a buffer area with screening and landscaping
in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code shall be provided;
(7) when abutting a residential use which is not related to the parking ramp or open
parking lot, a setback of at least 30 feet shall be provided from the property line
and this area shall be screened and landscaped in compliance with subsection
510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(8) all signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with section 410 of the City code and shall not impact surrounding or
abutting residential uses;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.05, Subd. 4(j)
(Rev. 2011)
(j) Automobile sales showroom provided that:
(1) no automobile repair or maintenance activities are conducted upon the site;
(2) there shall be no exterior storage or display of either new or used automobiles upon
the site;
(3) no stock of either new or used automobiles, except for those utilized for display
purposes, shall be maintained upon the site.
(k) Repair, testing and assembly of electrical appliances, apparatuses and related equipment.
The above would be restricted to light assembly and limited warehouse activities.
(l) Shared parking.
(m) Automobile sales with exterior display of vehicles provided that: (Added, Ord. No. 11-05)
(1) the use is accessory to an auto repair (minor) service conditional use;
(2) the outdoor display of automobiles occupies less than 30% of the principal building
main floor area;
(3) the outdoor display and/or storage of vehicles shall not be located within a front
yard;
(4) the outdoor display and/or storage of vehicles shall not be allowed in the required
parking for the auto repair service conditional use;
(5) a site plan is required showing the parking spaces designated to the auto sales
conditional use consistent with Section 510.17;
(6) the use shall be screened from adjacent residential uses in conformance with
section 510.25;
(7) no vehicles exceeding a gross weight of 9,000 pounds may be displayed or stored
outdoors;
(8) no inoperable or unregistered vehicles, outdoor storage of parts, tires, or other
waste associated with the use, and no outside maintenance or repair of vehicles will
be permitted;
(9) there shall be no pennants, streamers, string lighting or spotlights allowed. Only
indirect lighting shall be permitted;
(10) no visual messages or sales information beyond vehicle warranty required by state
law may be attached or affixed to vehicles; and
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.05, Subd. 4(m)(9)
(Rev. 2014)
(11) no public address or paging system is permitted to be audible outside of the
building.
(n) Small brewery with or without a taproom in compliance with Minnesota Statutes Section
340A.301 and the licensing requirements in city code section 1200 and provided that:
(1) 1 parking space per 400 sq. ft. for brewery, processing, production, storage or
cooler areas and 1 parking space per 200 sq. ft. for taproom and office areas;
(2) All bulk deliveries shall be to the rear of the building and screened from residential
uses;
(3) There is no outdoor storage of any brewing materials; and
(4) Outdoor taproom seating and service areas shall require a conditional use permit
and shall be regulated by city code section 1200.03, subd. 5 and 1205.23, subd. 4.
(Added, Ord. No. 14-21)
Subd. 5. Lot and setback requirements. The following minimum requirements shall be observed in
a B-3 district subject to additional requirements, exceptions, and modifications set forth in this ordinance.
(a) Lot area: no minimum
(b) Lot width: no minimum
(c) Setbacks:
(1) Front yard: five feet.
(2) Side yard: Zero unless
(i) a side yard that contains a driveway shall be at least 15 feet if there is oneway
traffic movement or at least 20 feet if there is two-way traffic
movement;
(ii) A side yard that directly abuts a residential use or residential district shall
be increased ten additional feet over the minimum stated above and shall
be screened and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25,
subdivision 2 of this code.
(3) Rear yard: 12 feet and if abutting a residential use or residential district shall be
screened and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code.
Subd. 6. Building requirements.
(a) Height. No structure shall exceed three stories or 40 feet except as provided in subsections
510.15, subdivision 1 and 520.03, subdivision 4(d) of this code.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.07
520.07. B-4 community business district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district provide for the establishment
of commercial and service activities which draw from and serve customers from the entire community or
region.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in a B-4 district are:
(a) all permitted uses allowed in B-1, B-2, and B-3 districts except as hereinafter modified;
(b) antique and gift shops;
(c) appliance stores;
(d) art and school supplies;
(e) bicycle sales and repair;
(f) boat and marine including servicing or repair when totally enclosed within a building;
(g) books and office supplies;
(h) bowling alleys, billiard rooms, skating rinks;
(i) carpet and rugs;
(j) clothing stores;
(k) coin and philatelic stores;
(l) costume rentals;
(m) department stores limited to permitted uses allowed within this district;
(n) electrical appliance store including incidental repair;
(o) employment agency;
(p) florist shop;
(q) furniture store including upholstery as a secondary use;
(r) furrier, retail only, plus storage;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.07, Subd. 2(s)
(Rev. 2019)
(s) glass, china, or pottery;
(t) interior decorating studio;
(u) jewelry store and watch repair;
(v) leather goods and luggage;
(w) light fixture and lamps;
(x) meeting halls;
(y) musical instrument sales and incidental parts;
(z) physical culture, health services, reducing salons, public bath, excepting saunas and massage
services;
(aa) picture framing;
(bb) record shops;
(cc) restricted production andy7 repair limited to the following: art, needlework, clothing, custom
manufacturing and alterations, jewelry from precious metals, watches, dentures and optical
lenses, household electrical appliances;
(dd) schools - music, dance, business, beauty, and barber;
(ee) sewing machine sale and service;
(ff) shoe repair;
(gg) sporting goods;
(hh) tailor shops;
(ii) tobacco product shops as defined in City Code section 1132.01; (Added, Ord. No. 19-15)
(jj) toy store;
(kk) variety store limited to permitted uses allowed within this district;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.07, Subd. 2(ll)
REV. (2019)
(ll) wearing apparel;
(mm) off-set duplication.
(nn) minor dealers as defined by section 530.02, subdivision 3(f). (Added, Ord. No. 98-17)
(oo) furniture and home decorating consignment house dealers exempted by section 530.02,
subdivision 8. (Added, Ord. No. 02-10)
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in a B-4 district are:
(a) All accessory uses allowed in B-1, B-2, and B-3 districts.
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The uses described in this subdivision require a conditional use permit
based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code and are the following:
(a) All conditional uses allowed in B-1, B-2 and B-3 districts.
(b) Privately owned parking ramps as a principal or accessory use and privately owned open
parking lot as a principal use, provided that:
(1) access is from and onto a collector or arterial street;
(2) entrances and exists create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement;
(3) sufficient magazine space is provided within the structure or on the site to minimize
or eliminate the blocking of traffic in the public right-of-way;
(4) parking spaces and aisle or driveways shall be developed in compliance with
subsection 510.17 of this code and are subject to the review and approval of the city
engineer or city planner, or both;
(5) the location is at least 60 feet from the boundary of an R-1 or R-2 district;
(6) when abutting an R-1 or R-2 district a buffer area with screening and landscaping in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code shall be provided;
(7) when abutting a residential use which is not related to the parking ramp or open
parking lot, a setback of at least 30 feet shall be provided from the property line and
this area shall be maintained as open space, and screening and landscaping shall be
provided in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(8) all signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance
with section 410 of the city code and shall not impact surrounding or abutting
residential uses;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.07, Subd. 4(c)
(a) Saunas and massage services provided that:
(1) the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the facility will not be detrimental
to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare;
(2) the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property
in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted nor substantially
diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood;
(3) the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in
the district;
(4) adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and necessary facilities have been or are
being provided;
(5) the conditional use shall, in all other respects, conform to section 610 of the city
code, and to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.07, Subd. 4(d)
(b) State licensed bingo more than one night per week provided that:
(1) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive and entrance is provided;
(2) the site does not abut any residential district;
(3) all signs and information or visual communication devices shall not impact
surrounding or abutting residential uses;
(4) the site is served by an arterial street;
(5) requirements of Minnesota Statutes, chapter 349 and as amended, entitled bingo,
gambling devices and video games of chance licensing act, are met;
(6) requirements of section 1105 of the city code and as amended, relating to
regulation of lawful gambling, are met;
(7) the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the facility will not be detrimental
to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare;
(8) the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property
in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted nor substantially
diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood;
(9) the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in
the district;
(10) no alcohol is allowed on the premises;
(11) no one under age 18 is allowed on the premises;
(12) the site is not within 1,000 feet of the site of any other state licensed bingo.
(c) Veterinary services provided that:
(1) Must have a separate entrance.
(2) If adjacent to residential zoning district, then it must be screened as set forth in
section 510.25. (Added, Ord. No. 00-09)
(d) Counseling or training services subject to the standards specified in section 515.07,
subdivision 4 (c). (Added, Ord. No. 07-06)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.07, Subd. 5
Subd. 5. Lot requirements and setback requirements. The following minimum requirements shall
be observed in a B-4 district subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in
this ordinance.
(a) Lot area: no minimum.
(b) Lot width: no minimum.
(c) Setbacks:
(i) a side yard that contains a driveway shall be at least 15 feet if there is one-way
traffic movement or at least 20 feet if there is two-way traffic movement;
(ii) A side yard that directly abuts a residential use or residential district shall be
increased ten additional feet over the minimums stated above and shall be screened
and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code.
(iii) Rear yard: 12 feet and if abutting a residential use or residential district, shall be
screened and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code.
Subd. 6. Building requirements.
(a) Height: No structure shall exceed three stories or 40 feet except as provided in subsections
510.15, subdivision 1 and 520.03, subdivision 4(d) of this code.
520.09. NG, neighborhood grocery district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to provide for the
establishment of local convenient grocery stores which deal directly with the customer for whom the goals
or services are furnished. These grocery stores are to provide services and goods only for the immediate
neighborhood and not intended to draw customers from the entire community.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. Grocery stores not more than 2,000 square feet of floor provided that:
(a) the property is a corner lot;
(b) the signing and lighting is approved by the city.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.09, Subd. 3
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in an NG; district are:
(a) off-street parking as regulated by subsection 510.17 of this code;
(b) off-street loading as regulated by subsection 510.19 of this code;
(c) signs and bulletin boards as regulated by section 410 of the city code;
(d) interior storage of merchandise solely intended to be retailed by the principal use;
(e) solar energy devices that are an integral part of the principal structure.
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The uses described in this subdivision require a conditional use permit
based on procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code and all the following:
(a) Grocery stores greater than 2,000 square feet but less than 3,000 square feet provided that:
(1) the property is on a corner lot;
(2) all signs and lighting be subject to city approval.
(b) Buildings combining residential and permitted non-residential uses allowed in this district
provided that:
(1) residential and nonresidential uses shall be in separate rooms and clearly defined
spaces and shall not conflict in any manner;
(2) the residential building standards as outlined in subsection 515.07, subdivision 6 of
this code are met.
(c) Off-site parking which uses private property to meet the parking requirements of this code.
(d) Use of public right-of-way to meet the parking requirements of this code.
(e) Wind generators and other tower-mounted energy devices.
(f) Solar energy devices not an integral part of the principle structure.
(g) Satellite antenna.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.09, Subd. 5
Subd. 5. Lot and setback requirements.
(a) Lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(b) Lot width: 80 feet
(c) Building setbacks:
(1) Front yard: not less than 30 feet, except
(i) in a block where a lot fronts on a side street next to a block which has its
side facing the same side street the setback on each lot shall be 15 feet
from the side street (right-of-way).
(2) Side yard: five feet unless:
(i) side yard abutting a street right-of-way shall not be less than 15 feet from
the right-of-way;
(ii) a side yard that contains a driveway shall be at least 15 feet if there is oneway
traffic movement or at least 20 feet if there is two-way traffic
movement;
(iii) a side yard that directly abuts a residential use or residential district shall
be increased five additional feet over the minimum stated above and shall
be screened and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25,
subdivision 2 of this code.
(3) Rear yards: 20 percent of lot depth and if abutting a residential district shall be
increased five feet and shall be screened and landscaped in compliance with
subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code.
Subd. 6. Building requirements.
(a) Height: No structures shall exceed two stories or 25 feet except as provided in subsection
510.15, subdivision 1 of this code.
(b) Exterior materials: The type of building materials used on exterior walls shall be face brick,
natural stone, specifically designed precast concrete, factory fabricated and finished metal
frame paneling, glass or other materials approved by the city.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.09, Subd. 7
Subd. 7. Parking requirements.
(a) Reduction of parking: Reduction of parking stalls may be allowed when the provision of
space required for parking stalls, due to the particular nature of the proposed use or other
considerations, would be an unnecessary hardship. Adequate open space shall be provided
to satisfy the total number of required parking stalls.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.09, Subd. 7(b)
(b) Additional parking: When the provisions for parking space required for specific district
uses is inadequate the city may require additional off-street parking be provided.
(c) Parking ratio:
(1) At least one off-street parking space shall be provided for each 200 square feet of
building floor area.
(2) At least one handicap off-street parking space shall be provided for each 50
spaces or fraction thereof.
(d) Design requirements:
(1) Drainage: All driveways and parking areas, except those for less than four
vehicles, shall be graded according to a drainage plan which has been approved
by the city.
(2) Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be
shaded or diffused to reflect the light away from the adjoining property and
traffic.
(3) Curbing: The entire perimeter of all parking areas in excess of four stalls, access
driveways, truck loading spaces or other hard surface areas that handle motor
vehicle traffic shall be curbed with a poured six inch high concrete curb, as
follows:
(i) curbing shall be required around safety islands;
(ii) curb cuts and ramps for the handicapped shall be installed as required by
state law;
(iii) construction shall be in accordance with curbing specifications on file at
the city;
(iv) the city may exempt curbing: Where the parking lot directly abuts a
sidewalk which is sufficiently higher than the grade of the parking lot
and satisfies the curbing requirements.
(4) Driveway requirements:
(i) A maximum driveway width of 35 feet at the curb opening, excluding
the entrances radii can be constructed;
(ii) The parking aisle shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width for two-way
traffic and according to Table I, subsection 510.17, gubdivision 2(d) of
this code for one-way traffic;
(iii) The edge of the curb opening shall not be closer to the nearest portion of
a street right-of-way intersection than 75 feet or two-thirds of the lot
width, whichever is smaller;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.09, Subd. 7(d)(4)(iv)
(iv) Where a intersection exits, a drive may be located opposite the end of the
intercepted street;
(v) The minimum driveway angle to the street shall be 60 degrees.
(5) All parking and hard surface areas shall be:
(i) no closer than ten feet from any street right-of-way;
(ii) no closer than five feet from any side lot line, except for a common drive
approved by the adjoining property owners and the city;
(iii) no closer than five feet from any rear lot line unless adjacent to an alley,
then the setback shall be increased to ten feet;
(iv) no closer than five feet from the main building;
(v) curbed with minimum driveway access radii of ten feet to match the
existing street curb or sidewalk.
(6) Loading docks:
(i) outside loading docks shall be located in the rear or side yard and be
properly screened;
(ii) the space needed for the loading docks must be adequate to handle the
loading and unloading needs, without obstructing the public right-ofway.
(7) Off-street parking shall be provided for all vehicles concerned with any use on
the lot.
(8) Parking lots with more than four parking stalls shall be striped.
(9) Sufficient concrete areas may be required for motorcycle parking in addition to
the required vehicle parking stalls.
(10) Bike racks may be required by the city in an area that is convenient to each major
building entrance and will not disrupt pedestrian or vehicular traffic or fire lanes.
(11) Safety signs, markings and traffic control devices may be required, to promote
vehicular and pedestrian safety.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.09, Subd. 8
Subd. 8. Landscape requirements:
(a) all open areas of any site, except for areas used for parking, driveways or storage shall be
landscaped and be incorporated in a landscape plan;
(b) the landscape plan shall be submitted for approval by the city and indicate the location,
size and species, and method and quantity of all proposed plants including designation
of any existing vegetation which is to be removed or which will remain with
construction;
(c) underground lawn sprinkling systems, or other provision for watering, shall be provided
to maintain the lawns and landscaping within the boulevards, front and side yard areas.
Subd. 9. Performance standards.
(a) Parking facilities: All driveways, parking areas and loading docks shall be surfaced with
blacktop, concrete or other hard surface material approved by the city.
(b) Exterior storage: All materials and commercial equipment shall be kept in a building and
nothing shall be stored outside.
(c) Refuse: All waste materials, refuse or garbage shall be contained in closed containers as
required by section 605 of the city code.
(d) Screening:
(1) all required screening shall be according to subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code.
(2) plantings shall not be placed so as to obstruct lines of sight at street corners and
driveways.
(3) Screening of off-street parking shall be required for:
(i) any off-street parking area requiring more than four spaces or adjoining a
residential district;
(ii) any driveway to a parking area of four or more spaces within 30 feet of
an adjoining residential district.
(4) All trash or garbage storage receptacles must be located in the rear or side yard
and be totally screened from view from any public right-of-way. Provisions must
be taken to protect screening from vehicle damage.
(5) All roof equipment, except alternate energy devices must be screened from
public view unless the equipment is designed as an integral part of the building
and is compatible with the lines of the building, as determined by the city.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.09, Subd. 9(e)
(e) Drainage and grade requirements: A finished ground grade shall be established such that
natural drainage away from all buildings is provided. The following minimum criteria
shall apply:
(1) the minimum elevation of finished grade shall not be less than one-fourth inch
rise per horizontal foot of setback measured from curb grade;
(2) the city may specify a minimum finished ground grade for any structure in order
to allow proper drainage and connection to city utilities.
(f) Landscaping: The following shall be minimum criteria for landscaping:
(1) it shall be the owner's responsibility to see that all required landscaping is
maintained in an attractive, well kept condition;
(2) all vacant lots, tracts or parcels shall be properly maintained in an orderly manner
free of litter and junk;
(3) all uses shall provide water facilities to yard areas for maintenance and
landscaping.
(g) Maintenance: It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that:
(1) Every exterior wall, foundation and roof of any building or structure shall be
reasonably watertight, weathertight, and rodentproof, and shall be kept in a good
state of maintenance and repair. Exterior walls shall be maintained free from
extensive dilapidation due to cracks, tears or breaks of deteriorated plaster,
stucco, brick, wood or other materials that gives evidence of long neglect.
(2) The protective surface on exterior walls of a building shall be maintained in good
repair and provide a sufficient covering and protection of the structural surface
against its deterioration. Without limiting the generality of this section, a
protective surface of a building shall be deemed to be out of repair if:
(i) more than 25% of the area of any plane or wall on which the protective
surface is blistered, cracked, flaked, scaled or chalked away; or
(ii) more than 25% of the pointing of any brick or stone wall is loose or has
fallen out.
(3) Every yard and all structures, walls, fences, walks, steps, driveways, landscaping
and other exterior developments shall be maintained in an attractive, well kept
condition.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.09, Subd. 9(g)(4)
(4) The boulevard area of a premise shall be property maintained, groomed, and
cared for by the abutting property owner.
(h) Essential services:
(1) connection is required on each lot served by city sanitary sewer;
(2) connection is required on each lot served by city water line.
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????????????
????????????????????????
??
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
???????????????? ?? ?????????? ?????????????????????????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????????? ?? ???????????????????????? ?????? ?? ?????????????????? ?? ???? ?????????????????? ?????? ???????????????? ???????? ????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????????? ???????????????? ???????? ?????? ???????????????? ?????????????????? ???????? ???????????? ?????????? ???????? ???????? ???????????????????????? ???????????????????????????? ???????? ???????? ????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????? ???????? ???????????? ???????? ?????????????? ???????? ?????? ???????? ???????????? ???????????? ?????? ???????????????? ?????????? ???????? ?????? ???????? ???????????? ????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????
????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????? ???????? ???????????????? ???????????????? ???????????????????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????????????? ???????????????? ?????????? ????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ???????????????? ???????????????????? ?????????? ???????? ???????????? ???????????????? ???????????????? ?????????????? ???????? ?????????????????? ?????? ????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????????????? ???????????????? ???????? ???????? ???????????????????????????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ???????? ???????????????????? ???????????????? ???????? ????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????????? ???????????????????? ?????????????? ????????
????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????? ?????????? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ???????? ???????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????
?? ????????????????????????
????
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????????????????????? ???????????????? ?????????????????? ?????????????????????????? ???????????????? ?????????????????? ?????????????? ?????????????? ?????????????????????? ????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????? ?????????? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ???????? ???????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????? ?????????? ?????????????? ???????????????????? ?????? ?????? ?????????????? ?????????? ???????????? ???????????? ??????????????
????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????? ?????????? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ???????? ???????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????????????????????????????????????
?? ?? ????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????????? ???????? ???????????? ?????? ???????????????????? ???????? ?????? ?????????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????? ???????????? ???????????? ?????????? ?? ????????????????
????????????????????????????????
????
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
?? ???????? ???????? ???????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ?????????? ?????????????????? ???????? ???????????????? ???????? ?????? ???????? ?????????? ????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
?? ???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
???????????? ?????? ?? ?????????????????????? ???????????????????????????? ?? ???????? ?????????? ???????????? ?????????? ???????????????????? ???????????? ?????????????????????????? ?????? ?????? ???????? ????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ???????????? ?? ???????????? ?????????????? ???????????? ?? ???????? ?????????? ???????? ?????? ???????????????? ?????? ???????????? ?????????????? ?????????? ???????? ?????????? ????????
?????????????????????? ???????????????????????? ???????? ???????????????????????? ???????????????????????? ?????? ?????? ?????? ???????????????? ?????????????????? ?????? ??????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ?????????????? ?? ?????? ???????????? ?? ???????? ???????????? ???????? ?????? ???????????????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????????????? ????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????
??
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ????????????????????????????????????????????
?? ????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????? ?????????????? ???????? ?????????? ?????????? ???????????????? ???????? ???????????????? ?????? ?????????? ???????? ???????????? ?????? ?????? ??????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????
??
?????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????? ???????????????? ?????????????????? ?????? ?????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????? ?????? ???????????? ?????? ???????????????? ????????????????
????????????????????
??
?????????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????? ?????????????????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ?????????? ?????????????????????? ????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????????????????? ?????????? ?????????? ???????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ??????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????????????????? ?????????????????????????? ?????? ???????????????????????? ???????????????????????? ?????????????????? ?????? ?????????? ???????????????? ????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
???????? ???????? ???????????????????????? ?????????????????? ???????????? ???????????????????????????? ?????????????????? ???????????? ?????????????????????? ??????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ?? ????????????????????????????????
?? ?? ????????????????????????
????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????? ?????? ???????? ???????????????? ???????????????????? ???????? ???????????????? ?????????????????????????? ???????? ???????????????? ???????????? ?????? ???????? ?????? ??????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????????????????????? ?????????????????? ?? ?????????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ???????? ???????????????? ???????????? ?????????????????? ???????? ?????????????????? ??????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????? ???????????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ???????? ?????????? ?????????? ???????????? ???????? ????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????? ?????? ???????????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ???????? ?????????? ???????? ?????????????? ?????????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????
???????? ?????? ???????????? ???????? ???????? ?????????????????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????? ?????????????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ???????? ??????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????????? ?? ???????? ???????????????????? ???????? ???????????????? ?????????????? ?????????????? ???????????? ???????? ?????????? ?????????? ??????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????
??
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ????????????????????????????????????????????
?? ????????????????????????
????
???????? ???????????????????? ?? ???????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????? ?????????? ???????????? ??????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????????????????? ???????????? ???????????????? ?????????????? ?????? ???????????? ?????????? ???????????????? ???????????? ?????????? ?????????????? ????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????
???????????? ?????????????????????????? ???????????????????????? ???????????????????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????????????????????????????? ?????????? ??????
????????????????????
?????????? ???????? ?????????? ???????? ?????????????? ???????????????? ???????????? ???????? ???????????????? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????????? ????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????????????????????????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????????????????????????????????????
?? ????????????????????????
????
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????? ???????? ?????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ?? ???? ?????????????? ???????????? ?????????????????? ?????? ?????????? ???????????????????? ??????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????? ?????? ?????????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????????? ???????? ?????????? ???????? ???????????? ?? ???? ?????????????? ???????????????? ?????????????? ????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????? ???????????????? ???????????? ???????????? ?????? ???????????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????? ?????? ?????????? ?????????? ???????? ?????? ??????????????????
????????????????????
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????
????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????????????????????????????????
?? ????????????????????????
????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????? ???????????? ?????? ???????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????????????????? ???? ??????
??????????????????????
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????? ?????????????? ???????? ???????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????? ??????
?????????????????????? ?????????? ???????? ???????????? ?????? ???????? ???????????????????? ?? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????? ?????????? ??????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ????????????????????????????????????????
?? ????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????? ???????????? ?????? ???????? ???????????????? ?????????????????????????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????????? ??????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ?????????? ???????????? ???????????????? ???????????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ?????????? ???????????? ???????? ???????????????????????? ????????
??????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????? ?????????????????? ???????????? ?????????????????????? ???????? ?????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????????????? ?????? ???????????????????? ???????????? ??????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????????? ?????? ???????????????????????? ???????? ???????????????? ?? ?????????????????? ???????????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ?????????? ??????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????????? ???????? ???????????????? ???? ?????????????????????? ?????????????????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ????????????????
???????????????? ???????? ?????????????????????????????? ?? ???????????????? ?????????????????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ?????????? ?????????????????? ????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?? ?????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????? ???????????? ?????????????????? ?????????????????????????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ?????? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ??????????
??????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
????
???????? ?????????????? ?? ???????? ???????????? ???????????? ?????????????? ?????????? ???????????????? ???????? ?????? ???????? ?????????? ?????????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ?????????? ????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.03 (Rev. 2002)
520.03. B-2 limited commercial district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to provide for low density,
retail or service outlets which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are furnished.
The uses allowed in this district are to provide goods and services on a limited community market scale and
located in areas which are well served by street or highway facilities at the edge of residential districts.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in a B-2 district are:
(a) all permitted uses allowed in the B-1 neighborhood commercial district, except as
hereinafter modified;
(b) bakery goods and baking of goods for retail sale on the premises;
(c) bank or savings institutions;
(d) candy, ice cream, popcorn, nuts, frozen desserts, and soft drinks, but not of the drive-in or
convenience food type of service;
(e) commercial office space and professional offices;
(f) delicatessen;
(g) on-site retail dry cleaning, dry cleaning pick-up stations and laundry pick-up stations
including incidental repair and assembly but no fabricating or manufacturing;
(h) dry goods store;
(i) florist shop;
(j) frozen food store but not including locker plant;
(k) hardware store;
(l) hobby store including handicraft classes but not to exceed 15 students;
(m) ice sales with storage not to exceed five ton and coin operated machines;
(n) liquor (off-sale) stores;
(o) locksmith;
(p) meat market, but not including the processing for a locker plant;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.03, Subd. 2(q)
(Rev. 2019)
(q) medical and dental clinics;
(r) newsstand;
(s) paint and wallpaper sales;
(t) photographic studios;
(u) postal or telegraph substation;
(v) public utility collection office;
(w) real estate agencies;
(x) shoe repair;
(y) supermarkets;
(z) loan offices;
(aa) travel agency;
(bb) off-set duplication establishments provided the business neither ships out nor receives supplies
or materials in trucks with more than two axels;
(Added, Ord. No. 99-02; Amended, Ord. No. 08-03; Deleted, Ord. No. 10-18; Deleted, Ord. No. 19-
15)
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in a B-2 district are:
(a) all permitted accessory uses allowed in a B-1 district except as hereinafter modified;
(b) any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct a permitted principal use shall not
exceed 40% of the floor space nor 40% of the man hours required to conduct the principal
permitted use;
(c) off-street parking of trucks in excess of 9,000 pounds gross weight.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.03, Subd. 4
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The uses described in this subsection require a conditional use permit
based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code and are the following:
(a) Multiple family dwellings provided that:
(1) development is compatible with existing and planned use of the area and conflicts
are not created between commercial and residential use and activities;
(2) the lot requirements and setbacks outlines in subsection 515.05, subdivision 5 of
this code and building requirements outlined in subsection 515.05, subdivision 6 of
this code are complied with;
(3) at least 300 square feet of usable open space as defined by subsection 505.09,
subdivision 110 of this code is provided for each dwelling unit;
(4) adequate off-street parking is provided in compliance with subsection 510.17 of
this code;
(b) Buildings combining residential and nonresidential uses allowed in this district provided
that:
(1) residential and nonresidential uses shall not be contained on the same floor;
(2) the residential and nonresidential uses shall not conflict in any manner;
(3) the residential building standards as outlined in subsection 515.07 of this code are
met;
(c) Municipal and public utility buildings and structures necessary for the health, safety and
general welfare of the community provided that:
(1) conformity with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks
and side yard requirements are met;
(2) equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside storage;
(3) adequate screening from neighboring uses and landscaping is provided in
accordance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.03, Subd. 4(d)
(Rev. 2008)
(d) Buildings in excess of three stories or 40 feet provided that:
(1) the site is capable of accommodating the increased intensity of the use;
(2) the increased intensity of use does not cause an increase in traffic volumes beyond
the capacity of the surrounding streets;
(3) public utilities and services are adequate;
(4) except for senior housing for each additional story over three stories or for each
additional ten feet above 40 feet, front and side yard setback requirements shall be
increased five feet; (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
(e) Theatres (not of the drive-in type) provided that:
(1) adequate off-street parking in compliance with subsection 510.17 of this code is
provided;
(2) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive and entrance is provided;
(3) when abutting a residential use or an R-1 or R-2 district a buffer area with
screening and landscaping in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code shall be provided;
(4) all signing and information or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with section 410 of the city code and shall not impact surrounding or
abutting residential uses;
(f) Commercial planned unit development as regulated by subsection 530.05 of this code.
(g) Senior housing provided that: (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
(1) development is compatible with existing and planned use of the area and conflicts
are not created between commercial and residential uses and activities;
(2) the conditions established in subsection 515.07, subdivision 4(h) of this code are
satisfactorily met;
(3) the lot and building standards as established in subsection 515.07, subdivisions 5
and 6 of this code are met;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.03, Subd. 4(h)
(Rev. 1995)
(h) Schools - music, dance, business, beauty, and barber provided that:
(1) development is compatible with the existing and planned uses of the area and
conflicts are not created between commercial and residential use and activities;
(2) adequate off-street parking in compliance with subsection 510.17 of this code is
provided;
(3) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive and entrance is provided;
(4) the site of the principal use and related parking is served by an arterial or collector
street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be generated;
(5) all signing and information or visual communication devices shall be in
compliance with section 410 of this city code when directly abutting a residential
use or district;
(6) adequate screening is provided in conjunction with subsection 510.25, subdivision
2 of this code when directly abutting a residential use or district;
(i) Day Care accessory to a school or church; (Added, Ord. No. 94-11, Sec. 1)
(j) Mortuaries - provided that:
(1) there is no outside storage;
(2) adequate screening from residential uses and landscaping is provided in accordance
with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(3) all parking areas be hard surfaced and have six inch high poured concrete curb and
gutter installed around the perimeter;
(4) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive and entrance is provided;
(5) vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic
movement and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer or city planner
or both. (Added, Ord. No. 95-03)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.03, Subd. 5
(Rev. 1995)
Subd. 5. Lot requirements and setbacks. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
in a B-2 district subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this code.
(a) Lot area: 10,000
(b) Lot width: 60
(c) Setbacks:
(1) Front yards: five feet unless:
(i) in a block where a lot fronts on a side street next to a lot which has its side
facing the same side street, the setback on each lot shall be 15 feet from the
side street (right-of-way).
(2) Side yards: zero unless:
(i) side yard abutting a public right-of-way (street) shall be not less than 15
feet from the right-of-way except in the case of 40 foot lots, the side yard
may be reduced to not less than five feet from the right-of-way;
(ii) a side yard that contains a driveway shall be at least 15 feet if there is oneway
traffic movement or at least 20 feet if there is two-way traffic
movement;
(iii) a side yard that directly abuts a residential use or residential district shall
be increased ten additional feet over the minimums stated above and shall
be screened and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25,
subdivision 2 of this code.
(3) Rear yards. 12 feet and if abutting a residential use or residential district shall be
screened and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code.
Subd. 6. Building requirements.
(a) Height. No structure shall exceed three stories or 30 feet except as provided in subsections
510.15, subdivision 1 and 520.03, subdivision 4(d) of this code.
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????????????
????????????????????????
????
???????????????? ?? ?????????? ???????????????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????????? ?? ???????????????????????? ?????? ?? ?????????????????? ?? ???? ?????????????????? ?????? ???????????????? ???????? ????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????? ???????????? ???????????????? ???????? ?????????????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ???????? ?????????? ???????????? ???????????????? ???????? ?????????? ?????????? ??????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????? ???????????????????????? ???????????????????? ???? ?????????? ?????????? ???????? ???????????? ?????? ???????????????????? ?????? ???????????????????? ????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ???????? ???????????? ?????? ???????????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ?????????????????? ???????? ???????????????? ????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
??
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????? ???????? ???????? ???????????? ???????? ?????? ???????????????? ?????????????? ???????? ?????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????? ?????????????????? ?????? ???????? ????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?? ????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????
??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ???? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ???? ???????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????????? ???????????? ??????
?????????????????????? ???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????? ???????????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????????? ?????????????? ?????????????? ???????????? ?????????????? ???? ???????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ???????????????? ???????? ???????????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????? ???????????????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????? ?????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????? ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ?????????????????????????????????? ???????????????? ?????????? ???????? ??????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????????????????????????????????????
????
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????? ?????? ???????????????????????? ?????? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ?????????????? ?????? ??????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ???? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ???? ???????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????????? ???????????? ??????
?????????????????????? ???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????? ??????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????????? ?????????????? ?????????????? ???????????? ?????????????? ???? ???????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ???????????????? ???????? ???????????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????? ???????????????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????? ?????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????? ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ?????????????????????????????????? ???????????????? ?????????? ???????? ??????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ?? ?? ??????????????????????????????????????
????
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????????????? ?????????? ???? ?????????????????? ?????? ???????????????? ?????????? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????????? ?????? ???????????????? ?????? ????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????????????? ?????????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ?????? ???????????????????????? ???????? ?????? ?????????? ???????? ?????????????? ?????????????????????????? ????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ???? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ???? ???????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????????? ???????????? ??????
?????????????????????? ???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????? ??????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????????? ?????????????? ?????????????? ???????????? ?????????????? ???? ???????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????
??
?????????? ???????? ???????????????? ???????? ???????????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????? ???????????????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????? ?????? ??????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????? ?????? ???????????????? ???????????????? ?????????????? ?????? ???????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ?????????? ?????????????????????? ????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????
????
?????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????? ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ?????????????????????????????????? ???????????????? ?????????? ???????? ??????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ?????????? ?????? ?????????????? ???????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????? ???????????????????????? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ?????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????
??
???????? ???????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????????? ???????? ?????????????? ?????????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ??????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????? ???????? ?????????????? ?????????????????????????? ?????? ?????????? ???????????????????????? ?????????????????????? ???????? ???????????? ?????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????? ???????????????????? ???????????? ???????? ???????????????????? ?????????????? ???????????????????? ?????????? ???????? ???????????????????? ???????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????? ???????????? ???????????? ???????? ?????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????? ???????????????????????? ????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????? ???????? ?????????????? ?????????????????????????? ?????? ?????????? ???????????????????????? ?????????????????????? ???????? ???????????? ?????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????????????????????????????????????
????
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ???????? ???????????????? ?????????????????? ?????????????? ?? ???? ???????????????????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ???????? ?????????? ??????
???????????????? ???????? ?????????????? ?????????????? ?? ???????????? ???????????????? ?????????????????????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????? ????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ???????????????? ???????? ???????????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????? ???????????????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????? ?????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????? ?????? ???????????? ?????? ?????? ???????????? ?????????????????????? ??????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????????????? ?????????? ???? ?????????????????? ?????? ???????????????? ?????????? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????????? ?????? ???????????????? ?????? ????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????????????? ?????????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ?????? ???????????????????????? ???????? ?????? ?????????? ???????? ?????????????? ?????????????????????????? ????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ???? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ???? ???????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????????? ???????????? ??????
?????????????????????? ???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????????? ?????????????? ?????????????? ???????????? ?????????????? ???? ???????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????
??
?????????? ???????????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????? ??????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????? ?????????????????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ?????????? ?????????????????????? ?????????????? ??????
??????????????????????
??
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????
????
?????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
?????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????? ???????????????? ???????????????? ?????????????? ?????? ???????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ?????????? ?????????????????????? ????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????? ?????????? ?????? ???????????????? ???????????? ?????? ???????????????? ?????????????? ?????? ???????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ??????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????????????????????? ?????????????????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????????? ???????? ???????????????????? ?????? ?????? ???????? ?????????? ??????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????? ?????????????? ???????? ???????????? ?????? ???????????????????? ???????????? ?????? ???????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ??????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????? ?????????? ?????????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ?????????? ??????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????? ???????????????? ???????? ???????????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????? ???????????????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????? ?????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????????????????????????????????????
?? ????????????????????????
????
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????????????????????????????????????????? ?????????? ???????????????????????????????????????? ???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ???????????????? ???????????????? ???????? ?????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????????????? ???????????????????????? ???????? ???????????????? ????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
???????? ????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
?? ???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
?? ???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????
????
?? ???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????
????
?? ???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
?? ???????? ???? ?????????? ?????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ???????????????? ???????? ???????????????? ?????????????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ???????? ?????????? ????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
?? ???????? ???????? ???????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????????????? ?????????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????????? ?????????? ?????? ???????????????????????? ??????????
????????????????????????????????
????
?? ???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????
????
?? ???????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????????? ???????????????????? ???????????????? ???????????????? ?????? ?????????????? ?????????????? ?????? ????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????
????
?? ???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
?? ?????????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? ????????????????????????????????????????????
?? ????????????????????????
??????
?? ?????????? ?????? ?????????????? ???????????????? ?????? ?????????????? ?????????????? ?????? ???????????????????? ?????? ?????? ???????????????? ???????????????? ?????? ????????
????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
?? ???????? ???? ???????????????? ???????????? ???????? ???????? ???????? ???????? ???????? ?????????????????? ???????????????????????? ???????????????????????? ???????????????? ??????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
?? ???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????
????
?? ???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
?? ???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?? ??
?? ?? ????????????????????????????????????????????????
????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
???????? ???????????????? ?????????????????? ?????? ?????? ???????????? ?????? ?????????? ?????? ???????????? ?????? ???????????????? ????????????????
????????????????????
??
?????????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????? ?????????????????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ?????? ?????????????????????? ?????????? ?????????????????????? ????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ?????????????????????????????????????? ?????????????? ?????????????????? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
?????????????????? ???????? ?????????????????????? ???????????????????????????? ???????????????????????????????????????????????? ??????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????
??
?? ??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
???????? ????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
??
RobbinsdaleCityCode (Zoning) 520.07
520.07. B-4 community business district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district provide for the establishment
of commercial and service activities which draw from and serve customers from the entire community or
region.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in a B-4 district are:
(a) all permitted uses allowed in B-1, B-2, and B-3 districts except as hereinafter modified;
(b) antique and gift shops;
(c) appliance stores;
(d) art and school supplies;
(e) bicycle sales and repair;
(f) boat and marine including servicing or repair when totally enclosed within a building;
(g) books and office supplies;
(h) bowling alleys, billiard rooms, skating rinks;
(i) carpet and rugs;
(j) clothing stores;
(k) coin and philatelic stores;
(l) costume rentals;
(m) department stores limited to permitted uses allowed within this district;
(n) electrical appliance store including incidental repair;
(o) employment agency;
(p) florist shop;
(q) furniture store including upholstery as a secondaryuse;
(r) furrier, retail only, plus storage;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.07, Subd. 2(s)
(Rev. 2019)
(s) glass, china, or pottery;
(t) interior decorating studio;
(u) jewelry store and watch repair;
(v) leather goods and luggage;
(w) light fixture and lamps;
(x) meeting halls;
(y) musical instrument sales and incidental parts;
(z) physical culture, health services, reducing salons, public bath, excepting saunas and massage
services;
(aa) picture framing;
(bb) record shops;
(cc) restricted production and repair limited to the following: art, needlework, clothing, custom
manufacturing and alterations, jewelry from precious metals, watches, dentures and optical
lenses, household electrical appliances;
(dd) schools - music, dance, business, beauty, and barber;
(ee) sewing machine sale and service;
(ff) shoe repair;
(gg) sporting goods;
(hh) tailor shops;
(ii) tobacco product shops as defined in City Code section 1132.01; (Added, Ord. No. 19-15)
(jj) toy store;
(kk) variety store limited to permitted uses allowed within this district;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.07, Subd. 2(ll)
REV. (2019)
(ll) wearing apparel;
(mm) off-set duplication.
(nn) minor dealers as defined by section 530.02, subdivision 3(f). (Added, Ord. No. 98-17)
(oo) furniture and home decorating consignment house dealers exempted by section 530.02,
subdivision 8. (Added, Ord. No. 02-10)
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in a B-4 district are:
(a) All accessory uses allowed in B-1, B-2, and B-3 districts.
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The uses described in this subdivision require a conditional use permit
based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code and are the following:
(a) All conditional uses allowed in B-1, B-2 and B-3 districts.
(b) Privately owned parking ramps as a principal or accessory use and privately owned open
parking lot as a principal use, provided that:
(1) access is from and onto a collector or arterial street;
(2) entrances and exists create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement;
(3) sufficient magazine space is provided within the structure or on the site to minimize
or eliminate the blocking of traffic in the public right-of-way;
(4) parking spaces and aisle or driveways shall be developed in compliance with
subsection 510.17 of this code and are subject to the review and approval of the city
engineer or city planner, or both;
(5) the location is at least 60 feet from the boundary of an R-1 or R-2 district;
(6) when abutting an R-1 or R-2 district a buffer area with screening and landscaping in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code shall be provided;
(7) when abutting a residential use which is not related to the parking ramp or open
parking lot, a setback of at least 30 feet shall be provided from the property line and
this area shall be maintained as open space, and screening and landscaping shall be
provided in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code;
(8) all signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance
with section 410 of the city code and shall not impact surrounding or abutting
residential uses;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.07, Subd. 4(c)
(a) Saunas and massage services provided that:
(1) the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the facility will not be detrimental
to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare;
(2) the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property
in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted nor substantially
diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood;
(3) the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in
the district;
(4) adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and necessary facilities have been or are
being provided;
(5) the conditional use shall, in all other respects, conform to section 610 of the city
code, and to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 520.07, Subd. 4(d)
(b) State licensed bingo more than one night per week provided that:
(1) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive and entrance is provided;
(2) the site does not abut any residential district;
(3) all signs and information or visual communication devices shall not impact
surrounding or abutting residential uses;
(4) the site is served by an arterial street;
(5) requirements of Minnesota Statutes, chapter 349 and as amended, entitled bingo,
gambling devices and video games of chance licensing act, are met;
(6) requirements of section 1105 of the city code and as amended, relating to
regulation of lawful gambling, are met;
(7) the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the facility will not be detrimental
to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare;
(8) the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property
in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted nor substantially
diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood;
(9) the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in
the district;
(10) no alcohol is allowed on the premises;
(11) no one under age 18 is allowed on the premises;
(12) the site is not within 1,000 feet of the site of any other state licensed bingo.
(c) Veterinary services provided that:
(1) Must have a separate entrance.
(2) If adjacent to residential zoning district, then it must be screened as set forth in
section 510.25. (Added, Ord. No. 00-09)
(d) Counseling or training services subject to the standards specified in section 515.07,
subdivision 4 (c). (Added, Ord. No. 07-06)
RobbinsdaleCityCode (Zoning) 520.07, Subd.5
Subd. 5. Lot requirements and setback requirements. The following minimum requirements shall
be observed in a B-4 district subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in
this ordinance.
(a) Lot area: nominimum.
(b) Lot width: nominimum.
(c) Setbacks:
(i) a side yard that contains a driveway shall be at least 15 feet if there is one-way
traffic movement or at least 20 feet if there is two-way traffic movement;
(ii) A side yard that directly abuts a residential use or residential district shall be
increased ten additional feet over the minimums stated above and shall be screened
and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code.
(iii) Rear yard: 12 feet and if abutting a residential use or residential district, shall be
screened and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code.
Subd. 6. Building requirements.
(a) Height: No structure shall exceed three stories or 40 feet except as provided in subsections
510.15, subdivision 1 and 520.03, subdivision 4(d) of this code.
520.09. NG, neighborhood grocery district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to provide for the
establishment of local convenient grocery stores which deal directly with the customer for whom the goals
or services are furnished. These grocery stores are to provide services and goods only for the immediate
neighborhood and not intended to draw customers from the entire community.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. Grocery stores not more than 2,000 square feet of floor provided that:
(a) the property is a corner lot;
(b) the signing and lighting is approved by the city.

Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.01 (Rev. 2012)
Section 521 - Zoning: downtown district
(Added, Ord. No. 98-08)
521.01. DD-1 - downtown district. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to preserve and enhance the
existing pedestrian character of the downtown commercial area, to permit uses that promote conversion of
existing buildings and the development of new buildings in a manner that maintains the visual character
and architectural scale of existing development within the district, to promote the transformation of the
downtown into an even more compact pedestrian- and transit-oriented mixed-use area with a traditional
“main street” character, and to establish reasonable development standards and regulations which support
these objectives. This district is intended to facilitate the implementation of those portions of the
comprehensive plan that set policies for the downtown, as well as policy direction from goals and
objectives adopted by the economic development authority.
With respect to relationship to other applicable regulations and enforcement, in addition to the provisions
specified in this district, all property located within this district shall be subject to all the applicable
standards, procedures and regulations of sections 505, 510, 530 and 535. Where the provisions of this
district and the sections specified above are in conflict, the provisions of this district shall apply except for
section 530.07, “downtown architectural guidelines overlay district” in which case the provisions of the
overlay district shall govern.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses, up to 10,000 square feet in gross
floor area, in the downtown district:
(a) retail uses including, but not limited to, the sale of hardware, paint and wallpaper, meat
market, bakery, grocery food items, gifts, flowers, drug store/pharmacy, books, hobby
supplies, jewelry, antiques, new wearing apparel, pets and pet supplies, marine tropical
fish sales and service, and craft shops making articles exclusively for sale at retail on the
premises. (Amended, Ord. No. 12-02)
(b) personal services including, but not limited to, tailor, dry cleaners, laundromat, copy
centers including those with ancillary computer stations, barber shop, beauty salon, and
shoe repair.
(c) food retail services including, but not limited to, restaurant, delicatessen, coffee shop, ice
cream shop, and convenience food establishment, excluding those establishments that
provide drive-through window service.
(d) professional offices including, but not limited to those for lawyers, engineers,
accountants, urban planners, and architects.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.01, Subd. 3
(Rev. 2017)
(e) medical office or including, but not limited to, dentists, doctors, optometrists,
chiropractors, psychiatrists, and other practitioners of the healing arts for humans but
excluding any such use where the principal services rendered are related to drug or
alcohol detoxification.
(f) business offices including, but not limited to, financial and banking services, real estate
sales, travel agency, and insurance sales, but excluding check cashing and temporary
employment agency.
(g) blueprinting, printing, lithography, silk-screening, and sign painting.
(h) studios or academies including, but not limited to, those for dance, art, drama, music,
martial arts, and photography.
(i) public utilities, civic uses, and essential public services.
(j) gasoline service stations existing on date of adoption of this section.
(k) light manufacturing and/or repair of small precision goods such as watches, dental,
surgical or optical goods, needlework, jewelry, television, radio computer or electronic
assembly, provided that all activities are totally enclosed within a structure and
provisions are made to control and reduce noise.
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in the downtown district (DD-1)
are:
(a) off-street parking as regulated by subsection 510.17 of this code, with the exception of
subsection 510.17, subdivision 7 “number of spaces required”. For the number of spaces
required in the downtown district (DD-1), see subdivision 7 of this district.
(b) off-street loading as regulated by subsection 510.19 of this code.
(c) signs, as regulated by subdivision 9 of this district.
(d) open or outdoor service, sales and equipment rental provided that the outside use is
limited to 25% of the gross floor area of the principal use to a maximum of 2,500 square
feet, whichever is less.
(e) Food trucks licensed in accordance with Section 1120 of the City Code in privately owned
parking lots provided that:
(1) An application including a site plan and hours of operation is submitted and
approved by the city manager;
(2) The use shall not cause congestion on the site or adjacent streets or block fire lanes;
(3) The use shall be on a paved surface and not shall displace required parking needed
to support the existing principal use(s) of the site;
(4) The use shall be subject to all applicable nuisance and general performance
standards in the city code and must be kept free of trash, rubbish, litter and debris;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.01, Subd. 3(e)(5)
(Rev. 2017)
(5) All tents, canopies, awnings or similar items and all water, electrical and lighting
facilities shall be in compliance with applicable codes;
(6) Signs used to advertise the food truck, not permanently affixed to the truck, shall
comply with temporary sign standards and permit requirements;
(7) The food truck shall be licensed by the State of Minnesota, Hennepin County and
the City of Robbinsdale, as required;
(8) The use shall have written permission from the property owner;
(9) The use at any site shall be limited to no more than 3 consecutive days and a total of
10 days in a calendar year unless approved by the city council.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.01, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2008)
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The uses described in this subsection require a conditional use permit
based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code, provided that such
conditions are based on the consideration of the purpose of this district, the downtown architectural
design guidelines and the appropriateness of the use with respect to design or other compatibility with
surrounding uses, pedestrian amenity, parking layout, vehicular ingress and egress and other site plan
consideration. Conditional uses are the following:
(a) Permitted uses listed in subdivision 2 that exceed a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet
in buildings that have a footprint of no more than 20,000 square feet.
(b) Multiple dwellings or senior housing provided that the units are contained in a mixed
residential-commercial use building, provided that no more than 50% of the ground floor
shall be used for residential purposes and that no portion of the West Broadway frontage
may be used for residential dwelling units. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
(c) Residential and commercial uses on the same floor.
(d) Hotels, provided that no more than 50% of the ground floor shall be used for hotel guest
rooms and that no portion of the West Broadway frontage may be used for hotel guest
rooms.
(e) Theaters (not of the drive-in type).
(f) Planned unit developments as regulated by subsection 530.05 of this code.
(g) Off-street parking areas in excess of 125% of the minimum specified in subdivision 7 of
this downtown district.
(h) Shared and joint public parking.
(i) Open or outdoor service, sales and equipment rental accessory use that exceeds 2,500
square feet provided that:
(1) The outdoor area devoted to service, sales and equipment rental, connected with
the principal use, is limited to 25% of the gross floor area of the principal use.
(2) Outdoor areas are landscaped and fenced or screened from view of neighboring
uses.
(3) All areas shall be asphalt or concrete surfaced.
(4) The use shall not take up parking space or loading areas as required for
conformity to this section. (Added, Ord. No. 00-04)
(j) Farmers market subject to rules and regulations adopted from time to time via resolution
by the city council. (Added, Ord. No. 00-04)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.01, Subd. 4(k)
(Rev. 2015)
(k) Retail sale of second hand, used or consignment wearing apparel, accessories, costume
jewelry, shoes, boots or furniture occupying up to 2,250 sq. ft. or 25% of the gross floor
area of the building (whichever is less) provided that: (Added, Ord. No.12-02)
(1) There will be no exterior storage of used or consignment goods;
(2) There shall be no loading or unloading of used or consignment goods across a
public sidewalk or from a public street, or such activities must be by appointment
only;
(3) There is conformance with licensing requirements under Section 1135.05;
(4) It is not located in the B4p overlay district or it is excepted from the requirements
of B4p by 530.02, Subd. 8(k).
(l) Nonproduction brewery dispensing malt liquor brewed on the premises and served in a
taproom in compliance with Minnesota Statutes, Section 340A.301, subd. 6 (i) or 6 (j)
and the licensing requirements in city code section 1200, provided that:
(1) One parking space per 500 sq. ft. for brewery, processing, production, or storage or
cooler areas and 1 parking space per 400 sq. ft. for taproom and office areas;
(2) All bulk deliveries shall be to the rear of the building and screened from residential
uses;
(3) Primary access for employees and patrons will be from the parking lot;
(4) There is no outdoor storage of any brewing materials;
(5) Outdoor taproom seating and service areas shall require a conditional use permit
pursuant to section 521.01, subd. 4(i) regardless of size and shall be regulated by
city code section 1200.03, subd. 5 and 1205.23, subd. 4;
(6) The building architecture shall be compatible with the surrounding area and be
consistent with the downtown architectural design guidelines; and
(7) Brewery production and operations areas shall be no more than 50% of the Gross
Floor Area of the building.
(m) A cocktail room served by a microdistillery with production of distilled spirits at the
property limited to 5,000 proof gallons in a calendar year licensed under Minnesota
Statutes, Section 340A.22, subdivision 6c provided that:
(1) One parking space per 500 sq. ft. for the microdistillery, processing,
production and storage areas and 1 parking space per 400 sq. ft. for cocktail
room and office areas;
(2) All bulk deliveries shall be to the rear of the building and screened from
residential uses;
(3) Primary access for employees and patrons shall be from the parking lot;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.01, Subd. 4(m)(4)
(Rev. 2015)
(4) There is no outdoor storage of any materials used in the distilling process;
(5) Outdoor cocktail seating and service areas shall require a conditional use permit
pursuant to section 521.01, subd. 4(i) regardless of size and shall be regulated by
the licensing section of city code; and
(6) The building architecture shall be compatible with the surrounding area and be
consistent with the downtown architectural design guidelines.
(Added, Ord. No. 14-21; Added, Ord. No. 15-07)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.01, Subd. 5
(Rev. 2008)
Subd. 5. Lot requirements and setbacks. The following minimum requirements shall be observed
in the downtown district (DD-1):
(a) Lot area: 2,500 square feet.
(b) Lot width: 25 feet.
(c) Setback and building orientation:
(1) Front yards: In order to reinforce the existing building line and to facilitate
pedestrian access and circulation, all new principal buildings constructed after
July 21, 1998 shall be built to within three feet of the front property line and shall
be oriented so that the front of the building faces the public street. In the case of
a corner lot, the building shall be built to within three feet of the front and cornerside
property lines abutting each street, except that the ground floor of any
building and any fences, walls, posts, trees, bushes or any plant life shall be set
back in such a manner so as not to materially impede vision between a height of
three feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersection streets in the
triangle bounded by the curb lines of such corner lot and a straight line joining
points on such curb lines 20 feet from their intersection. Exceptions to the
maximum setback of three feet are also permitted up to 15 feet, if the setback is
pedestrian oriented and the design of the space contributes to the quality and
character of the streetscape. (Amended, Ord. No. 99-15)
(2) Side yards: Zero maximum, except where the side yard contains a driveway in
compliance with this code or where otherwise permitted as part of a conditional
use permit.
(3) Rear yard: Zero required.
Subd. 6. Height. No structure shall exceed four stories or 50 feet in height except as provided in
subsection 510.15, subdivision 1.
Subd. 7. Parking requirements. The following minimum areas shall be provided and maintained
by ownership, easement, or lease or combination thereof for and during the life of the respective uses as
hereinafter set forth:
(a) retail uses: one space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area;
(b) personal services: one space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area;
(c) food retail services: one space for each eight seats based upon design; where there is no
design layout, or where floor area is provided for patron use but not containing fixed
seats, one space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area;
(d) professional offices: one space for every 500 square feet of gross floor area;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.01, Subd. 8
(Rev. 2010)
(e) medical offices or clinics for medical practitioners: one space for each 300 square feet of
gross floor area;
(f) business offices: one space for every 500 square feet of gross floor area;
(g) blueprinting, printing, lithography, silk-screening, and sign painting: one space for every
400 square feet of gross floor area;
(h) studios or academies: one space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area;
(i) multiple dwelling units: one space per unit;
(j) senior housing: one-half space per unit; (Amended, Ord. No. 08-02)
(k) hotels: one space per each guest room plus one additional space for each 10 rooms;
(l) theaters: one space per five seats;
(m) light manufacturing and/or repair of small precision goods: one space for every 500
square feet of gross floor area.
Subd. 8. Landscaping requirements. All open areas of any site, except for that portion used for
parking, driveways, and storage shall be landscaped and incorporated in a landscape plan, in accordance
with the following:
(a) landscaping shall be provided between parking lots and any adjacent public street, walk,
or right-of-way; a landscaped area of at least three feet in width shall be provided, and
contain a streetwall of a maximum total height of four feet, trees, or hedge maintained at
least 36 inches in height above grade, to form a visual screen;
(b) the remainder of the landscaped area shall be planted with trees, ground cover, low
shrubs or flowering plants;
(c) a performance bond is required in accordance with section 510.25, subdivision 2 (a)(2).
Subd. 9. Signs. Signs are permitted in accordance with the regulations in subsection 410.09 of
this code, with the exception of subdivision 3 “business district”. Signs in the downtown district must
comply with the following:
(a) Type.
(1) An establishment may erect wall signs or projecting signs, or a combination
thereof as regulated by clauses (b) and (c). (Amended, Ord. No. 10-09, Sec. 2)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.01, Subd. 9(a)(2)
(Rev. 2010)
(2) Roof signs are prohibited. (Amended, Ord. No. 10-09, Sec. 2)
(3) Freestanding or pylon signs, permanent or temporary, shall not be permitted, except
for joint or shared parking uses and monument signs no higher than six feet. Joint
or shared parking signs shall not exceed 24 square feet nor a maximum height of 10
feet, and may only identify parking directions, locations, and parking use operator,
and shall not associate the parking use with an individual business name or logo.
(Amended, Ord. No. 00-10; Ord. No. 10-09, Sec. 2)
(4) Mural scenes or designs painted directly on an exterior building wall that are
intended as decorative or ornamental features are permitted with the prior approval
of the city council. Murals that include text, numbers, trademarks, logos or other
forms of business advertisement shall be considered painted wall signs and must
comply with the regulations of this code. Murals that are not painted wall signs are
not regulated by clauses (b) and (c). (Amended, Ord. No. 10-09, Sec. 2)
(5) Sandwich board signs, one per business establishment, are permitted provided that
they are located on the sidewalk in front of the business establishment and do not
block pedestrian use of the sidewalk. Each side of the sandwich board sign shall
not exceed nine square feet. Sandwich board signs are not regulated by clauses (b)
and (c). (Amended Ord. No. 10-09, Sec. 2)
(6) Special event banners for the purpose of advertising events on the premises of a
restaurant or entertainment venue are permitted as part of an entertainment license
and in addition to City Code Section 410.11, subd 13(a) regulating advertising
banners in general, provided that:
(a) The City Clerk shall be notified of each event prior to the banner
installation;
(b) Banners must be securely fastened to buildings, structures or fences, in no
case extending above a roof line;
(c) Banners shall be removed no later than the day following the event;
(d) Banners shall be no larger than 50 square feet; if two events are advertised
at one location, the total area shall be no larger than 50 square feet; and
(e) While not regulating the number of events advertised during the year,
banners may not be displayed at any premises more than a total of 90 days.
(Added, Ord. No. 19-12)
(b) Number. An establishment may erect any number of wall or projecting signs provided that
the total area does not exceed the total permitted area established in subdivision 9(c),
building walls lying upon the same planar surface or parallel planar surfaces facing the same
direction are considered one wall; and building walls lying upon separate planer surfaces but
intersecting at greater than 160 degrees interior angle are considered one wall. (Amended,
Ord. No. 00-10)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.01, Subd. 9(c)
(Rev. 1998)
(c) Size and materials.
(1) The maximum total area of all signs on a façade of a business establishment shall
not exceed three square feet per one lineal foot of business establishment frontage,
not to exceed a maximum of 100 square feet. Window signs shall not be included
in the above calculation and shall not exceed one-third of the glazed area of the
window. Signs may be externally illuminated and shall be made of metal, painted
wood or other painted similar material, but no acrylic signs or acrylic back-lit signs
are permitted. Signs with limited acrylic material and limited back-lighting may be
approved by the city council. Signs shall be placed on the building so as not to
obscure architectural features and detail. (Amended, Ord. No. 00-10)
(2) The maximum area of any individual wall sign shall not exceed two square feet per
one lineal foot of business establishment frontage. The maximum area of any
projecting sign shall not exceed six square feet.
Subd. 10. Performance standards.
(a) Parking facilities: All driveways, parking areas, and loading docks shall be surfaced with
blacktop, concrete, brick pavers, or other impervious material approved by the city. All
parking areas shall have B6-12 poured concrete curbing installed on their perimeters and
safety islands, and be in conformance with all other design requirements specified in
subsection 520.01, subdivision 8(d).
(b) Exterior storage: All materials and commercial equipment shall be kept inside a building
and nothing shall be stored outside except that which has received a conditional use permit
under subdivision 3(d) of this district.
(c) Refuse: All waste materials, refuse, or garbage shall be kept in closed containers and
screened as required by subsection 520.01, subdivision 10(d)(4) and by section 605 of the
city code.
(d) Screening:
(1) All required screening shall be according to subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this
code.
(2) Plantings shall not be placed so as to obstruct lines of sight at street corners and
driveways.
(3) Screening of off-street parking shall be required for:
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.01, Subd. 10(d)(3)(i)
(Rev. 1998)
(i) any off-street parking area requiring more than four spaces;
(ii) any driveway to a parking area of four or more spaces.
(4) All trash or garbage storage receptacles must be located in the rear or side yard and
be totally screened from view from any public right-of-way. Provisions must be
taken to protect screening from vehicle damage.
(5) All roof equipment, except alternate energy devices, must be screened from public
view unless the equipment is designed as an integral part of the building and is
compatible with the lines of the building, as determined by the city.
(e) Drainage and grade requirements: A finished ground grade shall be established such that
natural drainage away from all buildings is provided. The following minimum criteria shall
apply:
(1) the minimum elevation of finished grade shall not be less than one-fourth inch rise
per horizontal foot of setback measured from curb grade;
(2) the city may specify a minimum finished ground grade for any structure in order to
allow proper drainage and connection to city facilities.
(f) Landscaping: Regular maintenance of all landscaping, as dictated by site conditions, shall
be required. Failure to provide regular and required maintenance to consistently comply
with and meet the intent of this section shall constitute a violation of this code. All uses
shall provide water facilities to yard areas for maintenance and landscaping.
(g) Exterior maintenance: It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that the
exterior of any building or structure is kept in a good state of maintenance and repair. The
boulevard area of a premise shall be properly maintained, groomed, and cared for by the
abutting property owner.
(h) Essential services: Underground connection is required on each lot served by electrical
service, city sanitary sewer and city water line.
(i) Lighting: In addition to section 510.25, subdivision 5, all lighting shall be hooded and so
directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from
neighboring residential uses. (Added, Ord. No. 00-04)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.03
(Rev. 2010)
521.03. (Added, Ord. No. 10-04) DD-2 – Downtown transition and transit district. Subdivision 1.
Purpose. A district to provide for the transition of land use from the downtown commercial district with its
traditional architecture and compact pedestrian development patterns to the lower density residential districts
which accommodates mixed uses and regional transit facilities with transit oriented development.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. The permitted uses in the DD-2 district are:
(a) Retail uses including, but not limited to, the sale of hardware, paint and wallpaper, meat
market, bakery, grocery food items, gifts, flowers, drug store/pharmacy, books, hobby
supplies, jewelry, antiques, wearing apparel, pets and pet supplies, marine tropical fish sales
and service, and craft shops making articles exclusively for sale at retail on the premises.
(b) Personal services including, but not limited to, tailor, dry cleaners, laundromat, copy centers
including those with ancillary computer stations, barber shop, beauty salon, and shoe repair.
(c) Food retail services including, but not limited to, restaurant, delicatessen, coffee shop, ice
cream shop, and convenience food establishment, excluding those establishments that
provide drive-through window service.
(d) Professional offices including, but not limited to, those for accountants, architects,
engineers, lawyers, surveyors, and urban planners.
(e) Medical offices including, but not limited to, dentists, doctors, optometrists, chiropractors,
psychiatrists, and other practitioners of the healing arts, for humans but excluding any such
use where the principal services rendered are related to drug or alcohol detoxification.
(f) Business offices including, but not limited to, financial and banking services, real estate
sales, travel agencies, and insurance sales, but excluding check cashing, and temporary
employment agencies.
(g) Blueprinting, printing, lithography, silk-screening and sign painting.
(h) Public utilities, civic uses and essential public services.
(i) Light or custom manufacturing and/or repair of small precision goods such as watches,
dental, surgical or optical goods, needlework, jewelry, television, radio, computer or
electronic assembly, provided that all activities are totally enclosed within a structure and
provisions are made to control and reduce noise.
(j) Open parking lots and parking ramps available to the general public.
(k) Townhouse, condominium and cooperative developments in conformance with sections
515.05 and 515.09.
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in the DD-2 district are:
(a) All accessory uses in the DD-1 district except as hereinafter modified.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.03, Subd. 3 (b)
(Rev. 2010)
(b) Off-street parking as regulated by section 521.01, subdivision 7 of this code.
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The uses described in this subsection require a conditional use permit in
the DD-2 district based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code, and are
the following:
(a) Public transit facilities or terminals provided:
(1) the site and related parking is served by an arterial or collector street of sufficient
capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be generated;
(2) an off-street rider drop-off and pick-up drive and entrance is provided;
(3) vehicular entrances to parking or service areas shall create a minimum of conflict
with through traffic movement; and
(4) when abutting an R-1 or R-2 district a buffer area with screening and landscaping in
compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code shall be provided.
(b) Planned Unit Developments as regulated by subsection 530.05 of this code.
(c) Multiple dwellings or senior housing in conformance with section 515.05, subdivision 6,
with at least half of the required parking provided underground.
(d) Hotels and motels.
(e) Mixed-use buildings combining any of the following: commercial, office, multiple
residential dwellings, senior housing or hotels permitted in this district.
(f) Farmer’s market subject to requirements adopted by City Council resolution.
(g) Privately owned parking ramps as a principal or accessory use and privately owned parking
lots as a principal use in compliance with section 515.07, subdivision 4 (e).
(h) Buildings in excess of three stories or 40 feet in compliance with section 515.07,
subdivision 4(f).
(i) A cocktail room served by a microdistillery with production at the property of distilled
spirits limited to 5,000 proof gallons in a calendar year licensed under Minnesota Statutes,
Section 340A.22, subdivision 6c in accordance with the requirements specified in section
521.01, subd. 4 (m).
(Added, Ord. 15-07)
Subd. 5. Lot requirements and setbacks. Setbacks for all properties in the DD-2 district are
specified in Section 530.09, Transit Overlay District Building and Development Standards. (Amended, Ord.
No. 19-06)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.03, Subd. 6
(Rev. 2019)
Subd. 6. Building requirements. As required in section 530.09 Transit Overlay District Building
and Development Standards. (Amended, Ord. No. 19-06)
Subd. 7. Parking requirements. The following minimum areas shall be provided and maintained by
ownership, easement, or lease or combination thereof for and during the life of the respective uses as
hereinafter set forth:
(a) retail uses: one space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area;
(b) personal services: one space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area;
(c) food retail services: one space for each eight seats based upon design; where there is no
design layout, or where floor area is provided for patron use but not containing fixed seats,
one space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area;
(d) professional offices: one space for every 500 square feet of gross floor area;
(e) medical office or clinics for medical practitioner: one space for each 300 square feet of
gross floor area;
(f) business offices: one space for every 500 square feet of gross floor area;
(g) blueprinting, printing, lithography, silk-screening, and sign painting: one space for every
400 square feet of gross floor area;
(h) studios or academies: one space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area;
(i) multiple dwelling units: one space per unit;
(j) senior housing: one-half space per unit;
(k) hotels: one space per each guest room plus one additional space for each ten rooms;
(l) light manufacturing and/or repair of small precision goods: one space for every 500 square
feet of gross floor area.
Subd. 8. Landscaping requirements. All open areas of any site, except for that portion used for
parking, driveways, and storage shall be landscaped and incorporated in a landscape plan, in accordance
with the following:
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.03, Subd. 8 (a)
(Rev. 2014)
(a) landscaping shall be provided between parking lots and any adjacent public street, walk,
or right-of-way; a landscaped area of at least three feet in width shall be provided, and
contain a streetwall of a maximum total height of four feet, trees, or hedge maintained at
least 36 inches above grade 3, to form a visual screen;
(b) the remainder of the landscaped area shall be planted with trees, ground cover, low
shrubs or flowering plants;
(c) a performance bond is required in accordance with section 510.25, subdivision 2 (a)(2).
Subd. 9. Signs. Signs are permitted in accordance with the regulations in subsection 410.09 of
this code, with the exception of subdivision 3 “business district.” Signs in the DD-2 downtown transition
and transit district must comply with the following:
(a) Type.
(1) An establishment may erect wall signs or projecting signs, or a combination
thereof as regulated by clauses (b) and (c).
(2) Roof signs are prohibited.
(3) Freestanding or pylon signs, permanent or temporary, shall not be permitted,
except for joint or shared parking uses and public transit message center signs
and monument signs. Monument signs: such signs shall not exceed six feet in
height. Joint or shared parking signs: such signs shall neither exceed 24 square
feet nor a maximum height of ten feet, and may only identify parking directions,
locations and parking use operator, and shall not associate the parking use with
an individual business name or logo. Public transit message center signs: such
signs shall not exceed 12 feet in height. (Amended, Ord. No. 14-08)
(4) Mural scenes or designs painted directly on an exterior building wall that are
intended as decorative or ornamental features are permitted with the prior
approval of the City Council. Murals that include text, numbers, trademarks,
logos or other forms of business advertisement shall be considered painted wall
signs and must comply with the regulations of this code. Murals that are not
painted wall signs are not regulated by clauses (b) and (c).
(5) Sandwich board signs, one per business establishment, are permitted provided
that they are located on the sidewalk in front of the business establishment and do
not block pedestrian use of the sidewalk. Each side of the sandwich board sign
shall not exceed nine square feet. Sandwich board signs are not regulated by
clauses (b) and (c).
(b) Number. An establishment may erect any number of wall signs provided that the total
area does not exceed the total permitted area established in subdivision 9 (c). Building
walls lying upon the same planar surface or parallel planar surfaces facing the same
direction are considered one wall; and building walls lying upon separate planar surfaces
but intersection at greater than 160 degrees interior angle are considered one wall.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.03, Subd. 9 (c)
(Rev. 2010)
(c) Size and materials.
(1) The maximum total area of all wall signs on a façade of a business establishment
shall not exceed three square feet per one lineal foot of business establishment
frontage, not to exceed a maximum of 100 square feet. Window signs shall not
be included in the above calculation and may not exceed one-third of the glazed
area of the window. Signs may be externally illuminated and shall be made of
metal, painted wood or other painted similar material, but no acrylic material and
limited backlighting may be approved by the City Council. Signs shall be placed
on the building so as not to obscure architectural features and detail.
(2) The maximum area of any individual wall sign shall not exceed two square feet
per one lineal foot of business establishment frontage. The maximum area of any
projecting sign shall not exceed six square feet.
Subd. 10. Performance standards.
(a) Parking facilities: All driveways, parking areas and loading docks shall be surfaced with
blacktop, concrete, brick pavers or other impervious material approved by the City. All
parking areas shall have B6-12 poured concrete curbing installed on their perimeters and
safety islands, and be in conformance with all other design requirements specified in
subsection 520.01, subdivision 8 (d).
(b) Exterior storage: All materials and commercial equipment shall be kept inside a building
and nothing shall be stored outside except that which has received a conditional use
permit.
(c) Refuse: All waste materials, refuse, or garbage shall be kept in closed containers and
screened as required by subsection 520.01, subdivision 10 (d)(4) and by section 605 of
the city code.
(d) Screening:
(1) All required screening shall be according to subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code.
(2) Plantings shall not be placed so as to obstruct lines of sight at street corners and
driveways.
(3) Screening of off-street parking shall be required for:
(i) any off-street parking area requiring more than four spaces;
(ii) any driveway to a parking area of four or more spaces.
(4) All trash or garbage storage receptacles must be located in the rear or side yard
and be totally screened from view from any public right-of-way. Provisions must
be taken to protect screening from vehicle damage.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 521.03, Subd. 10 (d)(5)
(Rev. 2010)
(5) All roof equipment, except alternate energy devices must be screened from
public view unless the equipment is designed as an integral part of the building
and is compatible with the lines of the building, as determined by the City.
(e) Drainage and grade requirements: A finished ground grade shall be established such that
natural drainage away from all buildings is provided. The following minimum criteria
shall apply:
(1) the minimum elevation of finished grade shall not be less than one-fourth inch
rise per horizontal foot of setback measured from curb grade;
(2) the City may specify a minimum finished ground grade for any structure in order
to allow proper drainage and connection to City facilities.
(f) Landscaping: Regular maintenance of all landscaping as dictated by site conditions, shall
be required. Failure to provide regular and required maintenance to consistently comply
with and meet the intent of this section shall constitute a violation of this code. All uses
shall provide water facilities to yard areas for maintenance and landscaping.
(g) Exterior maintenance: It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that
the exterior of any building or structure is kept in a good state of maintenance and repair.
The boulevard area of a premise shall be properly maintained, groomed and cared for by
the abutting property owner.
(h) Essential services: Underground connection is required on each lot served by electrical
service, City sanitary sewer and City water line.
(i) Lighting: In addition to section 510.25, subdivision 5, all lighting shall be hooded and so
directed that the light source shall not be visible from the public right-of-way or from
neighboring residential uses.

Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 525.01
Section 525 - Zoning: industrial districts
525.01. B-W, Business-warehouse District. Subdivision 1. Purpose. A district to provide for
establishment of wholesale and retail trade, large volume or bulk commercial items, warehousing, and
light industry or processing.
Subd. 2. Permitted uses. Permitted uses in a B-W district are:
(a) all permitted uses allowed in B-1, B-2, B-3, and B-4 districts except as hereinafter
modified;
(b) animal hospitals and clinics but not including kennels;
(c) automobile sales;
(d) battery sales and rebuilding;
(e) building materials establishments;
(f) commercial greenhouse;
(g) fuels, but not including service stations;
(h) lumber yards;
(i) monument sales;
(j) plumbing, showrooms and shops;
(k) print shops;
(l) sign shops;
(m) trailer sales;
(n) warehousing and storage, but not including junk yards;
(o) wholesale distribution;
(p) wholesale meat processing;
(q) fence sales and service.
Subd. 3. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in a B-W district are:
(a) all accessory uses allowed in B-1, B-2, B-3, and B-4 districts except as hereinafter
modified.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 525.01, Subd. 4
Subd. 4. Conditional uses. The area described in this subdivision require a conditional use
permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by subsection 535.01 of this code and are the
following:
(a) All conditional uses allowed in B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-4 districts except as hereinafter
modified:
(1) no residential dwelling units.
(b) Research and testing laboratories provided that:
(1) the ventilation system shall be designed so that no odor or organisms will spread
to the outside air;
(2) conformance with the performance standards as outlined in subsection 510.25 of
this code;
(3) additional conditions may be imposed in certain instances to protect the health,
safety and general welfare of the residents of the city;
(c) Motorcycle, snowmobile, truck in excess of 9,000 pounds gross weight, and similar
motorized machines or equipment sales and service provided that:
(1) all sales and servicings are conducted within a structure;
(2) provisions are made to control and reduce noise;
(3) no outside storage except as allowed in compliance with subsection 520.09,
subdivision 4(e) of this code;
(4) such use is not within 100 feet of a residential use or residential district;
(5) the location of such use will not encourage motorcycle traffic through a
residential district;
(6) the provisions of subsection 535.01, subdivision 2(e) of this code are considered
and satisfactorily met.
(d) Automobile repair - major, provided that:
(1) no outside storage except as allowed in compliance with section 520.09,
subdivision 4(e) of this code;
(2) all servicing is conducted within a structure;
(3) provisions are made to control and reduce noise;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 525.01, Subd. 4(d)(4)
(4) adequate parking is provided in compliance with subsection 510.17 of this code;
(5) passenger vehicles and trucks in an inoperative state or unlicensed and
unregistered shall not be parked or stored in an outside location for a period
exceeding 30 days;
Subd. 5. Lot requirements and setback requirements. The following minimum requirements shall
be observed in a B-W district subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in
this code.
(a) Lot area: no minimum.
(b) Lot width: no minimum.
(c) Setbacks:
(1) front yard: zero
(2) side yard: zero unless:
(i) a side yard that contains a driveway shall be at least 15 feet if there is
one-way traffic movement or at least 20 feet if there is two-way traffic
movement;
(ii) a side yard that directly abuts a residential use or residential district shall
be increased ten additional feet over the minimum stated above and shall
be screened and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25,
subdivision 2 of this code.
(3) Rear yard: 12 feet and if abutting a residential use or residential district, shall be
screened and landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of
this code.
Subd. 6. Building requirements:
(a) Height: No structure shall exceed three stories or 40 feet except as provided in
subsection 510.15, subdivision 1 of this code.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01 (Rev. 2016)
Section 530 - Zoning: special districts and regulated uses
Section 530.01 (Repealed; Section Amended, Ord. 16-17)
530.01. Statutory Authorization. The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter
103F and Chapter 452 delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council/Board of Commissioners of Robbinsdale, Minnesota does
ordain as follows;
Subdivision 1. Purpose.
(a) This ordinance regulates development in the flood hazard areas of the City of Robbinsdale.
These flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation, which may result in loss of life
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare by minimizing these losses and disruptions.
(b) National Flood Insurance Program Compliance. This ordinance is adopted to comply with
the rules and regulations of the national Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 Code of
Federal Regulations parts 59 - 78, as amended, so as to maintain the community’s eligibility
in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(c) This ordinance is also intended to preserve the natural characteristics and functions of
watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational
opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development.
Subd. 2. General Provisions.
(a) How to Use This Ordinance. This ordinance adopts the floodplain maps applicable to the
City of Robbinsdale and includes three floodplain districts; Floodway, Flood Fringe, and
General Flood Plain.
(1) Where Floodway and Flood Fringe districts are delineated on the floodplain maps,
the standards in Subds. 4 or 5 will apply, depending on the location of the property.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 2(a)(2)
(Rev. 2016)
(2) Locations where floodway and Flood Fringe districts are not delineated on the
floodplain maps are considered to fall within the General Floodplain district. Within
the General Floodplain district, the Floodway District standards in Subd. 4
apply unless the floodway boundary is determined, according to the process
outlined in Subd. 6. Once the floodway boundary is determined, the Flood Fringe
District standards in Subd. 5 may apply outside the floodway.
(b) Lands to Which Ordinance Applies. This ordinance applies to all lands within the jurisdiction
of Robbinsdale shown on the Official Zoning Map and/or the attachments to the map as being
located within the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General Floodplain Districts.
(1) The Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Floodplain Districts are overlay districts
that are superimposed on all existing zoning districts. The standards imposed in the
overlay districts are in addition to any other requirements in this ordinance. In case
of a conflict, the more restrictive standards will apply.
(c) Incorporation of Maps by Reference. The following maps together with all attached material
are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the Official Zoning Map and this
ordinance. The attached material includes the Flood Insurance Study for Hennepin County,
Minnesota, and Incorporated Areas, dated November 4, 2016 and the Flood Insurance Rate
Map panels enumerated below, dated November 4, 2016, all prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. These materials are on file in the Community Development
Department.
Effective Flood Insurance Rate Map panels:
27053C0211F
27053C0212F
27053C0213F
27053C0214F
(d) Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. The regulatory flood protection elevation (RFPE) is
an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any
increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from
designation of a floodway.
(e) Interpretation. The boundaries of the zoning districts are determined by scaling distances on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 2(e)(1)
(Rev. 2016)
(1) Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits illustrated on the official
zoning map and actual field conditions, the flood elevations shall be the governing
factor. The Zoning Administrator must interpret the boundary location based on the
ground elevations that existed on the site on the date of the first National Flood
Insurance Program map showing the area within the regulatory floodplain, and
other available technical data.
(2) Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will be given a reasonable
opportunity to present their case to the Planning Commissioner and to submit
technical evidence.
(f) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or other private agreements.
However, where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
ordinance prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this ordinance are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
(g) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. This ordinance does not imply that areas outside the
floodplain districts or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This ordinance does not create liability on the part of the City of
Robbinsdale or its officers or employees for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(h) Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this ordinance is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be
affected and shall remain in full force.
(i) Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance
must be interpreted according to common usage and so as to give this ordinance its most
reasonable application.
(1) Accessory Use or Structure - a use or structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
(2) Base Flood Elevation -The elevation of the "regional flood." The term "base flood
elevation" is used in the flood insurance survey.
(3) Basement - any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base
subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of
excavation below ground level.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 2(i)(4)
(Rev. 2016)
(4) Conditional Use - a specific type of structure or land use listed in the official control
that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review procedure and with
appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the official zoning controls or
building codes and upon a finding that:
(i) Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist.
(ii) The structure and/or land use conform to the comprehensive land use
plan if one exists and are compatible with the existing neighborhood.
(5) Critical Facilities - facilities necessary to a community's public health and safety,
those that store or produce highly volatile, toxic or water-reactive materials, and
those that house occupants that may be insufficiently mobile to avoid loss of life or
injury. Examples of critical facilities include hospitals, correctional facilities,
schools, daycare facilities, nursing homes, fire and police stations, wastewater
treatment facilities, public electric utilities, water plants, fuel storage facilities, and
waste handling and storage facilities.
(6) Development - any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
(7) Equal Degree of Encroachment- a method of determining the location of floodway
boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of
conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
(8) Farm Fence-A fence as defined by Minn. Statutes, Section 344.02, Subd. l(a)-(d).
An open type fence of posts and wire is not considered to be a structure under this
ordinance. Fences that have the potential to obstruct flood flows, such as chain link
fences and rigid walls, are regulated as structures under this ordinance.
(9) Flood - a temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of a
wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
(10) Flood Frequency - the frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood stage
or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
(11) Flood Fringe - the portion of the Special Flood Hazard Area (one percent annual
chance flood) located outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the
term "floodway fringe" used in the Flood Insurance Study for Hennepin
County, Minnesota.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 2(i)(12)
(Rev. 2016)
(12) Flood Prone Area - any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see "Flood").
(13) Floodplain - the beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse
which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
(14) Floodproofing - a combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to
properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or
elimination of flood damages.
(15) Floodway - the bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to carry or
store the regional flood discharge.
(16) Lowest Floor - the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered
a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render
the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44
Code of Federal Regulations, Part 60.3.
(17) Manufactured Home - a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home"
does not include the term "recreational vehicle."
(18) New Construction - Structures, including additions and improvements, and
placement of manufactured homes, for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of this ordinance.
(19) Obstruction - any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any
channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede, retard, or
change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or
collecting debris carried by such water.
(20) One Hundred Year Floodplain - lands inundated by the "Regional Flood" (see
definition).
(21) Principal Use or Structure - all uses or structures that are not accessory uses or
structures.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 2(i)(12)
(Rev. 2016)
(22) Reach - a hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban
area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings
would most typically constitute a reach.
(23) Recreational Vehicle - a vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400 square
feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be
self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is designed
primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the purposes of this ordinance,
the term recreational vehicle is synonymous with the term "travel trailer/travel
vehicle."
(24) Regional Flood - a flood which is representative of large floods known to have
occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be
expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 1 % chance or
100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base
flood" used in a flood insurance study.
(25) Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE) - an elevation not less than one
foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood
elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation
of a floodway.
(26) Repetitive Loss - Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate
occasions during a ten year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of
each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred.
(27) Special Flood Hazard Area - a term used for flood insurance purposes
synonymous with "One Hundred Year Floodplain."
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 2(i)(28)
(Rev. 2016)
(28) Start of Construction - includes substantial improvement, and means the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or
other improvement that occurred before the permit's expiration date. The actual
start is either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
(29) Structure - anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground
or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds,
detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles not meeting
the exemption criteria specified in Subd. 9(b)(2) of this ordinance and other similar
items.
(30) Substantial Damage - means damage of any origin sustained by a structure where
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
(31) Substantial Improvement - within any consecutive 3 65-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair
after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures that have
incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
(i) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
(ii) Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure." For the purpose of this ordinance, "historic structure" is as
defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 2(j)
(Rev. 2016)
(j) Annexations. The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference into Subd. 2(c)
above may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate boundaries of the City
of Robbinsdale at the time of adoption of this ordinance. If any of these floodplain land
areas are annexed into the City of Robbinsdale after the date of adoption of this ordinance,
the newly annexed floodplain lands will be subject to the provisions of this ordinance
immediately upon the date of annexation.
(k) Detachments. The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference into Subd. 2(c)
above will include floodplain areas that lie inside the corporate boundaries of
municipalities at the time of adoption of this ordinance. If any of these floodplain land
areas are detached from a municipality and come under the jurisdiction of Robbinsdale
after the date of adoption of this ordinance, the newly detached floodplain lands will be
subject to the provisions of this ordinance immediately upon the date of detachment.
Subd. 3. Establishmentn of Zoning Districts.
(a) Districts.
(1) Floodway Distric. The Floodway District includes those areas within Zones AE
that have a floodway delineated as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in Subd. 2(c), as well as portions of other lakes, wetlands, and basins
within Zones AE (that do not have a floodway delineated) that are located at or
below the ordinary high water level as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section
103G.005, subdivision 14.
(2) Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District includes areas within Zones AE
that have a floodway delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in Subd.
2(c), but are located outside of the floodway. For other lakes, wetlands and other
basins within Zones AE that do not have a floodway delineated, the Flood Fringe
District also includes those areas below the 1 % annual chance (100-year) flood
elevation but above the ordinary high water level as defined in Minnesota Statutes,
Section 103G.005, subdivision 14.
(3) General Floodplain District. The General Floodplain District includes those areas
within Zones A and AE that do not have a delineated floodway on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map adopted in Subd. 2( c ).
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 3 (b)
(Rev. 2016)
(b) Applicability. Within the floodplain districts established in this ordinance, the use, size,
type and location of development must comply with the terms of this ordinance and other
applicable regulations. In no cases shall floodplain development adversely affect the
efficiency or unduly restrict the capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributaries to
the main stream, drainage ditches, or any other drainage facilities or systems. All uses not
listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in Subds. 4, 5 and 6 are prohibited. In addition,
critical facilities, as defined in Subd. 2(i)(5), are prohibited in all floodplain districts.
Subd. 4. Floodway District (FW)
(a) Permitted Uses. The following uses, subject to the standards set forth in Subd. 4(b), are
permitted uses if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district or any applicable
overlay district:
(1) General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck
farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport landing strips.
(3) Open space uses, including but not limited to private and public golf courses, tennis
courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps,
swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries,
shooting preserves, hunting and fishing areas, and single or multiple purpose
recreational trails.
(4) Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
(5) Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and pipelines, provided that the
Department of Natural Resources' Area Hydrologist is notified at least ten days
prior to issuance of any permit.
(b) Standards for Floodway Permitted Uses.
(1) The use must have a low flood damage potential.
(2) The use must not obstruct flood flows or cause any increase in flood elevations and
must not involve structures, obstructions, or storage of materials or equipment.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530, Subd. 4 (b)(3)
(Rev. 2016)
(3) Any facility that will be used by employees or the general public must be designed
with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area
is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth (in feet) multiplied by the
velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a product of four upon occurrence of the
regional (1% chance) flood.
(c) Conditional Uses. The following uses may be allowed as conditional uses following the
standards and procedures set forth in Subd. 10(d) of this ordinance and further subject to
the standards set forth in Subd. 4(d), if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district
or any applicable overlay district.
(1) Structures accessory to the uses listed in Subds. 4(a)(l) - 4(a)(3) above and the
uses listed in Subds. 4(c)(2) and 4(c)(3) below.
(2) Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.
(3) Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control structures.
(4) Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
(5) Placement of fill or construction of fences that obstruct flood flows. Farm fences,
as defined in Subd. 2(i)(8), are permitted uses.
(6) Travel-ready recreational vehicles meeting the exception standards in Subd. 9(6).
(7) Levees or dikes intended to protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood event
equal to or less than the 10-year frequency flood event.
(d) Standards for Floodway Conditional Uses.
(1) All Uses. A conditional use must not cause any increase in the stage of the 1%
chance or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or
reaches affected.
(2) Fill; Storage of Materials and Equipment:
(i) The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant
life is prohibited.
(ii) Fill, dredge spoil, and other similar materials deposited or stored in the
floodplain must be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method. Permanent sand and gravel
operations and similar uses must be covered by a long-term site
development plan.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 4(d)(2)(iii)
(Rev. 2016)
(iii) Temporary placement of fill, other materials, or equipment which would
cause an increase to the stage of the 1 % percent chance or regional flood
may only be allowed if the City Council has approved a plan that assures
removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood
warning time available.
(3) Accessory Structures. Accessory structures, as identified in Subd. 4(c)(l), may be
permitted, provided that:
(i) structures are not intended for human habitation;
(ii) structures will have a low flood damage potential;
(iii) structures will be constructed and placed so as to offer a minimal
obstruction to the flow of flood waters;
(iv) Service utilities, such as electrical and heating equipment, within these
structures must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation or properly floodproofed;
(v) Structures must be elevated on fill or structurally dry floodproofed in
accordance with the FP 1 or FP2 floodproofing classifications in the State
Building Code. All floodproofed structures must be adequately anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement and designed to
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
(vi) As an alternative, an accessory structure may be internally/wet
floodproofed to the FP3 or FP4 floodproofing classifications in the State
Building Code, provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal
investment and does not exceed 576 square feet in size. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or meet or exceed the following criteria:
(A) To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must
be a minimum of two "automatic" openings in the outside walls
of the structure, with a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
and
(B) There must be openings on at least two sides of the structure and
the bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above
the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human
intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not
satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 4(d)(4)
(Rev. 2016)
(4) Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross
section of protected wetlands or public waters are subject to the provisions of
Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.245.
(5) A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway must not cause an increase
to the 1 % chance or regional flood. The technical analysis must assume equal
conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
(6) Floodway developments must not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the
channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse or drainage system.
Subd. 5. Flood Fringe District (FF)
(a) Permitted Uses. Permitted uses are those uses of land or structures allowed in the
underlying zoning district(s) that comply with the standards in Subd. 5(6). If no preexisting,
underlying zoning districts exist, then any residential or nonresidential structure or
use of a structure or land is a permitted use provided it does not constitute a public
nuisance.
(b) Standards for Flood Fringe Permitted Uses.
(1) All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on fill so that the
lowest floor, as defined, is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
The finished fill elevation for structures must be no lower than one foot below the
regulatory flood protection elevation and the fill must extend at the same elevation
at least 15 feet beyond the outside limits of the structure.
(2) Accessory Structures. As an alternative to the fill requirements of Subd. 5(b)(l),
structures accessory to the uses identified in Subd. 5(a) may be permitted to be
internally/wet floodproofed to the FP3 or FP4 floodproofing classifications in the
State Building Code, provided that:
(i) the accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed
576 square feet in size, and is only used for parking and storage.
(ii) All portions of floodproofed accessory structures below the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation must be: (i) adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement and designed to equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls, (ii) be constructed with materials resistant to
flood damage, and (iii) must have all service utilities be water-tight or
elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 5(b)(2)(iii)
(Rev. 2016)
(iii) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following criteria:
(A) To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be
a minimum of two "automatic" openings in the outside walls of the
structure, with a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and
(B) There must be openings on at least two sides of the structure and the
bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above
the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human
intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy
this requirement for automatic openings.
(3) The cumulative placement of fill or similar material on a parcel must not exceed
1,000 cubic yards, unless the fill is specifically intended to elevate a structure in
accordance with Subd. 5(b )(1) of this ordinance, or if allowed as a conditional use
under Subd. 5(c)(3) below.
(4) The storage of any materials or equipment must be elevated on fill to the regulatory
flood protection elevation.
(5) All service utilities, including ductwork, must be elevated or water-tight to prevent
infiltration of floodwaters.
(6) The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable,
explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.
(7) All fill must be properly compacted and the slopes must be properly protected by
the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method.
(8) All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an elevation
not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation, or must
have a flood warning /emergency evacuation plan acceptable to the City Council.
(9) Accessory uses such as yards, railroad tracks, and parking lots may be at an
elevation lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. However, any
facilities used by employees or the general public must be designed with a flood
warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area is inundated
to a depth and velocity such that the depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in
feet per second) would exceed a product of four upon occurrence of the regional
(1 % chance) flood.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 5(b)(10)
(Rev. 2016)
(10) Interference with normal manufacturing/industrial plant operations must be
minimized, especially along streams having protracted flood durations. In
considering permit applications, due consideration must be given to the needs of
industries with operations that require a floodplain location.
(11) Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles must meet the standards of Subd. 9
of this ordinance.
(c) Conditional Uses. The following uses and activities may be allowed as conditional uses, if
allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) or any applicable overlay district, following the
procedures in Subd. 10( d) of this ordinance.
(1) Any structure that is not elevated on fill or floodproofed in accordance with Subds.
5(b)(l) and 5(b)(2) of this ordinance.
(2) Storage of any material or equipment below the regulatory flood protection
elevation.
(3) The cumulative placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill when the fill is
not being used to elevate a structure in accordance with Subd. 5(b)(l) of this
ordinance.
(4) The use of methods to elevate structures above the regulatory flood protection
elevation, including stilts, pilings, parallel walls, or above-grade, enclosed areas
such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages, shall meet the standards in Subd.
5(d)(6).
(d) Standards for Flood Fringe Conditional Uses.
(1) The standards listed in Subd. 5(b )( 4) through 5(b )(10) apply to all conditional uses.
(2) Basements, as defined by Subd. 2(i)(3) of this ordinance, are subject to the
following:
(i) Residential basement construction is not allowed below the regulatory
flood protection elevation.
(ii) Non-residential basements may be allowed below the regulatory flood
protection elevation provided the basement is structurally dry
floodproofed in accordance with Subd. 5(d)(3) of this ordinance.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 5(d)(3)
(Rev. 2016)
(3) All areas of nonresidential structures, including basements, to be placed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation must be floodproofed in accordance with the
structurally dry floodproofing classifications in the State Building Code.
Structurally dry floodproofing must meet the FPI or FP2 floodproofing
classification in the State Building Code, which requires making the structure
watertight with the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
the effects of buoyancy.
(4) The placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other similar material on a
parcel (other than for the purpose of elevating a structure to the regulatory flood
protection elevation) must comply with an approved erosion/sedimentation control
plan.
(i) The plan must clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize the fill on
site for a flood event at a minimum of the regional (1 % chance) flood
event.
(ii) The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered professional
engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the City Council.
(iii) The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the
material from the floodplain if adequate flood warning time exists.
(5) Storage of materials and equipment below the regulatory flood protection elevation
must comply with an approved emergency plan providing for removal of such
materials within the time available after a flood warning.
(6) Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be utilized to elevate a
structure's lowest floor above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The base or
floor of an enclosed area shall be considered above-grade and not a structure's
basement or lowest floor if: 1) the enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side
of the structure; 2) it is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood
resistant materials; and 3) it is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access
or storage. The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the
following additional standards:
(i) Design and Certification - The structure's design and as-built condition
must be certified by a registered professional engineer as being in
compliance with the general design standards of the State Building Code
and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above
the regulatory flood protection elevation or be designed to prevent flood
water from entering or accumulating within these components during
times of flooding.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 5(d)(6)(ii)
(Rev. 2016)
(ii) (Specific Standards for Above-grade, Enclosed Areas - Above-grade,
fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must be
designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:
(A) The minimum area of openings in the walls where internal
flooding is to be used as a floodproofing technique. There shall be
a minimum of two openings on at least two sides of the structure
and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade. The automatic openings shall have a minimum net
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding unless a registered professional
engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net area would suffice.
The automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters without any form of
human intervention; and
(B) That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials
in accordance with the FP3 or FP4 classifications in the State
Building Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking
of vehicles or storage.
Subd. 6. General Floodplain District (GF).
(a) Permitted Uses.
(1) The uses listed in Subd. 4(a) of this ordinance, Floodway District Permitted Uses,
are permitted uses.
(2) All other uses are subject to the floodway/flood fringe evaluation criteria specified
in Subd. 6(b) below. Subd. 4 applies if the proposed use is determined to be in the
Floodway District. Subd. 5 applies if the proposed use is determined to be in the
Flood Fringe District.
(b) Procedures for Floodway and Flood Fringe Determinations.
(1) Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval within the General
Floodplain District, the Zoning Administrator must obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any regional flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
state, or other source.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 6(b)(2)
(Rev. 2016)
(2) If regional flood elevation and floodway data are not readily available, the
applicant must furnish additional information, as needed, to determine the
regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the proposed use would fall
within the Floodway or Flood Fringe District. Information must be consistent with
accepted hydrological and hydraulic engineering standards and the standards in
Subd. 6(b)(3) below.
(3) The determination of floodway and flood fringe must include the following
components, as applicable:
(i) Estimate the peak discharge of the regional (1 % chance) flood.
(ii) Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based upon a
hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas.
(iii) Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional flood
without increasing flood stages more than one-half (0.5) foot. A lesser
stage increase than 0.5 foot is required if, as a result of the stage increase,
increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of encroachment
on both sides of the stream within the reach must be assumed in
computing floodway boundaries.
(4) The Zoning Administrator will review the submitted information and assess the
technical evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District
boundary. The assessment must include the cumulative effects of previous floodway
encroachments. The Zoning Administrator may seek technical assistance from a
designated engineer or other expert person or agency, including the Department of
Natural Resources. Based on this assessment, the Zoning Administrator may
approve or deny the application.
(5) Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries have been determined, the
Zoning Administrator must process the permit application consistent with the
applicable provisions of Subds. 4 and 5 of this ordinance.
Subd. 7. Land Development Standards.
(a) In General. Recognizing that flood prone areas may exist outside of designated
floodplain districts, the requirements of this section apply to all land within the City of
Robbinsdale.
(b) Subdivision. No land may be subdivided which is unsuitable for reasons of flooding or
inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. Manufactured home parks
and recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are considered subdivisions under this
ordinance.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 7(b)(1)
(Rev. 2016)
(1) All lots within the floodplain districts must be able to contain a building site outside
of the Floodway District at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
(2) All subdivisions must have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual
building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation, unless a flood warning emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all
vehicles and people during the regional (1% chance) flood has been approved by the
City Council. The plan must be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified
individual, and must demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out
the evacuation.
(3) For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District
boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of
all access roads must be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and
platting documents.
(4) In the General Floodplain District, applicants must provide the information required
in Subd. 6(b) of this ordinance to determine the regional flood elevation, the
Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries and the regulatory flood protection
elevation for the subdivision site.
(5) If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development is in a flood prone
area, any such proposal must be reviewed to assure that:
(i) All such proposals are consistent with the need to mm1m1ze flood damage
within the flood prone area,
(ii) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage,
and
(iv) Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of flood hazard.
(c) Building Sites. If a proposed building site is in a flood prone area, all new construction and
substantial improvements (including the placement of manufactured homes) must be:
(1) Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
(3) Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 7(c)(4)
(Rev. 2016)
(4) Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
Subd. 8. Public Utilities, Railroads, Roads, and Bridges.
(a) Public Utilities: All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and water
supply systems to be located in the floodplain must be floodproofed in accordance with the
State Building Code or elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
(b) Public Transportation Facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the
floodplain must comply with Subds. 4 and 5 of this ordinance. These transportation facilities
must be elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation where failure or interruption of
these facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities
are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may
be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services
would not endanger the public health or safety.
(c) On-site Water Supply and Sewage Treatment Systems. Where public utilities are not
provided: 1) On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and are subject to the provisions in Minnesota
Rules Chapter 4725.4350, as amended; and 2) New or replacement on-site sewage treatment
systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, they must not be subject to
impairment or contamination during times of flooding, and are subject to the provisions in
Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080.2270, as amended.
Subd. 9. Manufactured Homes, Manufactured Home Parks, and Recreational Vehicles.
(a) Manufactured Homes. New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing
manufactured home parks are prohibited in any floodplain district. For existing
manufactured home parks or lots of record, the following requirements apply:
(1) Placement or replacement of manufactured home units is prohibited in the Floodway
District.
(2) If allowed in the Flood Fringe District, placement or replacement of manufactured
home units is subject to the requirements of Subd. 5 of this ordinance and the
following standards.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 9(a)(2)(i)
(Rev. 2016)
(i) New and replacement manufactured homes must be elevated in
compliance with Subd. 5 of this ordinance and must be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists
flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(ii) New or replacement manufactured homes in existing manufactured home
parks must meet the vehicular access requirements for subdivisions in
Subd. 7(b)(2).
(b) Recreational Vehicles. New recreational vehicle parks or campground sand expansions to
existing recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are prohibited in any floodplain district.
Placement of recreational vehicles in existing recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds in
the floodplain must meet the exemption criteria below or be treated as new structures
meeting the requirements of this ordinance.
(1) Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this ordinance if they are
placed in any of the following areas and meet the criteria listed in Subd. 9(b)(2).
(i) Individual lots or parcels of record.
(ii) Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds.
(iii) Existing condominium-type associations.
(2) Criteria for Exempt Recreational Vehicles:
(i) The vehicle must have a current license required for highway use.
(ii) The vehicle must be highway ready, meaning on wheels or the internal
jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks.
(iii) No permanent structural type additions may be attached to the vehicle.
(iv) The vehicle and associated use must be permissible in any pre-existing,
underlying zoning district.
(v) Accessory structures are not permitted within the Floodway District. Any
accessory structure in the Flood Fringe District must be constructed of
flood-resistant materials and be securely anchored, meeting the
requirements applicable to manufactured homes in Sub. 9(b)(2).
(vi) An accessory structure must constitute a minimal investment.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 9(b)(3)
(Rev. 2016)
(3) Recreational vehicles that are exempt in Subd. 9(b)(2) lose this exemption when
development occurs on the site that exceeds a minimal investment for an accessory
structure such as a garage or storage building. The recreational vehicle and all
accessory structures will then be treated as new structures subject to the elevation
and floodproofing requirements of Subd. 5 of this ordinance. No development or
improvement on the parcel or attachment to the recreational vehicle is allowed that
would hinder the removal of the vehicle should flooding occur.
Subd. 10. Administration.
(a) Zoning Administrator. A Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the City
Manager must administer and enforce this ordinance.
(b) Permit Requirements.
(1) Permit Required. A permit must be obtained from the Zoning Administrator prior to
conducting the following activities:
(i) The erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation, or alteration of any
building, structure, or portion thereof. Normal maintenance and repair
also requires a permit if such work, separately or in conjunction with other
planned work, constitutes a substantial improvement as defined in this
ordinance.
(ii) The use or change of use of a building, structure, or land.
(iii) The construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic system, although a
permit is not required for a farm fence as defined in this ordinance.
(iv) The change or extension of a nonconforming use.
(v) The repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or
any other source.
(vi) The placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials
or equipment within the floodplain.
(vii) Relocation or alteration of a watercourse (including new or replacement
culverts and bridges), unless a public waters work permit has been applied
for.
(viii) Any other type of "development" as defined in this ordinance.
(2) Application for Permit. Permit applications must be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator. The permit application
must include the following as applicable:
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 10(b)(2)(i)
(Rev. 2016)
(i) A site plan showing all pertinent dimensions, existing or proposed buildings,
structures, and significant natural features having an influence on the permit.
(ii) Location of fill or storage of materials in relation to the stream channel.
(iii) Copies of any required municipal, county, state or federal permits or
approvals.
(iv) Other relevant information requested by the Zoning Administrator as
necessary to properly evaluate the permit application.
(3) Certificate of Zoning Compliance for a New, Altered, or Nonconforming Use. No
building, land or structure may be occupied or used in any manner until a certificate
of zoning compliance has been issued by the Zoning Administrator stating that the
use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this ordinance.
(4) Certification. The applicant is required to submit certification by a registered
professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that the
finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance. Floodproofing measures must be certified by a
registered professional engineer or registered architect.
(5) Record of First Floor Elevation. The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record
of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new structures and
alterations or additions to existing structures in the floodplain. The Zoning
Administrator must also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures and
alterations or additions to structures are floodproofed.
(6) Notifications for Watercourse Alterations. Before authorizing any alteration or
relocation of a river or stream, the Zoning Administrator must notify adjacent
communities. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work in public waters
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.245, this will suffice as adequate
notice. A copy of the notification must also be submitted to the Chicago Regional
Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
(7) Notification to FEMA When Physical Changes Increase or Decrease Base Flood
Elevations. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date
such supporting information becomes available, the Zoning Administrator must
notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy
of the relevant technical or scientific data.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 10(c)
(Rev. 2016)
(c) Variances.
(1) Variance Applications. An application for a variance to the provisions of this
ordinance will be processed and reviewed in accordance with applicable state
statutes and Section(s) 535.05 of the zoning ordinance/code.
(2) Adherence to State Floodplain Management Standards. A variance must not allow a
use that is not allowed in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than
the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards
lower than those required by state law.
(3) Additional Variance Criteria. The following additional variance criteria of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied:
(i) Variances must not be issued by a community within any designated
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
(ii) Variances may only be issued by a community upon (i) a showing of
good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a
determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(iii) Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(4) Flood Insurance Notice. The Zoning Administrator must notify the applicant for a
variance that: 1) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and 2) Such construction below the
base or regional flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification
must be maintained with a record of all variance actions.
(5) General Considerations. The community may consider the following factors in
granting variances and imposing conditions on variances and conditional uses in
floodplains:
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 10(c)(5)(i)
(Rev. 2016)
(i) The potential danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachments;
(ii) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream
to the injury of others;
(iii) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems, if any, and the ability
of these systems to minimize the potential for disease, contamination and
unsanitary conditions;
(iv) The susceptibility of any proposed use and its contents to flood damage
and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(v) The importance of the services to be provided by the proposed use to the
community;
(vi) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
(vii) The availability of viable alternative locations for the proposed use that
are not subject to flooding;
(viii) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
(ix) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Land Use
Plan and flood plain management program for the area;
(x) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
(xi) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
(6) Submittal of Hearing Notices to the Department of Natural Resources (DNR). The
Community Development Coordinator must submit hearing notices for proposed
variances to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten days' notice of
the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective
DNR area hydrologist.
(7) Submittal of Final Decisions to the DNR. A copy of all decisions granting variances
must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of such action. The notice may be
sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
(8) Record-Keeping. The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and must report such variances in
an annual or biennial report to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance
Program, when requested by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(d) Conditional Uses.
(1) Administrative Review. An application for a conditional use permit under the
provisions of this ordinance will be processed and reviewed in accordance with
Section 530.01 of the zoning ordinance/code.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 10(d)(2)
(Rev. 2016)
(2) Factors Used in Decision-Making. In passing upon conditional use applications, the
City Council must consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this
ordinance, and those factors identified in Subd. 10(c)(5) of this ordinance.
(3) Conditions Attached to Conditional Use Permits. The City Council may attach such
conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill
the purposes of this ordinance. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
(i) Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
(ii) Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
(iii) Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
(iv) Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory
storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures.
(v) Floodproofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code and
this ordinance. The applicant must submit a plan or document certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing
measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation
and associated flood factors for the particular area.
(4) Submittal of Hearing Notices to the Department of Natural Resources (DNR). The
Community Development Coordinator must submit hearing notices for proposed
conditional uses to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten days'
notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the
respective DNR area hydrologist.
(5) Submittal of Final Decisions to the DNR. A copy of all decisions granting
conditional uses must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of such action. The
notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area
hydrologist.
Subd. 11. Nonconformities.
(a) Continuance of Nonconformities. A use, structure, or occupancy of land which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this ordinance but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance may be continued subject to the following conditions. Historic
structures, as defined in Subd. 2(i)(3l)(ii) of this ordinance, are subject to the provisions of
Subds. 1 l(a)(l)- 1 l(a)(6) of this ordinance.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 11(a)(1)
(Rev. 2016)
(1) A nonconforming use, structure, or occupancy must not be expanded, changed,
enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its flood damage potential or degree of
obstruction to flood flows except as provided in Subd. ll(a)(2) below. Expansion
or enlargement of uses, structures or occupancies within the Floodway District is
prohibited.
(2) Any addition or structural alteration to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use that would result in increasing its flood damage potential must
be protected to the regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance with any of
the elevation on fill or floodproofing techniques (i.e., FP 1 thru FP4 floodproofing
classifications) allowable in the State Building Code, except as further restricted in
Subds. 11 (a)(3) and 11 (a)(7) below.
(3) If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions exceeds 50 percent
of the market value of any nonconforming structure, that shall be considered
substantial improvement, and the entire structure must meet the standards of Subds.
4 or 5 of this ordinance for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is
in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively. The cost of all structural
alterations and additions must include all costs such as construction materials and a
reasonable cost placed on all manpower or labor.
(4) If any nonconforming use, or any use of a nonconforming structure, is discontinued
for more than one year, any future use of the premises must conform to this
ordinance. The Assessor must notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of
instances of nonconformities that have been discontinued for a period of more than
one year.
(5) If any nonconformity is substantially damaged, as defined in Subd. 2(i)(30) of this
ordinance, it may not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of
this ordinance. The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or new
structures in Subds. 4 or 5 will apply depending upon whether the use or structure
is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe, respectively.
(6) If any nonconforming use or structure experiences a repetitive loss, as defined in
Subd. 2(i)(26) of this ordinance, it must not be reconstructed except in conformity
with the provisions of this ordinance.
(7) Any substantial improvement, as defined in Subd. 2(i)(31) of this ordinance, to a
nonconfonning structure requires that the existing structure and any additions must
meet the requirements of Subds. 4 or 5 of this ordinance for new structures,
depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.01, Subd. 12
(Rev. 2016)
Subd. 12. Penalties and Enforcement.
(a) Violation Constitutes a Misdemeanor. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or
failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) constitute
a misdemeanor and will be punishable as defined by law.
(b) Other Lawful Action. Nothing in this ordinance restricts the City of Robbinsdale from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. If the
responsible party does not appropriately respond to the Zoning Administrator within the
specified period of time, each additional day that lapses will constitute an additional
violation of this ordinance and will be prosecuted accordingly.
(c) Enforcement. Violations of the provisions of this ordinance will be investigated and
resolved in accordance with the provisions of Section 530.01 of the zoning ordinance/code.
In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the Zoning Administrator and City
Council may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it including but not
limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective
measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood
insurance availability to the guilty party. The City of Robbinsdale must act in good faith to
enforce these official controls and to correct ordinance violations to the extent possible so
as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
Subd. 13 Amendments.
(a) Floodplain Designation - Restrictions on Removal. The floodplain designation on the
Official Zoning Map must not be removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown
that the designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of
the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain.
Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of the Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) if the Commissioner determines that, through other measures,
lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
(b) Amendments Require DNR Approval. All amendments to this ordinance must be
submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources
(DNR) prior to adoption. The Commissioner must approve the amendment prior to
community approval.
(c) Map Revisions Require Ordinance Amendments. The floodplain district regulations must
be amended to incorporate any revisions by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
to the floodplain maps adopted in Subd. 2(c) of this ordinance.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.02
(Rev. 2005)
530.02. (Added, Ord. No. 95-08) B4p pawnbrokers, secondhand goods dealer, consignment house
dealers, auction house dealers and traders district regulations. Subdivision 1. Purpose and intent. In the
development and execution of this code, it is recognized that there are some uses, which by their very
nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when
several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances thereby having a deleterious effect upon the
use and enjoyment of adjacent areas. Special regulations of these uses is necessary to ensure that these
adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or the downgrading of the surrounding neighborhoods.
These special regulations are itemized in this section. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose
of preventing a concentration of these used in any one area. The district shall herein be referred to as the
"B4p overlay district."
Subd. 2. Lands subject to this district. The lands subject to the B4p overlay district are those set
forth in appendix A2 and shown on the official zoning map of the city of Robbinsdale.
Subd. 3. Definitions. For the purposes of this district, definitions are as set forth in section 1135.
(Amended, Ord. No. 05-03)
Subd. 4. Uses permitted. Any use permitted within the existing zoned district.
(a) Minor dealers as defined by section 530.02, subdivision 3(f). (Added, Ord. No. 98-17)
Subd. 5. Permitted accessory uses. All accessory uses allowed within the existing zoned district.
Subd. 6. Conditional uses.
(a) All conditional use allowed within the existing zoned district.
(b) Any licensed pawnbroker, any licensed secondhand goods dealer, any licensed auction
house dealer, a licensed consignment house dealer greater than 2,250 square feet unless
exempted by subdivision 8 of this section or a licensed trader business greater than 2,250
square feet provided that: (Amended, Ord. No. 98-17; Ord. No. 02-10; Ord. No. 05-03)
(1) the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the facility will not be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, general
welfare;
(2) the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other
property in the immediate vicinity, nor substantially diminish property values
within the neighborhood;
(3) adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and necessary facilities have been or
are being provided;
(4) an off-street loading and unloading rear entrance is provided;
(5) requirements of Minnesota Statutes regarding pawn and secondhand goods,
consignment, auction, and trading establishments are met;
(6) licensing requirements of section 1135 of the Robbinsdale city code are met;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.02, Subd. 7
(Rev. 2005)
(7) no alcohol is allowed on the premises;
(8) that the standards set forth in subdivision 7 are met; (Amended, Ord. No. 98-17)
(9) that there is no other pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, auction house
dealer, consignment house dealer greater than 2,250 square feet or a trader
greater than 2,250 square feet within 1,000 feet; (Amended, Ord. No. 98-17;
Ord. No. 05-03)
(10) that the structure of the business complies with the architectural design
guidelines. (Added, Ord. No. 98-17)
Subd. 7. Standards for pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealers, auction house dealers, and
consignment house dealers greater than 2,250 square feet or traders business greater than 2,250 square
feet. The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the B4p overlay district subject to
additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this ordinance. (Amended, Ord. No.
98-17)
(a) lot area: 20,000 square feet minimum
(b) lot width: 80 feet minimum
(c) lot coverage: the maximum percent of the area of a lot allowed to be covered by the main
building and all accessory buildings is as follows:
(1) one story - 40% maximum
(2) two story - 35% maximum
(3) three story - 30% maximum
(4) four story - 25% maximum
(5) five story - 20% maximum
(6) six story - 15% maximum
The above lot coverage will be subject to other considerations including parking and
open space requirements, use of facilities and proximity to other districts which may
decrease the maximum lot coverage.
(d) Setbacks: the setbacks will be the same as those allowed in the existing zoned district.
(e) Building requirements:
(1) Height: the allowed height of all buildings shall be the same as that allowed
within the existing zoned district.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.02, Subd 8
(Rev. 2005)
(2) Exterior materials: the type of building materials used on exterior walls shall be
face brick, natural stone, stucco, glass finished grade concrete or other materials
approved by the city.
(f) Parking requirements:
(1) Parking ratio: at least one off-street parking space shall be provided for each 150
square feet of gross floor area.
(g) Landscaping requirements:
(1) All open areas of any site, except for areas used for parking and driveways, shall
be landscaped and be incorporated in a landscape plan.
(2) The landscape plan shall be submitted for approval by the city and indicate the
locations, size and species, and method and quantity of all proposed plants
including designation of, and other site improvements.
(h) Performance standards:
(1) Refuse. All trash or garbage receptacles must be located in the rear or side yard
and be totally screened from view from any public right-of-way. Provisions must
be taken to protect screening from vehicle damage.
(2) Off-street loading. The required loading dock must be located in the side or rear
yard.
Subd. 8. (Added, Ord. No. 02-10) Exemptions: This section does not apply to or include the
exemptions set forth in section 1135.03 and the following:
(a) a consignment house dealer licensed under section 1135.05 that sells furniture and home
decorating items only and does not sell any of the following items:
(1) consumer electronics including CD's, DVD's, records, tapes, etc.
(2) jewelry;
(3) musical instruments
(4) tools;
(5) sporting goods;
(6) clothing.
530.03. (Repealed, Ord. No. 95-09, Sec. 3)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.04 Sec. 4
530.04. Adult establishments. Adult establishments as defined and regulated in section 1140 of the city
code are permitted uses in the B-3 and B-4 districts only. (Added, Ord. No. 95-09, Sec. 4)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05
(Rev. 2005)
530.05. Planned unit development. Subdivision 1. Purpose and intent. The purpose of this subsection of
the code is to provide for the grouping of land parcels for development as an integrated, coordinated unit
as opposed to traditional parcel by parcel, piecemeal, sporatic and unplanned approach to development.
This subsection is intended to introduce flexibility of site design and architecture for the conservation of
land and open space through clustering of buildings and activities. It is further intended that planned unit
developments are to be characterized by central management, integrated planning and architecture, joint
or common use of parking, maintenance of open space and other similar facilities, and a harmonious
selection and efficient distribution of uses.
Subd. 2. Property control.
(a) In order that the purposes of a planned unit development may be achieved, the property
shall be in single ownership or under the management or supervision of a central
authority or otherwise subject to such supervisory lease or ownership control as may be
necessary to carry out the provisions of this code.
(b) Prior to the sale of individual units, space or lots within a planned unit development a
homeowners association membership or a business property owners association
membership, or both, must be included as a deed restriction on the property. This
restriction shall specify that common open space and multiple owned structures shall be
maintained by the association which shall have the power to assess each individual
property owner member their proportionate share of the costs. This agreement shall be
subject to the review and approval of the city attorney. The intent of this section is to
protect the property values of the individual owner.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05, Subd. 2(c)
(c) Subdivision of land, required improvements. The subdivision or platting of land, or both,
or right conditionally permitted as a planned unit development shall be subject to the
requirements for approval and recording with the appropriate official of Hennepin
County as have been required by the city council.
Subd. 3. Procedures for establishing a planned unit development and subsequent review.
(a) An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed and processed based upon
procedures established by subsection 535.01 of this code.
(b) Preliminary development plan. The conditional use permit application must be
accompanied by a preliminary development plan, drawn to a scale of not more than 50
feet per inch, showing the following:
(1) General area-wide development plan (general outline of the site and surrounding
area):
(i) uses;
(ii) zoning;
(iii) streets;
(iv) grade or topography;
(v) densities.
(2) Specific site plan:
(i) the entire outline, overall dimensions and area of the tract described in
the application;
(ii) the use, zoning, and ownership of all adjacent properties within 100 feet
of the tract boundaries including the location of all structures thereon and
the right-of-way width and traveled width of all adjacent public
roadways;
(iii) the existing and proposed topography of the tract with contour intervals
not greater than five feet.
(iv) the location, general exterior dimensions and approximate gross floor
areas of all proposed buildings;
(v) the type of each use proposed to occupy each building and the
approximate amount of building floor area devoted to each separate use;
(vi) the proposed location, arrangement, and number of automobile parking
stalls;
(vii) the proposed location, arrangement and general dimensions of all truck
loading facilities;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05, Subd. 3(b)(2)(viii)
(viii) the location and dimensions of all vehicular entrances, exists and
driveways and their relationship to all existing or proposed public streets;
(ix) the location and dimensions of pedestrian entrances, exists and walks;
(x) the general drainage system;
(xi) the location and dimensions of all walls, fences, and plantings designed
to screen the proposed district from adjacent uses;
(xii) the types of all ground covers;
(xiii) standards for exterior finish, exterior lighting, location and type of
exterior signs, architectural style, and any other variables which will be
controlled in the design of buildings in the development area.
(c) Development schedule. The applicant shall submit a proposed schedule of construction.
If the construction of the proposed planned unit development is to be in stages, then the
components contained in each stage must be clearly delineated. The development
schedule shall indicate the starting date and the completion date of the complete
development plan.
(d) Review and evaluation criteria. The evaluation of the proposed plan and development
shall include but not be limited to the following criteria:
(1) adequate property control is provided to protect the individual owners' rights and
property values and the public responsibility for maintenance and upkeep;
(2) the interior circulation plan plus access from and onto public right-of-ways does
not create congestion or dangers and is adequate for the safety of the project
residents and the general public;
(3) a sufficient amount of usable open space is provided;
(4) the arrangement of buildings, structures and accessory uses does not
unreasonably disturb the privacy or property values of the surrounding residential
uses;
(5) the architectural design of the project is compatible with the surrounding area;
(6) the drainage and utility system plans are submitted to the city engineer and the
final drainage and utility plans must have his approval;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05, Subd. 3(d)(7)
(7) the development schedule insures a logical development of the site which will
protect the public interest and conserve land;
(8) minimum lot frontage shall be not less than 20 feet;
(9) dwelling unit and accessory use requirements are in compliance with the district
provisions in which the development is planned;
(e) Council action.
(1) If the council finds that the preliminary development plan meets all of the
requirements of a conditional use permit, the council shall approve the same as
the final development plan and the applicant shall then be entitled to make
application for necessary building permits.
(2) If the council finds that the preliminary development plan contains conditions
that must be amended in order to meet the requirements of the conditional use
permit, they shall return said application together with a statement of the
necessary changes and upon receipt of an amended, altered and changed plan
meeting the requirements of the city council, the council shall approve said plan
as the final development plan and thereupon the applicant shall be eligible to
obtain the necessary building permits.
(3) The final development plan, together with such covenants, deed restrictions,
reservations, controls or variances as are a part thereof, shall become a part of the
official file of the city.
Subd. 4. General development provisions.
(a) Compliance with the final development plan and changes.
(1) The development of the planned unit development shall be in compliance with
the final development plan.
(2) Differences between the actual development and proposed development shown in
the final development plan not permitted under the foregoing provisions of this
subsection will be permitted only if the final development plan is changed with
the approval of the city council. Proposed changes shall be reviewed by the
planning commission and recommendations forwarded to the council.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05, Subd. 4(b)
(b) Building permits. Applications for building permits shall be reviewed and approved by
the building inspection department after considering the recommendation of the planning
commission. Such applications shall be examined to determine if they are in compliance
with this code and the final development plan. The following, as appropriate, shall be
submitted with any building permit application:
(1) preliminary plans, elevations, sections and specifications of materials and
structural systems for the proposed building or buildings, approved by a
registered architect or engineer;
(2) a site plan for traffic engineering analysis, showing location and design of the
buildings, driveways, driveway intersections with streets, parking areas, loading
areas, maneuvering areas and sidewalks;
(3) a site grading plan and planting plan, including screen walls and fences, for
analysis of adequacy of surface drainage, erosion control, visual screening and
landscaping, including sodding;
(4) a site plan showing utilities and utility easements;
(5) plans for all signs to be erected including details of sign locations, design, size,
color, and lighting;
(6) a description of the proposed operations in sufficient detail to enable the building
inspector to determine if the proposed land use is within the uses permitted in the
established district.
(c) The building inspection department shall process the permit in compliance with the codes
of the city. The application submitted to the building inspection department shall include
complete and final plans, elevations, sections, and specifications of materials and
structural systems for the proposed building or buildings, prepared by a registered
architect.
(d) Off-street parking.
(1) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for a planned unit
development shall be the same as required for similar uses in subsection 510.17
of this code.
(2) All parking areas and driveways shall be concrete or blacktop and shall meet city
specifications applicable thereto. They shall be so graded and drained as to
dispose of all surface water. Drainage shall not be across sidewalks or
driveways.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05, Subd. 4(e)
(e) Off-street loading and unloading. No business shall be permitted to receive or dispatch
materials by trucks and similar vehicles except at an authorized loading berth which shall
be located so that said trucks or other vehicles are entirely removed from public street or
frontage sidewalk. Location and number of said loading berths shall be indicated on the
plans and shall be approved by the building inspection department at the time of issuance
of a building permit. Said loading berth shall be in compliance with subsection 510.19 of
this code.
(f) Landscaping.
(1) All open areas of any site, lot, tract, or parcel shall be graded to provide proper
drainage and except for areas used for parking, driveways, or storage, shall be
landscaped with trees, shrubs, and planted ground cover. Location size and
species of trees and shrubs shall be indicated on the site plan and subject to
approval by the building inspection department.
(2) It shall be the owners' responsibility to see that this landscaping is maintained in
an attractive and well kept condition. In case any trees or shrubs shall die, the
owners shall replace them with a like species. Any dead or damaged sod shall be
replaced.
(3) All vacant lots, tracts, or parcels shall be properly maintained in an orderly
manner free of litter and junk.
(g) Storage. Storage as required for similar uses, but also subject to additional provisions as
provided by the city.
(h) Performance standards. Performance standards required of similar uses in this code, but
also subject to additional provisions as provided by the city.
(i) Certificate of zoning compliance. A certificate of zoning compliance stating that all of
the provisions of this subsection, together with all provisions and requirements of the
final development plan have been fully complied with shall be obtained from the building
inspection department before any building in the planned unit development is used or
occupied. Application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be made to the
building inspector at such time as the conditions of this subsection and the final
development plan are completed. The building inspection department shall, within ten
days thereafter, inspect such building or buildings and the adjacent lands connected
therewith, and if they find them to be in conformity with the provisions of this code and
the final development plan, a certificate of zoning compliance will be issued.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05, Subd. 5
(Rev. 1993)
(j) Periodic review. If construction within the planned unit development or any staging
thereof is not begun within one year from the approval of the final plan establishing it,
the building inspection department shall report such fact to the city council together with
such other information as is available to them concerning any actual or planned changes
in the surrounding area with respect to construction of buildings, roads, highways, or
other public improvements. The council will then instruct the planning commission to
make any necessary reports, or the council will require the applicant to resubmit his
application for development plan. If a report is required from the planning commission,
the report shall be considered by the council at the next regular meeting or at such other
meeting as the council may direct, in order to determine whether the final development
plan is consistent with public health, safety or general welfare. The final development
plan shall be reviewed and reconsidered at one year intervals until such construction is
substantially completed in accordance with the plan.
Subd. 5. Residential planned unit development.
(a) Purpose. It is the intent of this subdivision to establish provisions for the granting of a
conditional use permit for a residential planned unit development which is in compliance
with the permitted or conditional uses, or both, allowed in a R-1, R-2 or R-3 district
including dwellings, offices and institutional uses of one or more buildings in relation to
an overall design, and integrated physical plan and in accordance with the provisions and
procedures as prescribed in this code. (Amended, Ord. No. 93-02)
(b) Minimum project size. The tract of land for which a residential planned unit
development is proposed and permit requested shall contain not less than 1.5 acres of
land. (Amended, Ord. No. 93-02)
(c) Required frontage. The tract of land for which a project is proposed and permit requested
shall not have less than 200 feet of frontage on the public right-of-way.
(d) Yards.
(1) The front and side yard restrictions at the periphery of the planned unit
development site at a minimum shall be the same as imposed in the respective
districts.
(2) No building shall be nearer than its building height to the rear or side property
line when such line abuts an R-1 or R-2 district.
(3) No building shall be located less than 15 feet from the back of the curb line along
those roadways which are part of the internal street pattern.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05, Subd. 5(e)
(Rev. 1998)
(4) No building within the project shall be nearer to another building than one-half
the sum of the building heights of the two buildings.
(e) Height.
(1) In R-1 and R-2 districts, height limitations shall be the same as imposed in the
respective districts.
(2) In all zones higher than R-2 there shall be no vertical limitations on any structure
except as found in the set-back or density control provisions in the district in
which the land is located and in this section.
(f) Roadways.
(1) Private roadways within the project shall have an improved surface to 20 feet or
more in width and shall be so designed as to permit the city fire trucks to provide
protection to each building.
(2) No portion of the required 20 feet road system may be used in calculating
required off-street parking space.
(g) Usable open space. Usable open space shall be provided in compliance with the district
requirement.
(h) Density bonus. As a consequence of a planned unit development's planned and
integrated character, the number of dwelling units allowed within the respective zoning
district may be increased by five percent. The building, parking, and similar
requirements for these extra units shall be observed in compliance with this code.
Subd. 6. Commercial planned unit development.
(a) Purpose. The intent of this subdivision is to establish provisions for the granting of a
conditional use permit to erect a commercial planned unit development which is in
compliance with the permitted or conditional uses, or both, allowed in B-2, B-3, B-4 BW
and DD-1 districts in one or more buildings in relation to an overall design, an integrated
physical plan and in accordance with the provisions and procedures as prescribed in this
code. (Amended, Ord. No. 93-02; Ord. No. 98-08)
(b) Minimum project size. The tract of land for which a commercial planned unit
development is proposed and permit requested shall contain not less than two acres of
land. (Amended, Ord. No. 93-02)
(c) Frontage. The tract of land for which a project is proposed and a permit requested shall
not have less than 200 feet of frontage on a public right-of-way.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05, Subd. 7
(Rev. 1997)
(d) Public services. The proposed project shall be served by the city water and sewer system
and fire hydrants shall be installed at such locations as necessary to provide fire
protection.
(e) Yard. No building shall be nearer than 70 feet to the side or rear property line when such
line abuts an R-1, R-2, or R-3 district.
(f) Landscaping, screening, and surfacing.
(1) The entire site other than that taken up by structures or landscaping shall be
surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage.
(2) A drainage system subject to the approval of the city engineer shall be installed.
(3) Developments abutting an R-1, R-2, or R-3 district shall be screened and
landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this code.
Subd. 7. (Added, Ord. No. 93-02) Residential/business planned unit development.
(a) Purpose. The intent of this subdivision is to establish provisions for the granting of a
conditional use permit to erect a residential/business planned unit development which is
in compliance with the permitted or conditional uses, or both, allowed in an RB district in
one or more buildings in relation to an overall design, an integrated physical plan and in
accordance with the provisions and procedures as described in this code.
(b) Minimum project size. The tract of land for which a residential/business planned unit
development is proposed and permit requested shall contain not less than ten acres of
land.
(c) Frontage. The tract of land for which a project is proposed and a permit requested shall
not have less than 1,000 feet on a collector street.
(d) Public services. The proposed project shall be served by the public water and sewer
system and fire hydrants shall be installed at such locations as necessary to provide fire
protection.
(e) Buffer yard. The buffer yard regulations set forth in subsection 510.25, subdivision 11,
shall be strictly adhered to.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.07
(Rev. 1997)
530.07. (Added, Ord. No. 97-14) Downtown architectural guidelines overlay district. Subdivision 1.
Purpose and intent. The purpose of the downtown overlay district is to preserve and protect the existing
pedestrian character of the downtown commercial area, to promote the transformation of the downtown
into an even more compact pedestrian- and transit-oriented mixed-use area with a “main street”
continuous building façade character. The provisions contained herein will provide design guidance for
those making exterior alterations to existing buildings or constructing new infill development.
(Note: Per Ord. 08-12, 4080 West Broadway has been removed from overlay district)
Subd. 2. Relationship to other applicable regulations. In addition to the regulations specified in
this chapter, all property located within the downtown architectural guidelines overlay district shall be
subject to all of the applicable standards, procedures and regulations of this section and the primary
zoning district in which the property is located, except as otherwise provided for in this section. Where
the provisions of the overlay district and the primary zoning districts are in conflict, the provisions of this
overlay district shall govern.
Subd. 3. Lands subject to this district. The lands subject to the downtown architectural
guidelines overlay district are those set forth in appendix I and shown on the official zoning map of the
city of Robbinsdale.
Subd. 4. Uses permitted. Any use permitted within the existing primary zoning district.
Subd. 5. Permitted accessory uses. All accessory uses permitted within the existing primary
zoning district.
Subd. 6. Conditional uses. All conditional uses permitted within the existing primary zoning
district.
Subd. 7. Architectural design review. All new development, exterior remodeling, renovation or
rehabilitation of existing buildings on lands subject to this subsection shall be required to comply with the
downtown Robbinsdale architectural design guidelines. The design review committee (comprising the
development director, the community development director, and the building official) will interpret the
guidelines as necessary; the development director will make the final recommendation to the city council
who will make the final decision on the approved design as set forth in the guidelines.
Subd. 8. Exceptions to downtown architectural guidelines overlay district design review
requirements. The city council may approve exceptions to downtown architectural guidelines overlay
district design review requirements upon finding that the strict adherence to the requirements is
impractical because of site location or conditions.
Subd. 9. Architectural guidelines. Architectural guidelines are established by resolution and
from time to time amended by resolution. The city council shall refer any amendment to the planning
commission for review and recommendation.
530.02. (Added, Ord. No. 95-08) B4p pawnbrokers, secondhand goods dealer, consignment
house dealers, auction house dealers and traders district regulations. Subdivision 1. Purpose and
intent. In the development and execution of this code, it is recognized that there are some uses,
which by their very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational
characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances
thereby having a deleterious effect upon the use and enjoyment of adjacent areas. Special
regulations of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the
blighting or the downgrading of the surrounding neighborhoods. These special regulations are
itemized in this section. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing a
concentration of these used in any one area. The district shall herein be referred to as the "B4p
overlay district."
Subd. 2. Lands subject to this district. The lands subject to the B4p overlay district are
those set forth in appendix A2 and shown on the official zoning map of the city of Robbinsdale.
Subd. 3. Definitions. For the purposes of this district, the terms listed below shall have
the following meanings :
(a) "Pawnbroker" means a person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal
property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal
property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a
stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on personal
property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged.
(b) "Secondhand goods dealer" means a person whose regular business includes
purchasing or selling tangible personal property (excluding motor vehicles)
previously used, rented, owned or leased.
(c) "Consignment house dealer" means a person whose regular business includes
receiving, but not purchasing, tangible property with the intention to sell the
property and divide the proceeds with the owner.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.02, Subd. 4
(Rev. 1998)
(d) "Auction house dealer" means a person whose regular business includes
auctioning used goods. The auction house dealer may receive used goods to
auction but may not purchase said items for auction.
(e) "Trader" means a person(s) whose regular business primarily consists of
receiving tangible property in trade for other tangible property in stock.
(f) "Minor dealer" means a consignment house dealer or trader whose business
occupies no greater than 2,250 square feet of gross floor area. (Amended, Ord.
No. 98-17)
Subd. 4. Uses permitted. Any use permitted within the existing zoned district.
(a) Minor dealers as defined by section 530.02, subdivision 3(f). (Added, Ord. No. 98-17)
Subd. 5. Permitted accessory uses. All accessory uses allowed within the existing zoned
district.
Subd. 6. Conditional uses.
(a) All conditional use allowed within the existing zoned district.
(b) Any pawnbroker, any secondhand goods dealer, any auction house dealer, a
consignment house dealer greater than 2,250 square feet unless exempted by
subdivision 8 of this section or a trader business greater than 2,250 square feet
provided that: (Amended, Ord No. 98-17, Ord No. 02-10)
(1) the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the faiclity will not be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, general
welfare;
(2) the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other
property in the immediate vicinity, nor substantially diminish property values
within the neighborhood;
(3) adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and necessary facilities have been
or are being provided;
(4) an off-street loading and unloading rear entrance is provided;
(5) requirements of Minnesota Statutes regarding pawn and secondhand goods,
consignment, auction, and trading establishments are met;
(6) licensing requirements of section 1135 of the Robbinsdale city code are met;
(7) no alcohol is allowed on the premises;
(8) that the standards set forth in subdivision 7 are met; (Amended, Ord. No.
98-17)

Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.02, Subd. 7
(Rev. 1998)
(9) that there is no other pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, auction house
dealer, consignment house dealer greater than 2,250 square feet or a trader
greater than 2,250 square feet within 1,000 square feet. (Amended, Ord.
No. 98-17)
(10) that the structure of the business complies with the architectural design
guidelines. (Added, Ord. No. 98-17)
Subd. 7. Standards for pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealers, auction house dealers,
and consignment house dealers greater than 2,250 square feet or traders business greater than
2,250 square feet. The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the B4p overlay
district subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this
ordinance. (Amended, Ord. No. 98-17)
(a) lot areas: 20,000 square feet minimum
(b) lot width: 80 feet minimum
(c) lot coverage: the maximum percent of the area of a lot allowed to be covered by
the main building and all accessory buildings is as follows:
(1) one story - 40% maximum
(2) two story - 35% maximum
(3) three story - 30% maximum
(4) four story - 25% maximum
(5) five story - 20% maximum
(6) six story - 15% maximum
The above lot coverage will be subject to other considerations including parking
and open space requirements, use of facilities and proximity to other distric ts
which may decrease the maximum lot coverage.
(d) Setbacks: the setbacks will be the same as those allowed in the existing zoned
district.
(e) Building requirements:
(1) Height: the allowed height of all buildings shall be the same as that
allowed within the existing zoned district.
(2) Exterior materials: the type of building materials used on exterior walls
shall be face brick, natural stone, stucco, glass finished grade concrete or
other materials approved by the city.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.02, Subd. 8
(Rev 2002)
(f) Parking requirements:
(1) Parking ratio : at least one off-street parking space shall be provided for
each 150 square feet of gross floor area.
(g) Landscaping requirements:
(1) All open areas of any site, except for areas used for parking and
driveways, shall be landscaped and be incorporated in a landscape plan.
(2) The landscape plan shall be submitted for approval by the city and
indicate the locations, size and species, and method and quantity of all
proposed plants including designation of, and other site improvements.
(h) Performance standards:
(1) Refuse. All trash or garbage receptacles must be located in the rear or
side yard and be totally screened from view from any public right-ofway.
Provisions must be taken to protect screening from vehicle
damage.
(2) Off-street loading. The required loading dock must be located in the side
or rear yard.
Subd. 8 (Added, Ord No. 02-10) Exemptions: This section does not apply to or
include the following:
(a) The sale of secondhand goods where all of the following conditions are
present:
(1) the sale is held on property principally occupied as a dwelling by
the seller, or owned, rented or leased by a charitable or political
organization;
(2) the items offered for sale are owned by the occupant;
(3) the sale does not exceed a period of 72 consecutive hours;
(4) not more than two sales are held either by the same person or on
the same property in any 12 month period; and
(5) none of the items offered for sale have been purchased for resale or
received on consignment for purpose of resale.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.02, Subd. 8(b)
(Rev 2002)
(b) sales by a person licensed under section 1130 as a motor vehicle dealer;
(c) the sale of secondhand books, magazines, or films or bona fide antiques or
collectibles;
(d) the sale of goods at an auction held by a licensed auctioneer if occurring
not more than twice in a 12-month period;
(e) the business of buying or selling secondhand good where such business is
incidental to and not the primary business of a person. Incidental in this
case shall mean less than 20% of the total gross sales;
(f) a bulk sale of property from a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler
having an established place of business or of goods sold at open sale from
bankrupt stock;
(g) firearms, including antique firearms, sold by firearms dealers holding
currently valid federal firearms dealer licenses permitting them to deal in
such sales;
(h) sale of precious metals made by precious metal dealers holding currently
valid federal firearms dealer licenses permitting them to deal in such sales;
(i) sale made by sheriff or other public officials in discharge of their official
duties;
(j) sales made by assignees or receivers appointed in this state to make sales
for the benefit of creditors; or
(k) a consignment house dealer licensed under Section 1135.05 that sells
furniture and home decorating items only and does not sell any of the
following items:
1) consumer electronics including CD’s, DVD’s, records, tapes, etc.
2) jewelry
3) musical instruments
4) tools
5) sporting goods
6) clothing.
530.04. Adult establishments. Adult establishments as defined and regulated in section 1140 of
the city code are permitted uses in the B-3 and B-4 districts only. (Added, Ord. No. 95-09, Sec.
4)
530.05. Planned unit development. Subdivision 1. Purpose and intent. The
purpose of this subsection of the code is to provide for the grouping of land parcels for
development as an integrated, coordinated unit as opposed to traditional parcel by parcel,
piecemeal, sporatic and unplanned approach to development. This subsection is intended to
introduce flexibility of site design and architecture for the conservation of land and open space
through clustering of buildings and activities. It is further intended that planned unit
developments are to be characterized by central management, integrated planning and
architecture, joint or common use of parking, maintenance of open space and other similar
facilities, and a harmonious selection and efficient distribution of uses.
Subd. 2. Property control.
(a) In order that the purposes of a planned unit development may be achieved, the
property shall be in single ownership or under the management or supervision of
a central authority or otherwise subject to such supervisory lease or ownership
control as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this code.
Robbinsdale City Code 530.05, Subd. 2(b)
(Rev. 1998)
(b) Prior to the sale of individual units, space or lots within a planned unit
development a homeowners association membership or a business property
owners association membership, or both, must be included as a deed restriction
on the property. This restriction shall specify that common open space and
multiple owned structures shall be maintained by the association which shall
have the power to assess each individual property owner member their
proportionate share of the costs. This agreement shall be subject to the review
and approval of the city attorney. The intent of this section is to protect the
property values of the individual owner.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05, Subd. 2(c)
(c) Subdivision of land, required improvements. The subdivision or platting of land,
or both, or right conditionally permitted as a planned unit development shall be
subject to the requirements for approval and recording with the appropriate
official of Hennepin County as have been required by the city council.
Subd. 3. Procedures for establishing a planned unit development and subsequent review.
(a) An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed and processed based
upon procedures established by subsection 535.01 of this code.
(b) Preliminary development plan. The conditional use permit application must be
accompanied by a preliminary development plan, drawn to a scale of not more
than 50 feet per inch, showing the following:
(1) General area-wide development plan (general outline of the site and
surrounding area):
(i) uses;
(ii) zoning;
(iii) streets;
(iv) grade or topography;
(v) densities.
(2) Specific site plan:
(i) the entire outline, overall dimensions and area of the tract
described in the application;
(ii) the use, zoning, and ownership of all adjacent properties within
100 feet of the tract boundaries including the location of all
structures thereon and the right-of-way width and traveled width
of all adjacent public roadways;
(iii) the existing and proposed topography of the tract with contour
intervals not greater than five feet.
(iv) the location, general exterior dimensions and approximate gross
floor areas of all proposed buildings;
(v) the type of each use proposed to occupy each building and the
approximate amount of building floor area devoted to each
separate use;
(vi) the proposed location, arrangement, and number of automobile
parking stalls;
(vii) the proposed location, arrangement and general dimensions of all
truck loading facilities;

Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05, Subd. 3(b)(2)(viii)
(viii) the location and dimensions of all vehicular entrances, exists and
driveways and their relationship to all existing or proposed
public streets;
(ix) the location and dimensions of pedestrian entrances, exists and
walks;
(x) the general drainage system;
(xi) the location and dimensions of all walls, fences, and plantings
designed to screen the proposed district from adjacent uses;
(xii) the types of all ground covers;
(xiii) standards for exterior finish, exterior lighting, location and type
of exterior signs, architectural style, and any other variables
which will be controlled in the design of buildings in the
development area.
(c) Development schedule. The applicant shall submit a proposed schedule of
construction. If the construction of the proposed planned unit development is to
be in stages, then the components contained in each stage must be clearly
delineated. The development schedule shall indicate the starting date and the
completion date of the complete development plan.
(d) Review and evaluation criteria. The evaluation of the proposed plan and
development shall include but not be limited to the following criteria:
(1) adequate property control is provided to protect the individual owners'
rights and property values and the public responsibility for maintenance
and upkeep;
(2) the interior circulation plan plus access from and onto public right-ofways
does not create congestion or dangers and is adequate for the safety
of the project residents and the general public;
(3) a sufficient amount of usable open space is provided;
(4) the arrangement of buildings, structures and accessory uses does not
unreasonably disturb the privacy or property values of the surrounding
residential uses;
(5) the architectural design of the project is compatible with the surrounding
area;
(6) the drainage and utility system plans are submitted to the city engineer
and the final drainage and utility plans must have his approval;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05, Subd. 3(d)(7)
(7) the development schedule insures a logical development of the site which
will protect the public interest and conserve land;
(8) minimum lot frontage shall be not less than 20 feet;
(9) dwelling unit and accessory use requirements are in compliance with the
district provisions in which the development is planned;
(e) Council action.
(1) If the council finds that the preliminary development plan meets all of
the requirements of a conditional use permit, the council shall approve
the same as the final development plan and the applicant shall then be
entitled to make application for necessary building permits.
(2) If the council finds that the preliminary development plan contains
conditions that must be amended in order to meet the requirements of the
conditional use permit, they shall return said application together with a
statement of the necessary changes and upon receipt of an amended,
altered and changed plan meeting the requirements of the city council,
the council shall approve said plan as the final development plan and
thereupon the applicant shall be eligible to obtain the necessary building
permits.
(3) The final development plan, together with such covenants, deed
restrictions, reservations, controls or variances as are a part thereof, shall
become a part of the official file of the city.
Subd. 4. General development provisions.
(a) Compliance with the final development plan and changes.
(1) The development of the planned unit development shall be in compliance
with the final development plan.
(2) Differences between the actual development and proposed development
shown in the final development plan not permitted under the foregoing
provisions of this subsection will be permitted only if the final
development plan is changed with the approval of the city council.
Proposed changes shall be reviewed by the planning commission and
recommendations forwarded to the council.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05, Subd. 4(b)
(b) Building permits. Applications for building permits shall be reviewed and
approved by the building inspection department after considering the
recommendation of the planning commission. Such applications shall be
examined to determine if they are in compliance with this code and the final
development plan. The following, as appropriate, shall be submitted with any
building permit application:
(1) preliminary plans, elevations, sections and specifications of materials and
structural systems for the proposed building or buildings, approved by a
registered architect or engineer;
(2) a site plan for traffic engineering analysis, showing location and design
of the buildings, driveways, driveway intersections with streets, parking
areas, loading areas, maneuvering areas and sidewalks;
(3) a site grading plan and planting plan, including screen walls and fences,
for analysis of adequacy of surface drainage, erosion control, visual
screening and landscaping, including sodding;
(4) a site plan showing utilities and utility easements;
(5) plans for all signs to be erected including details of sign locations,
design, size, color, and lighting;
(6) a description of the proposed operations in sufficient detail to enable the
building inspector to determine if the proposed land use is within the
uses permitted in the established district.
(c) The building inspection department shall process the permit in compliance with
the codes of the city. The application submitted to the building inspection
department shall include complete and final plans, elevations, sections, and
specifications of materials and structural systems for the proposed building or
buildings, prepared by a registered architect.
(d) Off-street parking.
(1) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for a planned
unit development shall be the same as required for similar uses in
subsection 510.17 of this code.
(2) All parking areas and driveways shall be concrete or blacktop and shall
meet city specifications applicable thereto. They shall be so graded and
drained as to dispose of all surface water. Drainage shall not be across
sidewalks or driveways.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05, Subd. 4(e)
(e) Off-street loading and unloading. No business shall be permitted to receive or
dispatch materials by trucks and similar vehicles except at an authorized loading
berth which shall be located so that said trucks or other vehicles are entirely
removed from public street or frontage sidewalk. Location and number of said
loading berths shall be indicated on the plans and shall be approved by the
building inspection department at the time of issuance of a building permit. Said
loading berth shall be in compliance with subsection 510.19 of this code.
(f) Landscaping.
(1) All open areas of any site, lot, tract, or parcel shall be graded to provide
proper drainage and except for areas used for parking, driveways, or
storage, shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, and planted ground cover.
Location size and species of trees and shrubs shall be indicated on the
site plan and subject to approval by the building inspection department.
(2) It shall be the owners' responsibility to see that this landscaping is
maintained in an attractive and well kept condition. In case any trees or
shrubs shall die, the owners shall replace them with a like species. Any
dead or damaged sod shall be replaced.
(3) All vacant lots, tracts, or parcels shall be properly maintained in an
orderly manner free of litter and junk.
(g) Storage. Storage as required for similar uses, but also subject to additional
provisions as provided by the city.
(h) Performance standards. Performance standards required of similar uses in this
code, but also subject to additional provisions as provided by the city.
(i) Certificate of zoning compliance. A certificate of zoning compliance stating that
all of the provisions of this subsection, together with all provisions and
requirements of the final development plan have been fully complied with shall
be obtained from the building inspection department before any building in the
planned unit development is used or occupied. Application for a certificate of
zoning compliance shall be made to the building inspector at such time as the
conditions of this subsection and the final development plan are completed. The
building inspection department shall, within ten days thereafter, inspect such
building or buildings and the adjacent lands connected therewith, and if they find
them to be in conformity with the provisions of this code and the final
development plan, a certificate of zoning compliance will be issued.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05, Subd. 5(Rev. 1993)
(j) Periodic review. If construction within the planned unit development or any
staging thereof is not begun within one year from the approval of the final plan
establishing it, the building inspection department shall report such fact to the
city council together with such other information as is available to them
concerning any actual or planned changes in the surrounding area with respect to
construction of buildings, roads, highways, or other public improvements. The
council will then instruct the planning commission to make any necessary
reports, or the council will require the applicant to resubmit his application for
development plan. If a report is required from the planning commission, the
report shall be considered by the council at the next regular meeting or at such
other meeting as the council may direct, in order to determine whether the final
development plan is consistent with public health, safety or general welfare. The
final development plan shall be reviewed and reconsidered at one year intervals
until such construction is substantially completed in accordance with the plan.
Subd. 5. Residential planned unit development.
(a) Purpose. It is the intent of this subdivision to establish provisions for the
granting of a conditional use permit for a residential planned unit development
which is in compliance with the permitted or conditional uses, or both, allowed in
a R-1, R-2 or R-3 district including dwellings, offices and institutional uses of
one or more buildings in relation to an overall design, and integrated physical
plan and in accordance with the provisions and procedures as prescribed in this
code. (Amended, Ord. No. 93-02)
(b) Minimum project size. The tract of land for which a residential planned unit
development is proposed and permit requested shall contain not less than 1.5
acres of land. (Amended, Ord. No. 93-02)
(c) Required frontage. The tract of land for which a project is proposed and permit
requested shall not have less than 200 feet of frontage on the public right-of-way.
(d) Yards.
(1) The front and side yard restrictions at the periphery of the planned unit
development site at a minimum shall be the same as imposed in the
respective districts.
(2) No building shall be nearer than its building height to the rear or side
property line when such line abuts an R-1 or R-2 district.
(3) No building shall be located less than 15 feet from the back of the curb
line along those roadways which are part of the internal street pattern.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05, Subd. 5(e)
(Rev. 1998)
(4) No building within the project shall be nearer to another building than
one-half the sum of the building heights of the two buildings.
(e) Height.
(1) In R-1 and R-2 districts, height limitations shall be the same as imposed
in the respective districts.
(2) In all zones higher than R-2 there shall be no vertical limitations on any
structure except as found in the set-back or density control provisions in
the district in which the land is located and in this section.
(f) Roadways.
(1) Private roadways within the project shall have an improved surface to 20
feet or more in width and shall be so designed as to permit the city fire
trucks to provide protection to each building.
(2) No portion of the required 20 feet road system may be used in
calculating required off-street parking space.
(g) Usable open space. Usable open space shall be provided in compliance with the
district requirement.
(h) Density bonus. As a consequence of a planned unit development's planned and
integrated character, the number of dwelling units allowed within the respective
zoning district may be increased by five percent. The building, parking, and
similar requirements for these extra units shall be observed in compliance with
this code.
Subd. 6. Commercial planned unit development.
(a) Purpose. The intent of this subdivision is to establish provisions for the granting
of a conditional use permit to erect a commercial planned unit development
which is in compliance with the permitted or conditional uses, or both, allowed in
B-2, B-3, B-4 BW and DD-1 districts in one or more buildings in relation to an
overall design, an integrated physical plan and in accordance with the provisions
and procedures as prescribed in this code. (Amended, Ord. No. 93-02; Ord. No.
98-08)
(b) Minimum project size. The tract of land for which a commercial planned unit
development is proposed and permit requested shall contain not less than two
acres of land. (Amended, Ord. No. 93-02)
(c) Frontage. The tract of land for which a project is proposed and a permit
requested shall not have less than 200 feet of frontage on a public right-of-way.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.05, Subd. 7
(Rev. 1997)
(d) Public services. The proposed project shall be served by the city water and sewer
system and fire hydrants shall be installed at such locations as necessary to
provide fire protection.
(e) Yard. No building shall be nearer than 70 feet to the side or rear property line
when such line abuts an R-1, R-2, or R-3 district.
(f) Landscaping, screening, and surfacing.
(1) The entire site other than that taken up by structures or landscaping shall
be surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage.
(2) A drainage system subject to the approval of the city engineer shall be
installed.
(3) Developments abutting an R-1, R-2, or R-3 district shall be screened and
landscaped in compliance with subsection 510.25, subdivision 2 of this
code.
Subd. 7. (Added, Ord. No. 93-02) Residential/business planned unit development.
(a) Purpose. The intent of this subdivision is to establish provisions for the granting
of a conditional use permit to erect a residential/business planned unit
development which is in compliance with the permitted or conditional uses, or
both, allowed in an RB district in one or more buildings in relation to an overall
design, an integrated physical plan and in accordance with the provisions and
procedures as described in this code.
(b) Minimum project size. The tract of land for which a residential/business planned
unit development is proposed and permit requested shall contain not less than 10
acres of land.
(c) Frontage. The tract of land for which a project is proposed and a permit
requested shall not have less than 1000 feet on a collector street.
(d) Public services. The proposed project shall be served by the public water and
sewer system and fire hydrants shall be installed at such locations as necessary to
provide fire protection.
(e) Buffer yard. The buffer yard regulations set forth in section 510.25, subdivision
11, shall be strictly adhered to.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.07, Subd. 2
Subd. 2. Relationship to other applicable regulations. In addition to the regulations specified in
this chapter, all property located within the downtown architectural guidelines overlay district shall be
subject to all of the applicable standards, procedures and regulations of this section and the primary
zoning district in which the property is located, except as otherwise provided for in this section. Where
the provisions of the overlay district and the primary zoning districts are in conflict, the provisions of this
overlay district shall govern.
Subd. 3. Lands subject to this district. The lands subject to the downtown architectural
guidelines overlay district are those set forth in appendix I and shown on the official zoning map of the
city of Robbinsdale.
Subd. 4. Uses permitted. Any use permitted within the existing primary zoning district.
Subd. 5. Permitted accessory uses. All accessory uses permitted within the existing primary
zoning district.
Subd. 6. Conditional uses. All conditional uses permitted within the existing primary zoning
district.
Subd. 7. Architectural design review. All new development, exterior remodeling, renovation or
rehabilitation of existing buildings on lands subject to this subsection shall be required to comply with the
downtown Robbinsdale architectural design guidelines. The design review committee (comprising the
development director, the community development director, and the building official) will interpret the
guidelines as necessary; the development director will make the final recommendation to the city council
who will make the final decision on the approved design as set forth in the guidelines.
Subd. 8. Exceptions to downtown architectural guidelines overlay district design review
requirements. The city council may approve exceptions to downtown architectural guidelines overlay
district design review requirements upon finding that the strict adherence to the requirements is
impractical because of site location or conditions.
Subd. 9. Architectural guidelines. Architectural guidelines are established by resolution and
from time to time amended by resolution. The city council shall refer any amendment to the planning
commission for review and recommendation.
530.09. Transit Overlay District Building and Development Standards. Subdivision 1. Purpose. An
overlay district to enhance and expand the pedestrian character of the downtown, to preserve the main
street character of the West Broadway area in the downtown and along the corridor extending south to
36th Ave. N. and to promote the development of new buildings in a manner that promotes the expansion
of downtown into a more compact pedestrian- and transit-oriented mixed-use area while accommodating
high density mixed uses and to provide a transition to adjacent neighborhoods.
Properties that were developed prior to the adoption of this code are considered legal non-conforming.
Building expansions may be permitted with a conditional use permit in conformance with Section 535.01
at the discretion of the City Council.
Subd. 2. Lands subject to this district. The lands subject to the Transit Overlay District Building
and Development Standards are set forth in appendix A3 and shown on the official zoning map of the city
of Robbinsdale.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.09, Subd. 3
Subd. 3 Building and Site Standards.
BUILDING SETBACKS PARKING AND STORAGE SETBACKS
a A-street (West Broadway) 3 ft. max. commercial
12 ft. max residential
A-street 5 ft. min.
b. B-street (Bottineau Blvd.;
Hubbard Ave. N.)
3 ft. min. (no maximum) B-street 5 ft. min.
c. Side property line 0 ft. (party wall) or
6 ft. min. (between buildings)
Side property line (to
adjacent property)
0 ft. min.
d. Rear property line 3 ft. min. Rear property line 0 ft. min. (if along
alley)
MINIMUM FRONTAGE BUILDOUT LOT COVERAGE
A-street (West Broadway) 70% min. Lot coverage by buildings 80% max.
B-street 40 ft. min. from b-street
MINIMUM GLAZING
A-street (West Broadway) 50% min.(unless approved by the City Council)
B-street 25% min.
Upper floors 15% min.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.09, Subd. 3
Exterior Building Materials
The type of building materials used on exterior walls shall be modular brick, natural stone; and/or
Portland cement stucco or similar. Accent materials may be tile, stone, metal and/or wood. The City
Council may waive these exterior material requirements for townhouse, cooperative and condominium
development provided:
(1) The exterior materials are maintenance free and contain ornamental patterns;
(2) The development contains other architectural features (i. e. ornamental columns, unique roof
lines, special exterior spaces such as porches and decks).
BUILDING HEIGHT
Building height is permitted based upon width of right-of-way. See maps for TOD Overlay District: Station Area
and TOD Overlay District: West Broadway Corridor for maximum building heights.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.09, Subd. 3
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.09, Subd. 3
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.09, Subd. 4
Subd. 4, Parking
(a) Parking. Off-street parking must be set back from frontages according to tables included in
530.09, subd. 4(a)(4), except where parking is located underground. Underground parking is
encouraged.
(1) Minimum required vehicular parking may be fulfilled in the following locations:
(i) Parking spaces provided on-site, or between multiple connected sites with a
recorded shared use parking agreement.
(ii) Parking spaces provided along a parking lane on-street corresponding to the site
frontages shall be a conditional use as regulated by subsection 535.01.
(iii) Parking spaced leased from a private or public parking facility shall be
memorialized in an agreement which shall be recorded with Hennepin County
and filed with the City Clerk.
(2) Access. Parking access must meet the following requirements.
(i) Driveways are limited to 25 feet in width unless travel lanes are striped, or
medians provided. No curb cut shall exceed 22 feet in a residentially zoned
district or 35 feet in a commercially zoned district. All curb cuts or driveway
openings require a permit from the City Engineer.
(ii) Sites with alley access must use the alley for ingress and egress.
(iii) Pedestrian access to off-street parking must be provided from frontages with
walkways a minimum of six feet in width.
(iv) All driveways, parking areas, and loading docks must be surfaced with blacktop,
concrete, brick pavers, or other impervious material approved by the city. All
parking areas must have B6-12 poured concrete curbing installed on their
perimeters and safety islands and be in conformance with all other design
requirements specified in subsection 520.01, subdivision 8(d).
(3) Structured parking. The ground floor of any parking structure abutting a public street
must have habitable space for a depth of 30 feet facing the street.
(i) Upper floors must be designed and detailed in a manner consistent with adjacent
buildings.
(ii) Entrances must minimize conflict with pedestrian movement.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.09, Subd. 4(a)(4)
(4) Required parking. The following minimum spaces are required per use. To enable an
efficient change in use over the life of the building, commercial uses are consolidated.
STATION AREA WEST BROADWAY
CORRIDOR
Residential 1.0 / dwelling 1.0 / bedroom
Lodging 1.0 / guest room 1.0 / guest room
Retail, Service,
Printing, Studio
1.0 / every 400 sq. ft. of gross
floor area
1.0 / every 300 sq. ft. of gross
floor area
Food Service 1.0 / every 200 sq. ft. of gross
floor area or every 8 seats.
1.0 / every 200 sq. ft. of gross
floor area or every 8 seats
Office, light
manufacturing, repair
1.0/ every 500 sq. ft. of gross
floor area
Parking stall and aisle dimension standards must conform with Section 510.17, Subd. 2(d)
of the Robbinsdale City Code. Any situation not described above shall conform with the
requirements of Section 510.17.
(b) Lots exceeding 480 feet in length facing the street must provide a pedestrian passage for
connection through the block.
(c) Pedestrian passage width is 12 ft. minimum and 24 ft. maximum.
(d) Pedestrian circulation. Walkways between the sidewalk and the principal entrance of the building
must be at least six feet in width.
(e) Outdoor dining areas. Outdoor seating is permitted within any setback area and temporary seating
may be permitted within rights-of-way by the City Engineer, provided the sidewalk remains clear
to a width of five feet.
(f) Drive-through facilities. Drive-through facilities and lanes must be located behind the principal
building and may not connect with West Broadway.
(g) Exterior storage is not permitted except with a conditional use permit. Exterior display is
permitted provided it occupies less than 10% of the floor area of the building to which it is
accessory to.
(h) Refuse. All waste materials, refuse, or garbage must be kept in closed containers and screened as
required by subsection 520.01, subdivision 10(d)(4) and by section 605 of the city code.
(1) Queuing lanes must not interfere with pedestrian circulation.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.09, Subd. 5
Subd. 5. Landscaping
(a) Landscaping requirements. All open areas of any site, except for that portion used for parking,
driveways, and storage, must be landscaped and incorporated in a landscape plan, conforming
with the requirements of Section 510.25 in addition to the following:
(1) Screening. Parking areas must be screened from public streets, sidewalks and paths by a
landscaped frontage strip at least five feet wide.
(i) Within the frontage strip, screening must consist of a masonry wall, evergreen
hedge or similar material. The height of the screen must be a minimum of 36
inches and a maximum of 48 inches in height.
(2) The remainder of the landscaped area must be planted with trees, ground cover, low
shrubs or flowering plants.
(3) A performance bond is required in accordance with section 510.25, subdivision 2 (a)(2).
Subd. 6. Description of properties in the Transit Overlay District.
The northerly district boundary begins at the corner of Lake Drive and Lakeview Avenue N and
follows Lake Drive westerly to County Road 81, turns northwest on County Road 81 to 42 ½
Avenue N, continues on 42 ½ Avenue N to the west extending to a point where the alignment
intersects the easterly edge of the BNSF right-of-way.
The westerly district boundary starts at the NW corner intersection of the 42 ½ Avenue line
extended to the railroad tracks, following the railroad right-of-way to 41st Avenue N, turning
northeast to Hubbard Avenue, then south on Hubbard Avenue to 40 ½ Avenue N, then northeast
on 40 ½ Avenue N to the alley between the properties on West Broadway and properties on
Hubbard extended to the point where the alley intersects with Hubbard Avenue, then following
Hubbard Avenue to 36th Avenue N.
The southerly boundary is 36th Avenue N between France Avenue and County Road 81.
The easterly boundary is County Road 81 from 36th Avenue North to 40th Avenue N, turning
northwest to follow 40th Avenue North to Lake Road, turning northeast on Lake Road to 41st
Avenue North extended, turning southeasterly on 41st Avenue N to Lakeview Avenue North, then
continuing northwest on Lakeview Avenue N to Lake Drive.
Properties excluded from the Transit Overlay District are as follows:
4223 County Road 81 (Lilac Parkway Apartment)
3815 W Broadway (Good Samaritan care facility)
3704 W Broadway (Birdtown Flats Apartment)
4020 Lakeland and 4000 40th Ave N (Copperfield Hill)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.09, Subd. 6
(2) Map
(Added Sec. 530.09, Ord. No. 19-06)
Section 530.09. Transit Overlay District Building and Development Standards
Subd. 1. Purpose.
An overlay district to enhance and expand the pedestrian character of the downtown, to preserve the
main street character of the West Broadway area in the downtown and along the corridor extending
south to 36th Ave. N. and to promote the development of new buildings in a manner that promotes the
expansion of downtown into a more compact pedestrian- and transit-oriented mixed-use are-a while
accommodating high density mixed uses and to provide a transition to adjacent neighborhoods.
Properties that were developed prior to the adoption of this code are considered. legal nonconforming.
Building expansions may be permitted with a conditional use permit in conformance
with Section 535.01 at the discretion of the City Council.
Subd. 2. Lands subject to this district. The lands subject to the Transit Overlay District Building and
Development Standards are set forth in appendix A3 and shown on the official zoning map of the city
of Robbinsdale.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.09, Subd. 3
Subd. 3 Building and Site Standards.
BUILDING SETBACKS PARKING AND STORAGE SETBACKS
a A-street (West Broadway) 3 ft. max. commercial
12 ft. max residential
A-street 5 ft. min.
b. B-street (Bottineau Blvd.;
Hubbard Ave. N.)
3 ft. min. (no maximum) B-street 5 ft. min.
c. Side property line 0 ft. (party wall) or
6 ft. min. (between buildings)
Side property line (to
adjacent property)
0 ft. min.
d. Rear property line 3 ft. min. Rear property line 0 ft. min. (if along
alley)
MINIMUM FRONTAGE BUILDOUT LOT COVERAGE
A-street (West Broadway) 70% min. Lot coverage by buildings 80% max.
B-street 40 ft. min. from b-street
MINIMUM GLAZING
A-street (West Broadway) 50% min.(unless approved by the City Council)
B-street 25% min.
Upper floors 15% min.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.09, Subd. 3
Exterior Building Materials
The type of building materials used on exterior walls shall be modular brick, natural stone; and/or
Portland cement stucco or similar. Accent materials may be tile, stone, metal and/or wood. The City
Council may waive these exterior material requirements for townhouse, cooperative and condominium
development provided:
(1) The exterior materials are maintenance free and contain ornamental patterns;
(2) The development contains other architectural features (i. e. ornamental columns, unique roof
lines, special exterior spaces such as porches and decks).
BUILDING HEIGHT
Building height is permitted based upon width of right-of-way. See maps for TOD Overlay District: Station Area
and TOD Overlay District: West Broadway Corridor for maximum building heights.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.09, Subd. 3
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.09, Subd. 3
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.09, Subd. 4
Subd. 4, Parking
(a) Parking. Off-street parking must be set back from frontages according to tables included in
530.09, subd. 4(a)(4), except where parking is located underground. Underground parking is
encouraged.
(1) Minimum required vehicular parking may be fulfilled in the following locations:
(i) Parking spaces provided on-site, or between multiple connected sites with a
recorded shared use parking agreement.
(ii) Parking spaces provided along a parking lane on-street corresponding to the site
frontages shall be a conditional use as regulated by subsection 535.01.
(iii) Parking spaced leased from a private or public parking facility shall be
memorialized in an agreement which shall be recorded with Hennepin County
and filed with the City Clerk.
(2) Access. Parking access must meet the following requirements.
(i) Driveways are limited to 25 feet in width unless travel lanes are striped, or
medians provided. No curb cut shall exceed 22 feet in a residentially zoned
district or 35 feet in a commercially zoned district. All curb cuts or driveway
openings require a permit from the City Engineer.
(ii) Sites with alley access must use the alley for ingress and egress.
(iii) Pedestrian access to off-street parking must be provided from frontages with
walkways a minimum of six feet in width.
(iv) All driveways, parking areas, and loading docks must be surfaced with blacktop,
concrete, brick pavers, or other impervious material approved by the city. All
parking areas must have B6-12 poured concrete curbing installed on their
perimeters and safety islands and be in conformance with all other design
requirements specified in subsection 520.01, subdivision 8(d).
(3) Structured parking. The ground floor of any parking structure abutting a public street
must have habitable space for a depth of 30 feet facing the street.
(i) Upper floors must be designed and detailed in a manner consistent with adjacent
buildings.
(ii) Entrances must minimize conflict with pedestrian movement.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.09, Subd. 4(a)(4)
(4) Required parking. The following minimum spaces are required per use. To enable an
efficient change in use over the life of the building, commercial uses are consolidated.
STATION AREA WEST BROADWAY
CORRIDOR
Residential 1.0 / dwelling 1.0 / bedroom
Lodging 1.0 / guest room 1.0 / guest room
Retail, Service,
Printing, Studio
1.0 / every 400 sq. ft. of gross
floor area
1.0 / every 300 sq. ft. of gross
floor area
Food Service 1.0 / every 200 sq. ft. of gross
floor area or every 8 seats.
1.0 / every 200 sq. ft. of gross
floor area or every 8 seats
Office, light
manufacturing, repair
1.0/ every 500 sq. ft. of gross
floor area
Parking stall and aisle dimension standards must conform with Section 510.17, Subd. 2(d)
of the Robbinsdale City Code. Any situation not described above shall conform with the
requirements of Section 510.17.
(b) Lots exceeding 480 feet in length facing the street must provide a pedestrian passage for
connection through the block.
(c) Pedestrian passage width is 12 ft. minimum and 24 ft. maximum.
(d) Pedestrian circulation. Walkways between the sidewalk and the principal entrance of the building
must be at least six feet in width.
(e) Outdoor dining areas. Outdoor seating is permitted within any setback area and temporary seating
may be permitted within rights-of-way by the City Engineer, provided the sidewalk remains clear
to a width of five feet.
(f) Drive-through facilities. Drive-through facilities and lanes must be located behind the principal
building and may not connect with West Broadway.
(g) Exterior storage is not permitted except with a conditional use permit. Exterior display is
permitted provided it occupies less than 10% of the floor area of the building to which it is
accessory to.
(h) Refuse. All waste materials, refuse, or garbage must be kept in closed containers and screened as
required by subsection 520.01, subdivision 10(d)(4) and by section 605 of the city code.
(1) Queuing lanes must not interfere with pedestrian circulation.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.09, Subd. 5
Subd. 5. Landscaping
(a) Landscaping requirements. All open areas of any site, except for that portion used for parking,
driveways, and storage, must be landscaped and incorporated in a landscape plan, conforming
with the requirements of Section 510.25 in addition to the following:
(1) Screening. Parking areas must be screened from public streets, sidewalks and paths by a
landscaped frontage strip at least five feet wide.
(i) Within the frontage strip, screening must consist of a masonry wall, evergreen
hedge or similar material. The height of the screen must be a minimum of 36
inches and a maximum of 48 inches in height.
(2) The remainder of the landscaped area must be planted with trees, ground cover, low
shrubs or flowering plants.
(3) A performance bond is required in accordance with section 510.25, subdivision 2 (a)(2).
Subd. 6. Description of properties in the Transit Overlay District.
The northerly district boundary begins at the corner of Lake Drive and Lakeview Avenue N and
follows Lake Drive westerly to County Road 81, turns northwest on County Road 81 to 42 ½
Avenue N, continues on 42 ½ Avenue N to the west extending to a point where the alignment
intersects the easterly edge of the BNSF right-of-way.
The westerly district boundary starts at the NW corner intersection of the 42 ½ Avenue line
extended to the railroad tracks, following the railroad right-of-way to 41st Avenue N, turning
northeast to Hubbard Avenue, then south on Hubbard Avenue to 40 ½ Avenue N, then northeast
on 40 ½ Avenue N to the alley between the properties on West Broadway and properties on
Hubbard extended to the point where the alley intersects with Hubbard Avenue, then following
Hubbard Avenue to 36th Avenue N.
The southerly boundary is 36th Avenue N between France Avenue and County Road 81.
The easterly boundary is County Road 81 from 36th Avenue North to 40th Avenue N, turning
northwest to follow 40th Avenue North to Lake Road, turning northeast on Lake Road to 41st
Avenue North extended, turning southeasterly on 41st Avenue N to Lakeview Avenue North, then
continuing northwest on Lakeview Avenue N to Lake Drive.
Properties excluded from the Transit Overlay District are as follows:
4223 County Road 81 (Lilac Parkway Apartment)
3815 W Broadway (Good Samaritan care facility)
3704 W Broadway (Birdtown Flats Apartment)
4020 Lakeland and 4000 40th Ave N (Copperfield Hill)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 530.09, Subd. 6
(2) Map
(Added Sec. 530.09, Ord. No. 19-06)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 535.01
(Rev. 2016)
Section 535 - Zoning: administration and enforcement
535.01. Conditional use permits. Subdivision 1. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to provide
the city with a reasonable degree of discretion in determining the suitability of certain designated uses
upon the general welfare, public health, and safety. In making this determination, whether or not the
conditional use is to be allowed, the city shall make findings of fact related to the nature of the land upon
which the use is to be located, the nature of the adjoining land upon which the use is to be located, the
nature of the adjoining land or buildings whether or not a similar use is already in existence and located
on the same premises or on other lands immediately close by, the effect upon traffic into and from the
premises, or on any adjoining roads, and all such other or further factors as the city shall deem a requisite
of consideration in determining the effect of such use on the general welfare, public health, and safety.
Subd. 2. Procedure.
(a) Request for conditional use permits, as provided within this subsection, shall be filed
with the city on an official application form a minimum of four weeks before the
planning commission meeting at which formal action is requested. Such application shall
be charged a fee as established in subsection 515.15. This fee shall not be refunded. Such
application shall also be accompanied by three copies of detailed written and graphic
materials fully explaining the proposed development or use or both. A certificate of
survey showing existing and proposed structures, if any, and any other information
determined by the city shall be submitted. The application, along with all related
information, shall be referred to the city planning commission for consideration and a
recommendation to the city council.
(b) The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the planning commission in
order to answer questions concerning the proposed conditional use.
(c) The conditional use application shall be referred to the city staff for a report and
recommendation to be presented to the commission. The city staff's report and
recommendations shall be given to the city planning commission at least five days prior
to the meeting at which said report and recommendations are to be presented. The report
and recommendations of the city staff are to be entered in and made part of the permanent
written record of the planning commission meeting.
(d) The planning commission shall make findings of fact regarding any adverse effects of the
proposed conditional use and what additional requirements may be necessary to reduce
such adverse effects. Its judgment shall be based upon, but not limited to, the following
factors:
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 535.01, Subd. 2(d)(1)
(1) consistency with the city comprehensive plan;
(2) the geographical area involved;
(3) whether such use will cause deterioration of the area in which it is proposed;
(4) the character of the surrounding area;
(5) the demonstrated need for such use;
(6) whether the proposed use would cause odors, dust, flies, vermin, smoke, gas,
noise or vibration, or would impose hazards to life or property in the
neighborhood;
(7) whether such use would inherently lead to or encourage disturbing influences in
the neighborhood;
(8) whether stored equipment or materials would be screened and whether there
would be continuous operation within the visible range of surrounding
residences.
(e) The planning commission shall have the authority to request additional information from
the applicant concerning operational factors or to retain expert testimony with the consent
and at the expense of the applicant, concerning operational factors, said information to be
declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections
of this code.
(f) Notice of time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper at least 10 days prior to the day of the hearing. Individual notices shall be
mailed not less than ten days before the hearing to all owners of property, according to
the assessment records, within 350 feet of the parcel included in the request.
(g) Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any proceedings set
forth within this code provided a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with this
subsection.
(h) The planning commission shall recommend such conditions relating to the granting of
said conditional use permit as they deem necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of
the code or recommend that the request be denied. The planning commission's
recommendation and the city staff's report and recommendation shall be forwarded to the
city council.
(i) The city council shall not grant a conditional use permit until they have received a report
and recommendation from the planning commission and the city staff. The planning
commission shall reach a decision not later than the second regular meeting following the
first regular meeting at which the request for a conditional use permit is considered by the
commission.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 535.01, Subd. 2(j)
(Rev. 2016)
(j) Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the planning commission and the city
staff, the conditional use permit request shall be placed on the agenda for the next regular
city council meeting, or as soon as possible thereafter. (Amended, Ord. No. 13-13)
(k) Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the planning commission and city
staff, the city council shall have the option to set and hold a public hearing if deemed
necessary and may impose any condition it considers necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
(l) Approval of a conditional use permit shall require an affirmative vote of a majority of the
members of the council. (Amended, Ord. No. 16-12)
(m) The city clerk shall notify the conditional use permit applicant of the council's decision in
writing and place a copy of the decision in the central property file.
Subd. 3. Reconsideration. Whenever an application for a conditional use permit has been
considered and denied by the city council, a similar application for a conditional use permit affecting
substantially the same property shall not be considered again by the planning commission or city council
for at least six months from the date of its denial; and a subsequent application affecting substantially the
same property shall likewise not be considered again by the planning commission or city council for an
additional six months from the date of the second denial unless a decision to reconsider such matter is
made by not less than a four-fifths vote of the city council.
Subd. 4. Lapse of conditional use permit by non-use. Whenever within one year after granting a
conditional use permit, or two years if a legally binding development agreement has been executed
between the applicant and the city, the work as permitted by the permit shall not have been completed,
then such permit shall become null and void unless a petition for extension of time in which to complete
the work has been granted by the city council. Such extension shall be requested in writing and filed with
the city at least 20 days before the expiration of the original conditional use permit. There shall be no
charge for the filing of such petition. The request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith
attempt to complete the work permitted in the conditional use permit. Such petition shall be presented to
the city council for a decision.
Subd. 5. Performance bond – conditional use permit. (Amended, Ord. No. 09-03)
(a) Except in the case of single family detached residential property, upon approval of a
conditional use permit the city shall be provided with a performance bond prior to the
issuing of building permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or
development. Said bond shall guarantee completion of improvements to public
infrastructure serving the improvements or development such as storm sewer and private
site improvements such as landscaping, parking lots or surface water management such
as rain gardens in conformance and compliance with the conditions of the conditional use
permit and the codes and ordinances of the city. (Amended, Ord. No. 09-03)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 535.01, Subd. 5(b)
(Rev. 2009)
(b) The performance bond shall consist of a bond, cash escrow deposit or irrevocable letter
of credit and be in the amount of the city engineer's estimated costs of labor and materials
for the proposed improvements or development. (Amended, Ord. No. 09-03)
(c) The city shall hold the performance bond until completion of the proposed improvements
or development and a certificate indicating compliance with the conditional use permit
and codes and ordinances of the city has been issued by the city building inspector.
(Amended, Ord. No. 09-03)
(d) Failure to comply with the conditions of the conditional use permit or the codes and
ordinances of the city or both shall result in forfeiture of the bond.
535.03. Rezoning and text amendments. Subdivision 1. The city council or the city planning
commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request to amend the text or the districting map of this
code. Any person, persons, firm or corporation or their express agent owning real estate may initiate a
request to amend the district boundaries or text so as to affect the said real estate or real estate abutting
thereto.
Subd. 2. Procedures.
(a) A request for a rezoning or text amendment together with three copies of detailed written
and graphic materials fully explaining the proposal for an amendment to this code shall
be filed with the city. At the time of such filing, the applicant shall pay a fee as
established in subsection 535.15. This fee shall not be refunded. If the request is a
rezoning, a certificate of survey showing existing and proposed structures, if any, must be
submitted. If the land to be rezoned is described by metes and bounds or other
complicated auditor's subdivision or government lot description, it shall be replatted
before or concurrent with rezoning.
(b) The amendment request and all related information, shall be referred to the city planning
commission for consideration and a report and recommendation to the city council.
(c) An amendment request must be submitted by the applicant at least four weeks prior to the
planning commission meeting at which formal action is requested. The city staff shall
refer said amendment proposal along with all related information to the planning
commission at least five days prior to the regular meeting.
(d) The amendment request shall be referred to the city staff for a written report and
recommendation to be presented to the commission. The city staff's report and
recommendation shall be given to the planning commission at least five days prior to the
meeting at which said report and recommendation are to be presented. The report and
recommendation of the city staff is to be entered in and made part of the permanent
written record of the planning commission meeting.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 535.03, Subd. 2(e)
(Rev. 2016)
(e) The planning commission shall hold a public hearing for all zoning map amendments and
text amendments. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published
in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the day of the hearing. Individual
notices, if it is a district change request, shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the
hearing to all owners of property, according to the assessment records, within 350 feet of
the parcel included in the request.
(f) Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such
proceedings as set forth within this ordinance provided a bona fide attempt to notify has
been made to comply with this subsection.
(g) The Planning Commission shall reach a decision and make its report to the City Council
within 60 days after the regular meeting at which the amendment request was first
considered by the Commission.
(h) The Council shall, upon receiving no report from the Planning Commission within 90
days, place such request on the agenda of its next regular meeting and decide the issue
within 30 days.
(i) Upon receiving the reports and recommendations of the Planning Commission and City
staff, the rezoning or text amendment request shall be placed on the agenda of the next
regular City Council meeting, or as soon as possible thereafter. Said reports and
recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of
the City Council meeting. (Amended, Ord. No. 13-13)
(j) Unless otherwise provided by state law, all amendments to the zoning ordinance shall
require a four-fifths affirmative vote of the City Council. (Amended, Ord. No. 16-12)
(k) The City Clerk shall notify the originator of the amendment request of the Council's
decision in writing.
Subd. 3. Consideration after denial. Whenever an application for a rezoning has been considered
and denied by the City Council, a new and substantially identical application for rezoning affecting the
same property shall not be considered again by the Planning Commission or City Council for at least six
months from the date of its denial. For good cause shown, the City Council may, by majority vote of all
its members, permit such a new application to be considered prior to the expiration of such period.
535.05. Variances and appeals. Subdivision 1. Authority/appeals. The City Council, acting as the board
of appeals and adjustments, upon receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall have
the authority to review and rule on appeals upon the part of any affected property owner where it is
alleged that there has been an error in the interpretation or application of the provisions of this code.
(Amended, Ord. No. 11-14)
Subd. 2. Authority/variances. The City Council, acting as the board of appeals and adjustments,
upon the receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall have the authority to consider
and grant variances to the provisions of this code, including the expansion of nonconformities subject to
the following: (Added, Ord. No. 11-14)
(a) variances shall only be granted;
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 535.05, Subd. 2 (a)(1)
(Rev. 2011)
(1) when the variance is in harmony with the purposes and intent of the code; and
(2) when the variance is consistent with the comprehensive plan. (Added, Ord. No.
11-14)
(b) as part of the determination of whether to grant a variance, the applicant may also be
required to establish that there are practical difficulties in complying with this code.
"Practical difficulties," as used in connection with the granting of a variance, means that:
(1) the property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not
permitted by the code;
(2) the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property and not
created by the landowner; and
(3) the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.
Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties. Practical
difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar
energy systems. (Added, Ord. No. 11-14)
(c) Variances shall be granted for earth sheltered construction as defined in Minnesota
Statutes, Section 216C.06, subdivision 14, when in harmony with the code. (Added, Ord.
No. 11-14)
(d) Variances shall not be granted to permit any use not allowed in the district in which the
property is located. (Added, Ord. No. 11-14)
(e) The City Council may impose conditions in the granting of variances. A condition must
be directly related to and must bear a rough proportionality to the impact created by the
variance. (Added, Ord. No. 11-14)
Subd. 3. Application. Requests for review and approval of variances or consideration of appeals
shall be submitted by the applicant to the City staff upon an approved application form. Requests shall be
submitted a minimum of four weeks prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which formal action is
requested. A certificate of survey showing existing and proposed structures, if any, shall be submitted
with all variance requests. (Amended, Ord. No. 11-14)
Subd. 4. Application fee. Submission of a request for a variance or an appeal shall be
accompanied by a fee as established by Subsection 535.15 of this code. (Amended, Ord. No. 11-14)
Subd. 5 Review and approval. (Amended, Ord. No. 11-14)
(a) Requests for consideration of variances and appeals shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission, which shall hold public hearings on the items.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 535.05, Subd. 5 (b)
(Rev. 2011)
(b) Individual notices of the public hearing shall be mailed to each owner of record of
property located within 350 feet of the exterior boundaries of the affected property at
least ten days prior to the public hearing. Failure of a property owner to receive said
notice shall not invalidate any proceedings set forth in this code provided a bona fide
attempt has been made to comply with this Section.
(c) It shall be the duty of the City staff, upon submission of a request for a variance or
appeal, to prepare a report on the request for the use of the Planning Commission and
City Council. Copies of the report and the submissions of the applicant shall be provided
to the Planning Commission at least five days prior to the scheduled public hearing.
Upon presentation at the public hearing, the report shall be entered in and made part of
the record of the public hearing.
(d) The Planning Commission shall hold the public hearing on the request as scheduled. The
Planning Commission shall consider the report and recommendation of City staff along
with the comments of any members of the public in attendance. The Planning
Commission shall have the authority to request additional information of the applicant, or
to obtain expert testimony at the expense of the applicant.
(e) In considering a request for physical variances, the Planning Commission shall make
specific findings of fact based upon the evidence and testimony presented regarding the
determinations required in paragraphs (a) and (b) of Subdivision 2 of this Section.
(Amended, Ord. 11-14)
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 535.05, Subd. 5(f)
(Rev. 2011)
(f) In considering requests for appeals, the planning commission shall make specific findings
of fact based upon the evidence and testimony presented regarding whether:
(1) the interpretation or application of the provisions of this code, in the specific
instance cited, was or was not consistent with the intent of this code; and
(2) the interpretation or application of the provisions of this code, in the specific
instance cited, was or was not consistent with the manner of interpretation or
application of the same provisions in other specific, demonstrable situations.
(g) After due deliberation, the planning commission shall formally act upon the requested
variance or appeal in one of the following manners.
(1) recommend approval of the variance request or appeal, as submitted, to the city
council;
(2) recommend approval of the variance request or appeal, with modifications or
conditions, to the city council;
(3) recommend denial of the variance request or appeal to the city council;
(4) postpone action on the variance request or appeal to the next regular meeting of
the planning commission or such later date as agreed to by the applicant; or
(5) table action on the variance request or appeal, but only with the consent of the
applicant.
(h) With the exceptions of action to postpone or table, the recommendation of the planning
commission shall be forwarded to the city council for its consideration. In such case that
the planning commission acts to postpone consideration of the variance request or appeal,
the applicant shall be provided with a written statement of the reasons for such action. A
variance request shall not be postponed more than once without the consent of the
applicant and shall always be postponed to the next regular meeting of the planning
commission or such later date as agreed to by the applicant. Following initial
postponement or failure of the applicant to agree to a satisfactory later date and upon
request by the applicant, the planning commission shall forward the variance appeal to
the city council for consideration. In such instances, the planning commission may
forward the matter with or without a recommendation. The planning commission shall
have the authority to table consideration of a variance or appeal for the second time only
with the consent of the applicant. Thereafter, the planning commission shall take up
consideration of the variance or appeal at any regular meeting requested by one of its
members or by the applicant.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 535.05, Subd. 5(i)
(Rev. 2013)
(i) Upon receiving the reports and recommendations of the planning commission and city
staff, the variance or appeal request shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular city
council meeting, or as soon as possible thereafter. Said reports and recommendations
shall be entered in and made a part of the permanent written record of the city council
meeting. (Amended, Ord. No. 13-13)
(j) The city council shall have the option to set and hold a second public hearing as part of
its deliberations on the request. If the city council determines to hold a public hearing,
the notice requirements of subsection 535.05, subdivision 4(b) shall be followed. The
city council retains the authority to question the applicant or his authorized representative
regarding the proposal, to request additional information of the applicant or to obtain
expert testimony.
(k) After due deliberation, the city council shall formally act upon the proposed variance in
one of the following manners:
(1) Approve the variance request or appeal as submitted;
(2) Approve the variance request or appeal with modifications or conditions;
(3) Disapprove the variance request or appeal;
(4) Postpone action on the variance request or appeal to the next regular meeting of
the city council or at such later date as agreed to by the applicant; or
(5) Table action on the variance request or appeal, but only with the consent of the
applicant.
(l) Action by the city council approving, approving with modifications, or disapproving a
variance request or appeal shall require a majority vote of the full city council. The
applicant shall be provided with written documentation of the city council's action,
substantiating the reasons for the council's decision. In such instance that the city council
acts to postpone consideration of the variance or appeal, the applicant shall be provided
with a written statement of the reasons for such action. A variance or appeal shall not be
postponed more than once without the consent of the applicant and shall always be
postponed to the next regular meeting of the city council or such later date as agreed to
by the applicant. Following initial postponement or failure of the applicant and city
council to agree to a satisfactory later date and upon request by the applicant, the city
council shall act upon the variance or appeal. Failure of the city council to do so shall
automatically be deemed to constitute disapproval. The city council with the consent of
the applicant, shall have authority to table consideration of a variance or appeal.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 535.05, Subd. 5(m)
(Rev. 2011)
Thereafter, the city council shall take up consideration of the variance or appeal at any
regular meeting requested by one of its members or by the applicant. Action by the city
council postponing or tabling a variance or appeal shall require a simple majority vote of
those present.
(m) Consideration after denial. Whenever an application for a variance or appeal has been
considered and denied by the city council, a new and substantially identical application
for a variance or appeal affecting the same property shall not be considered again by the
planning commission or city council for at least six months from the date of its denial.
For good cause shown, the city council may, by majority vote of all its members, permit
such a new application to be considered prior to the expiration of such period.
Subd. 6. Lapse of variance or appeal. Whenever within one year after granting a variance or
appeal, or two years if a legally binding development agreement has been executed between the applicant
and the city for non-income producing single family residential dwellings, the work as permitted by the
variance or appeal shall not have been completed, then such variance or appeal shall become null and
void unless a petition for extension of time in which to complete the work has been granted by the city
council. Such extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the city at least 20 days before the
expiration of the original variance or appeal. There shall be no charge for the filing of such petition. The
request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to complete the work permitted in the
variance or appeal. Such petition shall be presented to the city council for a decision.
Subd. 7. Performance bond - variances. (Amended, Ord. No. 09-03)
(a) Upon approval of a variance or appeal, the city shall be provided with a performance
bond prior to the issuing of building permits or initiation of work on the proposed
improvements or development. Said bond shall guarantee completion of improvements
to public infrastructure serving the improvements or development such as storm sewer
and private site improvements such as landscaping, parking lots or surface water
management such as rain gardens in conformance and compliance with the conditions of
the variance or appeal and the codes and ordinances of the city. (Amended, Ord. No. 09-
03)
(b) The performance bond shall consist of a bond, cash escrow deposit or irrevocable letter
of credit and be in an amount of the city engineer's estimated costs of labor and materials
for the proposed improvements or development. (Amended, Ord. No. 09-03)
(c) The city shall hold the performance bond until completion of the proposed improvements
or development and a certificate indicating compliance with the variance or appeal and
codes and ordinances of the city has been issued by the city building inspector.
(Amended, Ord. No. 09-03)
(d) Failure to comply with the conditions of the variance or appeal or the codes and
ordinances of the city or both shall result in forfeiture of the bond.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 535.07
(Rev. 2014)
535.07. Certificate of zoning compliance. Subdivision 1. Application. Said certificate shall be applied
for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the
building inspector shall have found the building or structure satisfactory and given final inspection. Said
application shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the city council and set forth in
Appendix B of the city code to defray the cost of processing. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-04)
Subd. 2. Construction performed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter IV of the city code
establishing and regulating building codes of the city shall not be subject to the requirement of a
certificate of zoning compliance established by this code. (Amended, Ord. No. 08-04)
535.09. Enforcement and penalties. Subdivision 1. This code shall be administered and enforced by the
city manager who is hereby designated as the enforcing officer. The city manager may institute, in the
name of the city, any appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as provided by statute, charter
or ordinance. Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this code shall be subject to an
administrative penalty in accordance with section 117 of the Robbinsdale city code and each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Amended, Ord. No. 14-22)
535.11. Use permit. Subdivision 1. Permit required. As may be specified in the use district provisions
of this code, a use permit shall be required prior to erection, addition, or alteration of any building
structure use or land. A use permit shall be required prior to the change, modification, or extension of a
nonconforming building structure or use.
Subd. 2. Application and fee. A use permit shall be applied for from the construction
coordinator. Said application shall be accompanied by a detailed written statement or plans or both
describing the proposed change, modification or alteration. An application fee established by resolution
of the city council and set forth in Appendix B of the city code shall be charged for each use permit and
shall not be refunded.
Subd. 3. Determination. Within ten days after the application for a use permit, the construction
coordinator shall determine whether the change, modification, or alteration conforms to the requirements
of all applicable city and state regulations and ordinances. This time limit for determination of
receptibility shall be automatically extended should a referral to another governmental jurisdiction be
required. The applicant shall be advised in writing of the construction coordinator's determination and
findings and if acceptable, a use permit shall be granted.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 535.11, Subd. 4
(Rev. 1991)
Subd. 4. Certificate of zoning compliance. All cases requiring a use permit shall also require a
certificate of zoning compliance and shall be subject to the provisions of subsection 535.07 of this code.
(Revised, Ord. No. 91-4, Sec. 6)
Subd. 5. Performance bond.
(a) Upon approval of a use permit the city shall be provided with a surety bond prior to the
issuing of building permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or
development. Said bond shall guarantee conformance and compliance with the
conditions of the use permit and the codes and ordinances of the city.
(b) The surety bond shall be in the amount of the city engineer's or city building inspector's
or both estimated costs of labor and materials for the proposed improvements or
development.
(c) The city shall hold the surety bond until completion of the proposed improvements or
development and certificate of zoning compliance indicating compliance with the use
permit and codes and ordinances of the city has been issued by the city building
inspector.
(d) Failure to comply with the conditions of the use permit or the codes or ordinances of the
city or combinations thereof shall result in forfeiture of the bond.
535.13. Procedures for adopting and amending the comprehensive plan. Subdivision 1. Purpose and
intent. This subsection is established to protect and promote health, safety, general welfare, and order
within the city through the establishment of procedures, governing adoption and making amendments to
the comprehensive plan. The provisions of this subsection are intended to insure that the adoption of the
comprehensive plan and amendments made to the comprehensive plan are consistent with the sections of
the city code regulating the development and natural environment of the city.
Subd. 2. Definitions.
(a) "Comprehensive plan" means that document which encompasses the inventory, policy
plan, concept plan, development framework/categorical plans, and management and
implementation framework as adopted by the city council on August 18, 1981 and as
amended.
Subd. 3. Administration of amendment requests.
(a) Amendments: the city council or the city planning commission may, upon their own
motion, initiate a request to amend the text or supporting maps of the comprehensive
plan, or both. Any person, persons, firm or corporation or their express agent residing
within the city may initiate a request.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 535.13, Subd. 4
(Rev. 2013)
Subd. 4. Procedures.
(a) A request plus three copies of detailed written and graphic materials, where applicable,
fully explaining the proposal for an amendment to the comprehensive plan shall be filed
with the city and shall be charged a fee as established in subsection 535.15 of this code.
(b) The amendment request and all related information shall be referred to the planning
commission for consideration and recommendation to the city council.
(c) An amendment request must be submitted by the applicant at least four weeks prior to the
planning commission meeting at which formal action is requested. The city staff shall
refer said amendment proposal along with all related information to the planning
commission at least five days prior to the regular meeting.
(d) The amendment request shall be referred to the city staff for a written report and
recommendation to be presented to the commission. The city staff's report and
recommendation shall be given to the planning commission at least five days prior to the
meeting at which said report and recommendation are to be presented. The report and
recommendation of the city staff is to be entered in and made part of the permanent
record of the planning commission meeting.
(e) The planning commission shall consider all effects of the proposed amendment. Its
judgment shall be based upon, but not limited to, the following factors:
(1) relationship to the code and the city code;
(2) relationship to comprehensive plan and any sub-area plans.
(f) The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on all comprehensive plan
adoptions and amendments. Notice of the time, place and purpose of this hearing shall be
published in the official newspaper at least ten days prior to the day of the hearing.
(g) The planning commission shall reach a decision not later than its second regular meeting
following the meeting at which the amendment request was first considered by the
commission. If the amendment is of metropolitan significance, the planning commission
shall forward the amendment request, along with all related information, to the
metropolitan council for review and comment.
(h) Upon receiving the reports and recommendations of the planning commission, the city
staff and the metropolitan council, if applicable, the amendment request shall be placed
on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting, or as soon as possible thereafter.
Said reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent
record of the city council meeting at which the amendment is considered. (Amended,
Ord. No. 13-13)
Robbinsdale City Code (zoning) 535.13, Subd. 4(i)
(Rev. 2016)
(i) Unless otherwise provided by state law, all amendments to the comprehensive plan shall
require a four-fifths affirmative vote of the City Council (Amended, Ord. no. 16-12)
(j) The city shall notify the originator of the amendment request of the council's decision in
writing.
535.15. Fees. Subdivision 1. Fees.
(a) In order to defray administrative costs of processing requests for conditional use permits,
zoning amendments, variances, appeals, and comprehensive plan amendments, a base fee
established by resolution of the city council and set forth in Appendix B of the city code
per application shall be charged.
(b) In order to defray the additional cost of processing requests for conditional use permits,
zoning amendments, variances, appeals, and comprehensive plan amendments, all
applicants shall pay the total cost of staff or consulting time and materials expended by
the city or both in processing of the applicant's requests.
(1) Staff or consulting time or both shall include but not be limited to time spent in
advising the applicant, time spent researching information necessary for the
review and analysis of the request, and time spent in the preparation of written or
graphic materials necessary for the processing of the request. Staff or consulting
time or both shall not include time spent in making presentations on the request
before the planning commission or city council, but shall include time spent in
conference with appropriate governmental agencies.
(2) Materials shall include, but not be limited to, maps, graphs, charts, drawings,
official notifications, written reports, and the printing or reproduction of same.
(3) The charge for staff or consulting time or both shall be based upon an hourly rate
established and made available to the applicant at such time as an application is
submitted. The charge for materials shall be based upon their actual cost to the
city.
(c) For any application for a conditional use permit, zoning amendment, variance, appeal, or
comprehensive plan amendment for a single family, non-income producing, residential
use, structure, or property, which is intended for the sole use, enjoyment, or occupancy of
the applicant, the base filing fee shall also be deemed to be to the total cost of processing
the application.
Robbinsdale City Code (Zoning) 535.15, Subd. 2
Subd. 2. Fee payable.
(a) The base fee shall be payable at the time an application is filed with and accepted by the
city clerk and shall not be refundable except as provided for in subdivision 3 below.
(b) At the time of application, the applicant shall be provided with an estimate of costs to
process the application. The applicant shall thereupon be required to place on deposit
with the city clerk a sum sufficient to cover the amount of the estimate.
(c) Unless the applicant shall have paid the base fee and placed on deposit with the city clerk
any required base fee or deposit, the application will not be scheduled for processing.
(d) If at any time during the processing of an application the costs for such exceed the
combined sum of an applicant's base fee and deposit by an amount greater than 10%, the
applicant shall be so informed and provided with a revised estimate of costs. Thereupon,
the applicant shall be required to place on deposit an additional sum sufficient to cover
the amount of the revised estimate before any additional work on the application
proceeds. An applicant may withdraw an application upon being provided the revised
estimate of costs. In such case, the applicant shall be liable for the costs incurred for
processing the application to the date of the withdrawal, provided such costs shall exceed
the combined amount of the applicant's base fee and deposit of record on that date by
more than 10%.
(e) Upon completion of staff review and analysis of an accepted application and prior to any
review or public hearing of the application by either the planning commission or city
council, the applicant shall be provided with a final written statement of charges for
processing the application. If the applicant's base fee and deposits are not sufficient to
cover the total charges contained in the final statement, the applicant shall be required to
pay the balance due, provided that in no case shall such balance exceed by 10% the
combined amount of the applicant's base fee and deposits of record on that date.
Subd. 3. Fee refundable.
(a) The base fee shall be refundable only upon written withdrawal of the application before
any work shall have commenced upon its processing or as provided for in subdivision
2(a) above.
(b) The deposit shall be refundable to the extent that it exceeds the amount which remains
after the base fee has been subtracted from the charges shown in the final statement.
(c) The deposit shall be refundable upon written notice of the applicant withdrawing an
application, but then only after all costs of processing the application up to the date of the
withdrawal have been subtracted.
APPENDIX A1
550.01
Section 550- Zoning Districts - Legal Descriptions
550.01 “R-1" District Subdivision 1. The "R-1" District shall consist of following property: all
property within the City of Robbinsdale not listed within another use district.(Amended, 06-10)
550.03 "R-2" District Subdivision 1. The "R-2" District shall consist of the following property:
Addresses listed in italics are subject to change without notice. Where in conflict, legal
description is correct. (Amended Ord, 09-08, 07-10, 07-14, 07-16, 11-01)
(a) AUDITOR'S SUBDIVISION NO. 48:
(1) All that part of Lot 6, described as follows to wit: Beginning at a point 499 feet North
of the South line and 418.15 feet East of the West line of said Lot 6, thence West
parallel with the South line of said Lot 6, a distance of 135 feet, thence North parallel
with the West line a distance of 93.2 feet more or less to the Northerly line of said Lot
6, thence Easterly along the Northerly line of said Lot 6, 135.1 feet to a point 418.15
feet due East of the West line of said Lot 6, thence South parallel with said West line
90.4 feet more or less to the point of beginning. (5400 45 ½ Ave N)
(b) AUDITOR'S SUBDIVISION NO. 180:
(1) Northwesterly 60 feet of Southeasterly 285 feet of Southwesterly 150.8 feet, Lot 24.
(3836 Hubbard Ave N)
(2) That part of North 160 feet of Lot 26 lying West of East 76 feet thereof except road,
Lot 26. (4467-69 38th Ave N)
(c) AUDITOR'S SUBDIVISION NO. 320:
(1) That part of Lot 16 except the East 85 feet thereof, lying East of the following
described line and its extensions: Beginning at a point on the North line of Oakdale
Avenue distant 97.65 feet Westerly as measured along the North line of Oakdale
Avenue from the Southwest corner of the East 85 feet of said lot, thence
Northeasterly to a point on the North line of said lot distant 42.2 feet West of the
Northwest corner of the East 85 feet of said lot. (3820-22 Oakdale Ave N)
(2) That part of Lot 16, except the East 85 feet thereof, lying West of the following
described line and its extensions: Beginning at a point on the North line of Oakdale
Avenue distant 97.65 feet Westerly as measured along the North line of Oakdale
Avenue from the Southwest corner of the East 85 feet of said lot, thence
Northeasterly to a point on the North line of said lot distant 42.2 feet West of the
Northwest corner of the East 85 feet of said lot. (3824-46 Oakdale Ave N)
550.03 subd 1(c)(3)
(3) That part of Lot 23, described as follows: Beginning at the Northeast corner of Lot
23, thence Southerly to the Southeast corner of Lot 23; thence Westerly along the
Southerly line of Lot 23, a distance of 61.5 feet to a point 41 feet Easterly of the
Southwest corner of Lot 23; thence Northerly deflecting 85 degrees 50 minutes to the
right 100.9 feet; thence Northeasterly 102.2 feet to a point in the Northerly line of Lot
23, distant 75 feet Easterly of the Northwest corner of Lot 23, thence Easterly 72 feet
to point of beginning. (3807 Oakdale Ave N)
(4) That part of Lot 23, described as follows: Beginning at the Northwest corner of Lot
23, thence Southerly to the Southwest corner of Lot 23; thence Easterly along South
line of Lot 23, a distance of 41 feet; thence Northerly deflecting 94 degrees 10
minutes to the left 100.9 feet; thence Northeasterly 102.2 feet to a point in the
Northerly line of Lot 23, distant 75 feet Easterly of point of beginning; thence
Westerly 75 feet to point of beginning. (3811 Oakdale Ave N)
(5) North 64.5 feet of South 235.5 feet of West 132 feet of Lot 32. (3220-22 France Ave
N)
(6) North 90 feet of West 135 feet of Lot 32. (3256-60 France Ave N)
(7) North 29 feet of the South 58 feet of North 469.9 feet of Lot 46. (3206-08 Chowen
Ave N)
(8) South 63 feet of North 358.9 feet of Lot 46. (3210-12 Chowen Ave N)
(9) South 78 feet of North 221.9 feet of Lot 46. (3220-22 Chowen Ave N)
(10) South 77.9 feet of North 143.9 feet of Lot 46. (3224-26 Chowen Ave N)
(11) North 66 feet of Lot 46. (3230 Chowen Ave N)
(12) That part of Lot 46 lying South of North 440.9 feet thereof excluding street. (3520-22
Lowry Ave N)
(d) AUDITOR'S SUBDIVISION NO. 326:
(1) Northwesterly 60 feet of Lot 23 and Southeasterly 7 feet of Lot 24.(4539-43 Lakeland
Ave N)
(2) That part of Lot 24 lying Northwesterly of the Southeasterly 7 feet thereof. (4549-53
Lakeland Ave N)
(3) The southeasterly 60.00 feet of Lot 38. (4510 W Broadway Ave N) (Amended, 03-07)
550.03 subd 1(e)
(e) AUDITOR'S SUBDIVISION NO. 359:
(1) That part of South 60 feet lying West of East 50 feet thereof excluding road, Lot 26.
(4660-62 W Broadway Ave N)
(2) That part of Lot 27, lying West of East 50 feet thereof. (4654-56 W Broadway Ave N)
(f) BEACHVIEW:
(1) Lot 3 and North 12 feet of Lot 4, Block 1. (4624 –26 Indiana Ave N)
(2) That part of Lot 4, lying South of North 12 feet thereof, Block 1. (4614-16 Indiana Ave
N)
(g) BRIMHALL'S 1ST ADDITION:
(1) Lots 1 and 3, Block 4. (4253-55 and 4265-651/2 Regent Ave N)
(h) BRIMHALL'S 2ND ADDITION:
(1) Lot 1 and the North 30 feet of Lot 2, Block 4. (3957-59 Quail Ave N)
(2) Lot 3 and South 10 feet of Lot 2, Block 4. (3951 Quail Ave N)
(3) South 20 feet of Lot 3 and North 30 feet of Lot 4, Block 4. (3947-49 Quail Ave N)
(4) Lot 1 and North 9.5 feet of Lot 2, Block 5. (3859-61 Quail Ave N)
(5) South 30.5 feet of Lot 2 and North 20 feet of Lot 3, Block 5. (3851-53 Quail Ave N)
(6) Lot 5 and South 10 feet of Lot 4, Block 5. (3843-45 Quail Ave N)
(7) Lot 6 and North 10 feet of Lot 7, Block 5. (3839-41 Quail Ave N)
(8) South 30 feet of Lot 7 and North 20 feet of Lot 8, Block 5. (3831-33 Quail Ave N)
(9) South 20 feet of Lot 8 and North 30 feet of Lot 9, Block 5. (3827-29 Quail Ave N)
(10) Lot 10, and South 10 feet of Lot 9, Block 5.(3823-25 Quail Ave N)
(11) Lot 11 and North 10 feet of Lot 12, Block 5. (3819-21 Quail Ave N)
(12) South 30 feet of Lot 12, and North 20 feet of Lot 13, Block 5. (3811-13 Quail Ave N)
550.03, subd (1)(h)(13)
(13) South 20 feet of Lot 13 and North 30 feet of Lot 14, Block 5. (3807-09 Quail Ave N)
(14) Lot 15 and South 10 feet of Lot 14, Block 5. (3801-03 Quail Ave N)
(15) Lot 16 and South 10 feet of Lot 17, Block 5. (3800-02 Regent Ave N)
(16) North 30 feet of Lot 17 and South 20 feet of Lot 18, Block 5. (3806-08 Regent Ave N)
(17) North 20 feet of Lot 18 and South 30 feet of Lot 19, Block 5.(3810-12 Regent Ave N)
(18) Lot 20 and North 10 feet of Lot 19, Block 5. (3818-20 Regent Ave N)
(19) Lot 21 and South 10 feet of Lot 22, Block 5.(3822-24 Regent Ave N)
(20) North 30 feet of Lot 22, and South 20 feet of Lot 23, Block 5.(3826-28 Regent Ave N)
(21) North 20 feet of Lot 23 and South 30 feet of Lot 24, Block 5.(3830-32 Regent Ave N)
(22) Lot 25 and North 10 feet of Lot 24, Block 5.(3838-40 Regent Ave N)
(23) Lot 26 and South 10 feet of Lot 27, Block 5.(3842-44 Regent Ave N)
(24) North 30 feet of Lot 27 and South 20 feet of Lot 28, Block 5.(3846-48 Regent Ave N)
(25) North 20 feet of Lot 28 and South 30 feet of Lot 29, Block 5. (3850-52 Regent Ave N)
(26) Lot 30 and North 10 feet of Lot 29, Block 5.(3858-60 Regent Ave N)
(27) Lot 24 and North 1/2 of Lot 23, Block 6.(3832-34 Quail Ave N)
(i) CARPENTER'S GLENWOOD ADDITION:
(1) South 55 feet of Lot 1. (4162-64 Adair Ave N)
(j) CONFER BROS. GLENWOOD MANOR 2ND ADDITION:
(1) Lots 3, 4, 5, and 10, Block 1. (4108-10, 4140, 4144-46, 4148-50 Yates Ave N)
(2) That part lying North of South 45 feet Lot 2, Block 3. (5909-11 42nd Ave N)
(3) Lot 10, Block 5.(5800-02 40th Ave N)
550.03, subd (1)(l)(4)
(4) Lots 4 and 8, Block 6. (4012, 4040 Yates Ave N)
(5) Lot 10, Block 7.(3710-12 39th Ave N)
(6) Lots 2, Block 8. (3953 Yates Ave N)
(7) Lot 9, Block 9. (3909-11 Zane Ave N)
(8) Lots 4 and 5, Block 11.(3844 & 3850 Zane Ave N)
(k) CASTONGUAY ADDITION:
(1) Lots 1, 2, and 3, Block 1. (4031-33 37th Ave N, 4037-39 37th Ave N, 3687-89 Halifax Ave
N)
(l) CRYSTAL LAKE HEIGHTS:
(1) That part of Lots 1, 2, and 3, Block 1, Crystal Lake Heights, and of Lot 20, Auditor's
Subdivision No. 180 and of vacated 38th Avenue described as follows: Commencing
at a point in Southwesterly line of said Lot 3, distant 22.98 feet Northwesterly from
Southwesterly corner thereof; thence Northeasterly to a point in Northeasterly line of
said Lot distant 23.18 feet Northwesterly from Southeasterly corner thereof thence
Northwesterly along the Northeasterly line of Lots 2 and 3, and extension thereof to
the intersection with a line running parallel with and 14 feet Southeasterly from
Northwesterly line of Lot 20, Auditor's Subdivision No. 180 thence Southwesterly
along said parallel line to Southwesterly line of Lot 1, Crystal Lake Heights, thence
Southeasterly to beginning, Block 1.(3780-82 Hubbard Ave N)
(2) Lot 4 and that part of Lot 3, lying Southeasterly of a line running from a point in
Northeasterly line of said Lot 3, distant 23.98 feet Northwesterly from Southeasterly
corner thereof to a point in Southwesterly line of said lot distant 22.98 feet
Northwesterly from Southwesterly corner thereof, Block 1.(3774-76 Hubbard Ave N)
(3) Lots 21 and 22, Block 5.(3652-56 Hubbard Ave N)
(4) Lot 11, Block 8.(3647-49 Halifax Ave N)
(5) Lot 19 and South 1/2 of Lot 18, Block 8.(3601-03 Halifax Ave N)
(6) Lot 6, and North 22 feet of Lot 7, Block 11.(3538-40 June Ave N)
(7) Lot 4 and South 25 feet of Lot 3, Block 12.(3547-49 Halifax Ave N)
(8) Lot 20 and North 10 feet of Lot 19, Block 12.(3516-18 Indiana Ave N)
550.03, subd (1)(n)(9)
(9) Lot 3, Block 13.(3551 Grimes Ave N)
(10) Lot 4, Block 14.(3547 France Ave N)
(m) D.W. JONES SUBDIVISION:
(1) South 56 feet of West 224 feet of North 1/2 Lot 4.(4416-18 Vera Cruz Ave N)
(2) East 75 feet of West 350 feet of South 1/2 Lot 4.(5410-12 44th Ave N)
(3) East 50 feet of the West 275 feet of the South 1/2 Lot 4.(5416-18 44th Ave N)
(n) EDLING ADDITION:
(1) North 50 feet of Lot 18, Block 1.(4309 York Ave N)
(o) GIEBENHAIN 1ST ADDITION:
(1) Lot 1, Block 2.(4225-27 Xenia Ave N)
(p) GIEBENHAIN 2ND ADDITION:
(1) Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4, Block 1.(4216-18 Xenia Ave N, 4212-14 Xenia Ave N, 5710-12
42nd Ave N, 5716-18 42nd Ave N)
(q) GLENWOOD TERRACE:
(1) Lot 28 and South 1/2 of Lot 29, Block 2.(3342-44 Beard Ave N)
(r) GORIAN PARK:
(1) Lots 2, 5, and 7. (3735-37 Regent Ave N, 3717-19 Regent Ave N, 3705 Regent Ave N)
(s) HIDDEN SHORES
(1) (3836-50 Lakeland Ave N)
(t) HIGHLAND TERRACE:
(1) Lots 1, 20, and 21.(3955 Regent Ave N, 3950-54 Scott Ave N)
550.03, subd (1)(u)
(u) ISLEMOUNT PARK 4TH ADDITION:
(1) That part of Lot 10 lying Southerly of a straight line drawn from the Southeast corner
of Lot 15, Block 1, to a point in the Westerly line of said Lot 10, distant 16.5 feet
Southeasterly from the Northwest corner of said Lot 10, as measured along the
Westerly line of said Lot 10, Lot 11, except the South 48.0 feet thereof, Block 1.
(4525 France Ave N)
(2) South 48 feet of Lot 11 and North 4 feet of Lot 12, Block 1.(4516 Grimes Ave N)
(3) South 53 feet of Lot 12, Block 1.(4510 Grimes Ave N)
(4) North 57 feet of Lot 13, Block 1.(4505 France Ave N)
(v) JENSEN ADDITION:
(1) South 70 feet of North 210 feet Lot 6, Block 4.(4519-21 Chowen Ave N)
(2) South 70 feet of North 140 feet of Lot 6, Block 4.(4525-27 Chowen Ave N)
(3) North 70 feet of Lot 6, Block 4.(4531-33 Chowen Ave N)
(w) JOHN PAULSON 5TH ADDITION
(1) (4160-80 Lake Road N)
(x) KNIGHTS ADDITION:
(1) Lot 4 and 17. (4533-35 Beard Ave N)
(y) LAURIE'S ADDITION:
(1) Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4, Block 1. (4400 Toledo Ave N, 5214-16 44th Ave N, 5206-08 44th
Ave N, 5200-02 44th Ave N)
(z) LILACRES:
(1) Lot 11.(3701-03 Toledo Ave N)
550.03, subd (1)(aa)
(aa) LILAC TERRACE ADDITION:
(1) Lot 5, Block 5.(5425-27 45th Ave N)
(2) Lot 7, Block 6.(4516 Vera Cruz Ave N)
(3) Lot 8, Block 6. (5419 45-½ Ave N)
(bb) MALMSTEN'S ADDITION:
(1) Lot 6, Block 1. (3952 Hubbard Ave N)
(cc) MCNAIR MANOR 2ND UNIT:
(1) South of the North 105 feet Lots 12, 13, Block 3.(3310-12 Drew Ave N)
(2) Lot 12 and Westerly 30 feet front and rear of Lot 11, including adjacent 1/2 of alley
vacated, Block 4.(3808-10 31st Ave N)
(3) Lot 16, Block 7.(2783-85 McNair Dr N)
(4) Lots 32 and 33, Block 8.(3423 30th Ave N)
(5) Southwesterly 9 feet of Lot 3, and Northwesterly 35 feet of Lot 4, Block 14.(2659
Parkview Blvd N)
(6) Lot 12, Block 15. (2620-22 McNair Dr N)
(7) Lot 11 and West 20 feet of Lot 12, Block 16.(2600-04 France Ave N)
(8) Lot 14 and West 1/2 of Lot 15, Block 16.(3812 46th Ave N)
(dd) MCNAIR MANOR 3RD UNIT:
(1) Lot 5, Block 1.(3109 York Ave N)
(2) Lots 3, 5, 6, and 7, Block 2.(2939-41, 2929-31, 2925-27, 2919-21 York Ave N)
550.03, subd (1)(dd)(3)
(3) Lot 1, Block 4.(3201-05 Parkview Blvd N)
(4) Lot 24, Block 5.(3404-06 Meridian Dr N)
(5) Lot 6, Block 9.(2631-33 Xerxes Ave N)
(6) Lot 1, Block 14.(2671-73 Meridian Dr N)
(ee) MINNEAPOLIS PARK:
(1) South 30 feet of Lot 2, and North 1/2 of Lot 3, Block 6.(4261 France Ave N)
(2) South 20 feet of Lot 15 and North 30 feet of Lot 16, Block 6.(4205 France Ave N)
(ff) NORDBYS ADDITION:
(1) That part of Easterly 115 feet of Lot 1, lying North of South 46.6 feet thereof, Block
1. (4627-31 Xerxes Ave N)
(gg) NORTH LILAC TERRACE:
(1) Lot 1, Block 1.(4576 Vera Cruz Ave N)
(2) East 88 feet of Lot 5 including adjacent vacated alley, Block 1.(5416-18 45 ½ Ave N)
(3) North 58 feet of Lot 6, Block 1. (4565-67 Toledo Ave N)
(hh) OPPORTUNITY TERRACE:
(1) Lots 14 and 15, Block 1. (3232-34 Halifax Ave N)
(2) North 75 feet of Lots 12, 13, Block 2.(3203-03 ½ Halifax Ave N)
(3) Lot 7 and the North 25 feet of Lot 8, Block 3.(3227-29 Indiana Ave N)
(4) Lot 8 except the North 25 feet front and rear thereof, and all of Lot 9, Block 3. (3221-
23 Indiana Ave N)
(5) Lot 1, Block 5.(4101-03 Lowry Ave N)
(6) Lot 2 and East 10 feet of Lot 3, Block 5.(4105-07 Lowry Ave N)
(7) That part of Lot 3 lying West of East 10 feet thereof also the East 1/2 of Lot 4, Block
5. (4109-09 ½ Lowry Ave N)
Lot 5 and West 1/2 of Lot 4, Block 5. (4111-15 Lowry Ave N)
550.03, subd (1)(hh)(8)
(8) South 10 feet of Lot 2, all of vacated Lot 3 and North 7 feet of Lot 4, including
adjacent 1/2 vacated alley, Block 6.(3135-37 Grimes Ave N)
(9) South 36 feet of Lot 4 and North 24 feet of Lot 5 including adjacent 1/2 of vacated
alley, Block 6. (3131-33 Grimes Ave N)
(10) (Lot 6 and South 19 feet of Lot 5 including 1/2 vacated alley, Block 6.(3127-29
Grimes Ave N)
(ii) PARKER'S FIRST ADDITION TO ROBBINSDALE PARK:
(1) Lot 6, Block 6.(4061-63 Hubbard Ave N)
(2) Southwesterly 66 feet of Northeasterly 143.45 feet of Lots 7 and 8, Block 6.(4612 40-
1/2 Ave N)
(3) All of that part of Lots 9, 10, lying Southwesterly of the North- easterly 65 feet
thereof, Block 7.(4530-32 40th Ave N)
(jj) PARKERSIDE:
(1) Lot 2, except the Northwesterly 10 feet front and rear thereof and all of Lot 3, Block
3. (3913 Hubbard Ave N)
(2) Lots 10 and 11, Block 8.(4041-43 Lake Road N)
(3) Lots 10 and 11, Block 9. (4042-44 Lake Road N)
(kk) PETRAN PARK:
(1) Lots 4 and 5.(3345 Beard Ave N)
(ll) REARRANGEMENT OF BLOCKS 1, 2, 7, 8, & 9 SEMINARY PARK, :
(1) Lot 32, Block 1 (3845-47 Regent Ave N)
(2) Lot 38 and North 1/2 of Lot 37, Block 1 (3901-03 Regent Ave N)
(3) Lot 13 and North 1/2 of Lot 14, Block 3 (3804-06 Toledo Ave N)
(4) Lot 15 and South 1/2 of Lot 14, Block 3 (3800-02 Toledo Ave N)
550.03, subd. (1)(mm)
(mm) REGISTERED LAND SURVEY NO. 323:
(1) Tract A. (3717-19 Lake Dr N)
(nn) REGISTERED LAND SURVEY NO. 634
(1) The East 196.25 feet of Tract B, except the North 53.93 feet thereof; and Tract C
except the South 53.94 feet thereof. (4441-43 Unity Ave N)
(2) Commencing at Southwest corner of Tract B thence East 94 feet North 52.89 feet
thence West 192.95 feet thence South 51.14 feet to beginning. (4430-32 Vera Cruz
Ave N)
(3) North 51.13 feet of that part of Tract B lying West of East 196.25 feet thereof. (4440-
42 Vera Cruz Ave N)
(4) North 53.93 feet of East 196.25 feet of Tract B. (4447-49 Unity Ave N)
(5) Tracts F, G and H. (4442-44 Unity Ave N, 4434-36 Unity Ave N, 4425-27 Toledo Ave
N)
(oo) REGISTERED LAND SURVEY NO. 1398:
(1) Tracts A and B. (3540-42, 3544-46 Indiana Ave N)
(pp) RESIDENCE PARK ADDITION:
(1) Lot 12 and South 1/2 of Lot 13, Block 3. (4926-28 37th Ave N)
(qq) ROBIN ESTATES ADDITION:
(1) Lot 1, Block 1. (4355-57 45th Ave N)
(rr) ROBBINSDALE HOME GARDENS:
(1) North 56.9 feet Lot 2, Block 1. (4359-59 ½ Toledo Ave N)
(2) North 45 feet of Lot 3 and South 11.9 feet of Lot 2, Block 1. (4355-57 Toledo Ave N)
(3) Lots 1, 6, and 17, Block 3. (4263 Unity Ave N, 4229-31 Unity Ave N, 4242-44 Vera
Cruz Ave N)
(4) Lots 2, and 9, Block 6. (5407-09 42nd Ave N, 4105-07 Unity Ave N
550.03, subd.(1)(rr)(5)- rev 2012
(5) Lot 9, Block 7. (4009 Unity Ave N)
(6) Lot 9, Block 7. (4009 Unity Ave N)
(ss) LAKEVIEW TERRACE:
(1) That part of Lot 29 of said addition lying Easterly of a line running from a point in
Northwesterly line of said lot distant 22.5 feet Southwesterly from Northeasterly
corner thereof to a point in Southeasterly line of said lot distant 2 feet Southwesterly
from Southeasterly corner thereof also that part of Lot 18, Auditor's Subdivision No.
179 described as follows: Commencing at a point in East line of Robbinsdale
Lakeview Terrace distant 145.65 feet North of Southeasterly corner of Lot 29, Block
1, said addition; thence South 145.65 feet to Southeast corner of said Lot 29, thence
East along Northerly line of 43rd Avenue to East line of Lot 18, thence North 145.65
feet thence West to beginning. (4304 43rd Ave N)
(tt) ROBBINSDALE PARK: (Amended Ord 12-09)
(1) Southeasterly 20 feet of Lot 15 and Northwesterly 30 feet of Lot 16, Block 4. (4315
W Broadway Ave N)
(2) Lot 20, Block 4. (4283-83 ½ W Broadway Ave N)
Lot 6, excluding alley, Block 5. (4262-64 Regent Ave N)
(3) Lot 8, excluding alley, Block 5. (4252-54 Regent Ave N)
(4) Lot 15, Block 5. (4248-50 Regent Ave N)
(5) Lot 7, Block 8. (4125 Quail Ave N)
(6) Lots 4 and 6, Block 9. (4139-41 Perry Ave N, 4133 Perry Ave N)
(7) Lots 4, 10, 17, and 19, Block 12. (4039-41 Orchard Ave N, 4011-13 Orchard Ave N,
4020-22 Perry Ave N, 4030-32 Perry Ave N.)
(8) Lots 3, 7, and 15, Block 13. (4047-49 Perry Ave N, 4029 Perry Ave N, 4008-12 Quail
Ave N)
(9) Lot 4 and North 1/2 of Lot 5, Block 13. (4041-43 Perry Ave N)
(10) North 19 feet of Lot 11, Block 14. (4007 Quail Ave N)
550.03, subd.(1)(tt)(12)
(11) Lots 2, 9, 10, and 12, Block 14. (4051-53 Quail Ave N, 4015-17 Quail Ave N, 4011
Quail Ave N, 4001-03 Quail Ave N)
(12) South 31 feet of Lot 11, Block 14. (4005 Quail Ave N)
(uu) ROBBIN TERRACE ADDITION:
(1) Lots 1 and 13, Block 5. (3701 Lake Drive N, 3825-27 Lake Drive N)
(2) That part of Lot 11, Block 5 described as beginning at the Northeast corner of Lot 13,
said Block 5; thence Easterly along the North line of said Lot 11 a distance of 60.11
feet to the actual point of beginning of the land to be hereinafter described; thence
continuing Easterly along said North line 62.67 feet; thence South parallel with the
East line of said Lot 13 to its intersection with the extension East of the South line of
said Lot 13; thence West along said extended line to its intersection with a line drawn
South, parallel with the East line of said Lot 13 from the actual point of beginning;
thence North along said parallel line to the actual point of beginning. (3817-19 Lake
Drive N
(3) That part of Lot 11, Block 5, described as follows: Beginning at the Northwest corner
of Lot 14, Block 5, said Robbin Terrace Addition; thence South to the Southwest
corner of said Lot 14; thence West along the North lines of Lots 9 and 10, Block 5
and Robbin Terrace Addition and the extension Westerly of said North lines a
distance of 110 feet; thence North parallel to the West line of said Lot 14 to the North
line of said Lot 11, thence Easterly to the point of beginning. (3809-11 Lake Drive N)
(4) That part of Lot 11, Block 5, described as follows: Commencing at the Northwest
corner of Lot 14, Block 5, said Addition; thence South along the West line of said Lot
14 to the Southwest corner of said Lot 14; thence West along the North line of Lots 9
and 10, Block 5, said Addition a distance of 55 feet to the point of beginning; thence
continuing West along the North line of said Lots 9 and 10 and its extension a
distance of 55 feet; thence North and parallel with the West line of said Lot 14 to the
Southwesterly line of 45th Avenue North, thence Southeasterly along the
Southwesterly line of 45th Avenue
(5) North, to a point on said Southwesterly line marked by the intersection with a line
parallel with the West line of said Lot 14 and commencing on the North line of said
Lots 9, and 10, 55 feet West of the Southwest corner of said Lot 14; thence South
along said parallel line to the point of beginning. (3813-15 Lake Drive N)
550.03, subd.(1)(uu)(6)
(6) That part of Lot 11, Block 5, described as beginning at the Northeast corner of Lot 13
said Block 5, thence Easterly along the North line of said Lot 11 a distance of 60.11
feet; thence South, parallel with the East line of said Lot 13 to its intersection with the
extension East of the South line of said Lot 13; thence West along said extended line
to the Southeast corner of said Lot 13; thence North along the East line of said Lot 13
to the point of beginning. (3821-23 Lake Drive N)
(7) Lot 12, except road, Block 5.(3829-31 Lake Drive N)
(vv) ROCKFORD DR. ADDITION:
(1) East 60 feet of that part of Lot 1 lying North of South 150 feet thereof. (5621-23 42nd
N)
(2) That part of Lot 29 lying West of the East 40 feet thereof. (3856-58 Xenia Ave N)
(3) That part lying West of the East 40 feet thereof, Lot 30. (3850-52 Xenia Ave N)
(4) Lot 39. (3927-29 Xenia Ave N)
(5) Lot 52. (4045-47 Xenia Ave N)
(ww) SCHULTZS HIDDEN HAVEN:
(1) Lots 1, 2, 6 & 7, Block 1 (4357-59 Robin Ave N, 4358-60 Robin Ave N)
(xx) SEMINARY PARK:
(1) Lot 12, Block 4. (3913-15 Unity Ave N)
(yy) SHANNON GLEN:
(1) Lots 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 27, and 28, Block 1. (4367-69 France Ave N, 4361-63 France
Ave N, 4351-53 France Ave N, 4360-62 Halifax Ave N.)
(zz) SHUMWAYS 1ST ADDITION:
(1) Lot 6 and North 1/2 of Lot 7, Block 1. (4309-11 Lakeland Ave N)
(2) Lot 8 and Southeasterly 1/2 of Lot 7, Block 1. (4301-03 Lakeland Ave N)
(3) Lot 16, Block 1. (4340 W Broadway Ave N)
(4) Lot 1 and Northwesterly 40 feet of Lot 2, Block 2. (4283 Lakeland Ave N)
550.03, subd.(1)(zz)(5)
(5) Lots 9 and 11, Block 2. (4254-56 W Broadway Ave N, 4266-68 W Broadway Ave N)
(aaa) SOUTHBROOK TOWNHOUSES
(1) (4100-32 46th Ave N)
(bbb) STRAWBERRY ACRES:
(1) North 1/2 of Lot 9, Block 1. (4146 Welcome Ave N)
(2) South 1/2 of Lot 5, Block 2. (4001 Vera Cruz Ave N)
(ccc) STRAWBERRY ACRES 2ND ADDITION:
(1) North 60 feet of Lot 1, Block 1. (3955 Vera Cruz Ave N)
(2) South 1/2 of Lot 10, Block 1. (3950-52 Welcome Ave N)
(3) The South 47 feet of Lot 3 as measured along the East and West lines thereof, Block
2. (3848-50 Welcome Ave N)
(ddd) STRAWBERRY ACRES 4TH ADDITION:
(1) Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, and 10. (4059-61 Welcome Ave N, 4053-55 Welcome Ave N,
4047-49 Welcome Ave N, 4041-43 Welcome Ave N, 4035-37 Welcome Ave N, 4011-
13 Welcome Ave N, 4001-03 Welcome Ave N)
Amended, Ord 04-14
(eee) VICTORY VIEW:
(1) Lot 1, Block 2. (3300-04 43rd Ave N)
(2) Lot 2, Block 3. (3406-08 43rd Ave N)
(fff) WALKER'S LUMBER:
(1) Lots 4 and 17, Block 2. (4536-38 Beard Ave N)
(ggg) WOOD'S 2ND ADDITION:
(1) Lots 3, 4, 19, and 20, Block 2. (3747-51 Major Ave N, 3714-18 Noble Ave N)
550.03, subd.(1)(hhh)
(hhh) WOODWORTH & DAVIS ADDITION TO ROBBINSDALE PARK:
(1) Lot 13 and the south 1/2 of Lot 14, Block 2. (3810 Major Ave N)
(2) All that part of Lots 34, 35, and 36 of Block 3 described as follows to-wit: Beginning
at a point on the West line of said Lot 36 in said Block, which point is 6.4 feet South
of the Northwesterly corner of said Lot, thence South on Vilas Avenue along the
West line of Said Block 3 a distance of 99.6 feet; thence easterly 127.5 feet to a point
on the Easterly line of said Lot 34 in said Block which point is 21.2 feet South of the
Northeasterly corner of said Lot 34; thence North along the Easterly line of said Lot
34, 35, 36, a distance of 100.2 feet; thence Westerly 127.5 feet to the point of
beginning, except the North 38 feet measured along the East and West lines thereof.
(3858 Noble Ave N)
(iii) SECTION 10, TOWNSHIP 118, RANGE 21:
(1) Commencing at a point in the South line of Government Lot 4 distance 200 feet West
from the Southeast corner thereof thence North 90 feet parallel with the East line
thereof thence West 100 feet parallel with the South line thereof thence South parallel
with said East line and the extension thereof to the center line of Lake Drive Avenue
thence Northeasterly 110.5 feet along said center line thence North to beginning
excluding road. (3910-14 Lake Drive)
(jjj) SECTION 7, TOWNSHIP 29, RANGE 24:
(1) North 88 feet of South 108 fee of East 155 feet of Southeast ¼. (2601 France Ave N)
(2) North 110 feet of South 430 feet of Southeast 1/4 of Southeast 1/4 lying East of
Railroad right-of-way. (2629 France Ave N)
(3) North 70 feet of South 330 feet of East 132 feet of Northeast 1/4.(3225-27 France
Ave N)
(4) The North 50 feet of South 130 feet of West 150 feet of East 299.66 feet of Northeast
1/4. (3204-06 Grimes Ave N)
(5) The North 50 feet of South 180 feet of West 150 feet of East 299.66 feet of Northeast
1/4. (3208-10 Grimes Ave N)
Section 550.03, subd (1)(jjj)(6)
(6) The North 50 feet of South 230 feet of West 150 feet of East 299.66 feet of Northeast
1/4. (3212-14 Grimes Ave N)
(7) The North 50 feet of South 280 feet of West 12 feet of East 299.66 feet of Northeast
1/4. (3216-18 Grimes Ave N)
(8) North 50 feet of South 330 feet of West 150 feet of East 299.66 feet of Northeast 1/4.
(3220-22 Grimes Ave N)
(9) South 65 feet of East 128 feet of North 1/2 of South 3/4 of Northeast 1/4 of Southeast
1/4.(2937-39 France Ave N)
(10) North 65 feet of South 130 feet of East 128 feet of North 1/2 of South 3/4 of
Northeast 1/4 of Southeast 1/4. (2941-43 France Ave N)
(11) Southerly 1/2 of East 128 feet of North 1/2 of South 3/4 of Northeast 1/4 of Southeast
1/4 lying South of North 296.6 feet thereof and lying North of South 130 feet thereof
except road. (2945 France Ave N)
(12) Northerly 1/2 of East 128 feet of North 1/2 of South 3/4 of Northeast 1/4 of Southeast
1/4 lying South of North 296.6 feet thereof and lying North of South 130 feet thereof.
(2947 France Ave N)
(13) Commencing at Northeast corner of Southeast 1/4 then South along East line thereof
330 feet; then South 89o 57' West 128 feet; then South parallel with East line of
Southeast 1/4 428 feet to actual point of beginning; then West 138.14 feet to point in
East Line of Grimes Avenue, then Southerly along East line of Grimes Avenue 62.13
feet to point in South line of North 1/2 of South 3/4 of Northeast 1/4 of Southeast 1/4
then East along said South line 144.63 feet; then North 61.66 feet to beginning.
(3046-48 Grimes Ave N)
(14) Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Southeast 1/4 thence south along the
East line of said Southeast 1/4 a distance of 330.0 feet; thence South 89o 57' West, a
distance of 128.0 feet; thence South parallel with the East line of said Southeast 1/4 a
distance of 368.0 feet to the point of beginning; thence West 131.83 feet to a point in
the East line of Grimes Avenue North; thence South 6o 00' West along the East line of
said Grimes Avenue North, 60.33 feet; thence East 138.14 feet; thence North parallel
with the East line of said Southeast 1/4 60.00 feet to the point of beginning. (3050-52
Grimes Ave N)
Section 550.03, subd (1)(jjj)(15)
(15) Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Southeast 1/4; thence South along the
East line of said Southeast 1/4 a distance of 330.0 feet; thence South 89o 57' West a
distance of 128.0 feet; thence South parallel with the East line of said Southeast 1/4 a
distance of 242.0 feet to the point of beginning; thence West 121.48 feet to a point in
the East line of Grimes Avenue North; thence Southerly along the East line of said
Grimes Avenue North on a curve to the right (having a central angle of 4o 38' 30" and
a radius of 779.25 feet and a chord bearing of South 3o 24' 12" West) 63.13 feet;
thence East 125.22 feet; thence North parallel with the East line of said Southeast 1/4,
63.00 feet to the point of beginning. (3100-02 Grimes Ave N)
(16) Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Southeast 1/4; thence South along the
East line of said Southeast 1/4 a distance of 330.0 feet; thence South 89o 57' West a
distance of 128.0 feet; thence South parallel with the East line of said Southeast 1/4 a
distance of 242.0 feet to the point of beginning; thence West 121.48 feet to a point in
the East line of Grimes Avenue North; thence Southerly along the East line of said
Grimes Avenue North on a curve to the right (having a central angle of 4o 38' 30" and
a radius of 779.25 feet and a chord bearing of South 3o 24' 12" West) 63.13 feet;
thence East 125.22 feet; thence North parallel with the East line of said Southeast 1/4,
63.00 feet to the point of beginning. (3104-06 Grimes Ave N)
(17) Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Southeast 1/4; thence South along East
line thereof 330 feet then South 89o 57' West 128 feet; then South parallel with East
line of Southeast 1/4 59 feet to actual point of beginning; then West 147.73 feet to
point in East line of Grimes Avenue; then Southerly along East line of Grimes
Avenue 63.41 feet; then East 125.32 feet then North 59 feet to beginning.(3116-18
Grimes)
(18) Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Southeast 1/4; thence South along the
East line of said Southeast 1/4, a distance of 330.0 feet; thence South 89o 57' West, a
distance of 128.0 feet; thence South parallel with the East line of said Southeast 1/4, a
distance of 10.0 feet to the point of beginning; thence South 89o 57' West, 177.02 feet
to a point in the East line of Grimes Avenue North; thence South 30o 58' East along
the East line of said Grimes Avenue North, 53.76 feet; thence on a tangential curve to
the right (having a central angle of 0o 55' 17" and a radius of 196.50 feet) 3.16 feet;
thence East 147.73 feet; thence North parallel to the East line of said Southeast 1/4,
49.00 feet to the point of beginning. (3120-22 Grimes Ave N)
(19) Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Southeast 1/4, thence on an assumed
bearing of South along the East line of said Southeast 1/4 a distance of 330 feet;
thence South 89o 57' West, a distance of 461.5 feet; thence South 9o 07' 56" East
192.05 feet; thence South 4o 09' 26" West 270.71 feet; thence on a bearing of West
5.33 feet to the actual point of beginning; thence on a bearing of East 144.23 feet to a
point in the West line of Grimes Avenue North; thence South 6o 00' West 62.29 feet
along said West line; thence West 144.23 feet; thence North 6o 00' East 62.29 feet to
the actual point of beginning. (3041-43 Grimes Ave N)
Section 550.03, subd (1)(jjj)(20)
(20) Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Southeast 1/4; thence South along the
East line of said Southeast 1/4 a distance of 330.0 feet; thence South 89o 57' West, a
distance of 461.5 feet; thence South 9o 07' 56" East 192.05 feet; thence South 4o 09'
26" West, 208.88 feet to point of beginning; thence East 140.90 feet to a point in the
West line of Grimes Avenue North; thence South 6o 00' West 62.01 feet along the
West line; thence West 138.90 feet; thence North 04o 09', 26" East 61.83 feet to the
point of beginning. (3045-47 Grimes Ave N)
(21) Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Southeast 1/4; thence South along the
East line of said Southeast 1/4, a distance of 330.0 feet; thence south 89o 57' West a
distance of 461.5 feet; thence South 9o 07' 56 seconds East 192.05 feet; thence South
4o 09' 26" West, 147.05 feet to the point of beginning; thence East 142.90 feet to the
West line of Grimes Avenue North; thence South 6o 00' West 62.01 feet along said
West line; thence West 140.90 feet; thence North 4o 09' 26" East 61.83 feet to the
point of beginning. (3049-51 Grimes Ave N)
(22) Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Southeast 1/4; thence South along the
East line of said Southeast 1/4, a distance of 330.0 feet; thence South 89o 57' West a
distance of 461.5 feet; thence South 9o 07' 56" East, 192.05 feet; thence South 4o 09'
26" West, 85.23 feet to the point of beginning; thence East 144.31 feet to a point in
the West line of Grimes Avenue North; thence Southerly along the West line of
Grimes Avenue North on a curve to the right (having a central angle of 2o 18' 06" and
a radius of 737.25 feet and a chord bearing of South 4o 50' 53" West) 29.82 feet;
thence South 6o 00' West tangent to the last described curve 32.33 feet; thence West
142.90 feet; thence North 4o 09' 26" East to the point of beginning. (3101-03 Grimes
Ave N)
(23) Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Southeast 1/4; thence South along the
East line of said Southeast 1/4 a distance of 330.0 feet; thence South 89o 57' West, a
distance of 461.5 feet; thence South 9o 07' 56" East 192.05 feet; thence South 4o 09'
26" West, 23.40 feet to the point of beginning; thence East 141.36 feet to a point in
the West line of Grimes Avenue North; thence South along the West line of Grimes
Avenue 14.11 feet; thence on a tangential curve to the right (having a central angle of
3o 41' 54" and a radius of 737.25 feet) 47.58 feet; thence West 144.31 feet; thence
North 4o 09' 26" East 61.83 feet to the point of beginning. (3105-07 Grimes Ave N)
Section 550.03, subd (1)(jjj)(24)
(24) Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Southeast 1/4; thence South along the
East line of said Southeast 1/4, a distance of 330.0 feet; thence South 89o 57' West, a
distance of 461.5 feet; thence South 9o 07' 56" East 153.23 feet to the point of
beginning; thence East 145.71 feet to a point in the West line of Grimes Avenue
North; thence Southerly along the West line of said Grimes Avenue North on a curve
to the right (having a central angle of 2o 08' 39" and a radius of 154.5 feet, and a
chord bearing of South 1o 04' 18" East) 5.78 feet; thence tangent to the last described
curve, and South 55.89 feet; thence West 141.36 feet; thence North 09' 26" East 23.40
feet; thence deflecting left and continuing North 9o 07' 56" West 38.82 feet to the
point of beginning. (3109-11 Grimes Ave N)
(25) Commencing at Northeast corner of Southeast 1/4; then South along East line thereof
330 feet; then South 89o 57' West 461.5 feet; then South 09o 07' 56" East 90.77 feet to
actual point of beginning, then East 140.23 feet to point in West line of Grimes
Avenue then Southerly along West line of Grimes Avenue 64.03 feet then West
145.71 feet; then North 09 o 07'56" West 62.46 feet to beginning. (3113-15 Grimes
Ave N)
(26) Commencing at Northeast corner of Southeast 1/4 then South along East line thereof
330 feet then South 89o 57' West 461.5 feet then South 09o 07' 56" East 27.35 feet to
actual point of beginning; then North 89o 57' East 113.43 feet to point in West line of
Grimes Avenue then South 30o 58' East along West line of Grimes Avenue 58.96
feet; then on a tangential curve to the right with a delta of 05o 04' 46" and a radius of
154.5 feet a distance of 13.70 feet; then West 140.23 feet then North 09o 07' 56" West
63.42 feet to beginning. (3117-19 Grimes Ave N)
550.07 (rev.2010)
550.07 "R-B" District. Subdivision 1. The "R-B" District shall consist of the following property:
Addresses listed in italics are subject to change without notice. Where in conflict, legal
description is correct.
(a) AUDITORS SUBDIVISION NO. 179
(1) Lot 42 (4219 Lakeland Ave N)
(b) AUDITORS SUBDIVISION NO. 180
(1) The northwesterly 52 feet of the northeasterly 175.8 feet of Lot 19, Lot 22 (3761-63 W
Broadway)
(2) Those parts of Lots 20 and 21, Auditor's Subdivision No. 180 and of Lot 1, Block 1,
Crystal Lake Heights, described as follows: beginning at the most westerly corner of
Lot 21; thence northeasterly along the northwesterly line of Lot 21, to a point therein
distant 158.9 feet measured southwesterly from the most northerly corner of Lot 21;
thence southeasterly parallel with the northeasterly line of Lot 21 a distance of 60.5
feet; thence southwesterly parallel with the northwesterly line of Lot 21 and extension
thereof to the most southerly corner of Lot 1; thence northwesterly along the
southwesterly line of Lot 1 and extension thereof to the intersection with the northerly
right-of-way line of vacated 38th Avenue North; thence east along the northerly rightof-
way of vacated 38th Avenue North to the beginning. (3815 W Broadway Ave N)
(3) Those portions of Auditor's Subdivision No. 180 and Rearrangement of Block 2 of
Lakeshore Addition: Commencing at intersection of northwesterly line of 39th
Avenue North and northeasterly line of West Broadway; thence northwesterly along
said northeasterly line to most southerly corner of Lot 2, Auditor's Subdivision No.
180; thence northeasterly along southeasterly line thereof 119.3 feet; thence
northwesterly to most southerly corner of Lot 36; thence northwesterly along
southwesterly line of Lot 36, and its northwesterly extension to northwesterly line of
39 1/2 Avenue North; thence northeasterly along said northwesterly line to
southwesterly line of U.S. Highway No. 52-218; thence southeasterly along said
southwesterly line to northwesterly line of 39th Avenue North; thence southwesterly
along said northwesterly line to beginning, also southeasterly 26 feet of southwesterly
23 feet of Lot 5, Rearrangement of Block 2 of Lakeshore Addition including adjacent
vacated street. (4300 39th Ave N)
(4) The Northeasterly 158.79 feet of the southeasterly 65 feet of Lot 24. (3821 W
Broadway Ave N)
(5) The Northeasterly 158.9 feet of the Northwesterly 14 feet of Lot 20; The
Northeasterly 158.9 feet of Lot 21; all in Auditor’s Subdivision Number 180,
Hennepin County, Minnesota (3811 West Broadway Ave) (Amended, Ord No. 08-05)
(6) Lot 14, Block 5 of Crystal Lake Heights (3605 France Ave N) (Moved from B-1
District Ord 10-01)
Section 550.07, subd. (c) (rev.2018)
(c) AUDITORS SUBDIVISION NO. 315
(1) All of lot 8 and the southeasterly 33 feet of lot 7. (3776 W Broadway Avenue), Added Ord
14-14
(2) Lots 9 and 10. (3770 West Broadway), Added Ord 14-15
(d) AUDITORS SUBDIVISION NO. 320
(1) East 42 feet of South 198 feet of Lot 47. (3500 Lowry Ave N) [Moved from R-2 District
Ord 07-16]
(2) That part of South 190 feet of Lot 47, lying West of East 42 feet thereof subject to street.
(3502 Lowry Ave N) [Moved from R-2 District Ord 07-16]
(e) CRYSTAL LAKE HEIGHTS (Added Ord 13-06; amended Ord. 18-09)
(1) Lot 1, 2 and 3, Block 14. (3559 W Broadway Ave)
(f) NORTH MEMORIAL CAMPUS ADDITION
(Amended, Ord No 00-07 Lot 5, Block 1 from RB to P, 3310 Oakland)
(1) Block 1, Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4, Block 2, Lots 1, 2, and 3, Block 3 (3208-10 Oakdale Ave N,
3300 Oakdale Ave N, 3366 Oakdale Ave N, 3368 Oakdale Ave N, 3401 Oakdale Ave N,
3253 W. Broadway Ave N, 3333 W Broadway Ave N, 3200 Abbott Ave No)
(g) LOT 2 BLOCK 1, ROBBINS WAY
(Amended, Ord No. 06-10, moved from R-1 District [2nd reading held in 2008])
(1) Parcel2:
The West 72.00 feet of the East 252.0 feet of Lot 6, as measured at right angles to the East line of
said Lot 6, "Lilac Way Addition to Robbinsdale".
Parcel 3:
The North 50 feet measured at right angles to the North line of the East 180 feet of Lot 6
measured at right angles to the East line thereof, "Lilac Way Addition to Robbinsdale".
Parcel 4:
That part of the following described land:
The East 180 feet of Lot 6, "Lilac Way Addition to Robbinsdale", except the North 50 feet
measured at right angles to the North line thereof,
Which lies northerly of the following described line: Beginning at Right of Way Boundary
Corner B58 as shown on Minnesota Department of Transportation Right of Way Plat No. 27-122
(which is filed as RT Document No. 3403137(; thence Easterly on an azimuth of 91 degrees 53
minutes 24 seconds along the boundary of said plat for 146.11 feet to Right of Way Boundary
Section 550.07, subd (h) - rev. 2017
Corner B59; thence on an azimuth of 180 degrees 07 minutes 25 seconds for 9.97 feet;
thence on an azimuth of 96 degrees 13 minutes 26 seconds for 10.02 feet; thence on an
azimuth of 90 degrees 19 minutes 06 seconds for 32.83 feet; thence on an azimuth of 86
degrees 52 minutes 36 seconds for 35.73 feet; then on an azimuth of 86 degrees 18
minutes 29 seconds for 11.47 feet; thence on an azimuth of 00 degrees 03 minutes 55
seconds for 2.05 feet to Right of Way Boundary Corner B86 as shown on said Plat
No. 26-122; thence continue on an azimuth of 00 degrees 03 minutes 55 seconds for
10.00 feet; thence on an azimuth of 91 degrees 36 minutes seconds for 86.04 feet;
thence on an azimuth of 84 degrees 57 minutes 38 seconds for 4.02 feet to the East
line of said Lot 6 and there terminating.
(c) PARKER VILLAGE FIRST ADDITION (Parker Village
Townhomes), Added Ord 04-06 (See attachment B of ordinance)
(d) PARKERS FIRST ADDITION TO ROBBINSDALE PARK Added, Ord 10-19
(1) Block 5, Lots 2 through 16 (4510 40 1/2 Ave N)
(e) PARKERSIDE:
(1) Lots 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,
and 31 of Block 8. (4200 40th Ave N)
(2) Lots 13, 14,15, 16, 17, 18, and 19 of Block 7 (4020 Lakeland Ave N)
(3) Lots 10, 11, 14 and 15 and the northerly 10 feet of Lots 12 and 13, Block 1
(3900 Hubbard Ave N) Added, Ord 10-19
(f) REARRANGEMENT OF BLOCK 2, LAKESHORE ADDITION (Added, Ord
10- 19)
(1) Lots 6 through 14. (3978 W Broadway Ave N)
(g) ROBBINSDALE PARK (amended Ord 12-09, added Ord 13-04)
(1) Lots 17 and 18, Block 6. (4926 42"d Ave N)
(2) The East Half of Lot 14 and West 35 feet of Lot 15, Block 6 (5004 42"d Ave N)
(3) Lot 16 and the East 15 feet of Lot 15, Robbinsdale Park (Added, Ord. No. 17-11)
Section 550.07, subd (m)
REGENT SQUARE:
(h) SHUMWAYS 1ST ADDITION:
(1) Lots 1, 2, and 3, Block 3. (4223 Co. Rd. 81)
(i) ST. CYR MANOR:
(1) All of Outlot 2. (4600 Lake Road N)
(j) SECTION 16, TOWNSHIP 118, RANGE 21:
(1) Commencing at a point in the North line of Government Lot 3, distance 1,512.38 feet
east from West line of Section 16; thence east along north line of Government Lot 3
distance 100 feet; thence deflecting to right 89 degrees, 57 minutes, 30 seconds to the
northeast line of Rockford Road; thence northwesterly along said road line to its
intersection with a line running southerly from point of beginning at an angle of 89
degrees, 57 minutes, 30 seconds from the north line of said Lot 3 as measured from
east to south; thence northerly along said line to point of beginning. (5810 – 42nd Ave
N)
550.10 — (Rev 2018)
Section 550.10 "B-1"District. Subdivision 1. The "B-1" District shall consist of the following property:
Addresses listed in italics are subject to change without notice. Where in conflict, legal description is correct.
("Auditor's Subdivisions No. 179", deleted per Ord 00-07 from B-1 to P)
(a) AUDITOR'S SUBDIVISION NO. 180:
(1) The northeast 175.8 feet of Lot 19, excluding the northwesterly 52 feet thereof; (3759 W
Broadway Ave.)
(2) The northeast 158.79 feet of Lots 23 and 24, excluding the southeasterly 65 feet of Lot 24.
(3821-3883 W Broadway Ave)
(b) CRYSTAL LAKE HEIGHTS:
(1) Lots 1, 2, and 3, Block 3. (3747-57 WBroadwayAve)
(2) Lots 1 through 13, Block 5. (3619-3643 France Ave N, 3925 37th Ave N, 3653-67 W Broadway
Ave) (Lot 14, Block 5 [3605 France] deleted - moved to R-B per Ord 10-01)
(3) That part of Lots 5 and 6 lying east of the west 110 feet thereof, Block 6 (3900 36th Avenue N)
(Deleted per Ord 14-01 and moved to R-B)
(4) Lot 1, 2 and 3, Block 14. (3559 W Broadway Ave) (Deleted per Ord. 13-06 and moved to R-B)
(3) Lots 29 and 30, Block 14 (Ord 04-07)
(4) That part of Lots 5 and 6 lying east of the west 110 feet thereof, Block 6. (3900 36th Ave. N.)
(Added, Ord. No. 18-09)
(c) LONG'S ADDITION:
(1) Lots 1 through 8. (3711-3737 W Broadway Ave)
(d) MALMSTEN'S ADDITION:
(1) Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4, Block 1. (3953, 3955, 3965 W Broadway Ave)
(e) PARKER'S 1ST ADDITION TO ROBBINSDALE PARK:
(1) Block 6, except Lot 6 and the Southwesterly 66 feet of Northeasterly 143.45 feet of Lots 7 and
8.(4012-41 Hubbard Ave N)
(f) PARKERSIDE:
(1) Lots 1 through 12, Block 1. (3913 17 W Broadway Ave) (Deleted per Ord 10-19 and moved to
R-B)
Section 550.12
(Rev 2016)
Section 550.12 "B-2" District. Subsection 1. The "B-2" District shall consist of the following
property:
Addresses listed in italics are subject to change without notice. Where in conflict, legal
description is correct.
(a) AUDITOR'S SUBDIVISION NO. 180:
(1) Lots 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, except that part lying Southwesterly of the center line of
U.S. Highway No. 52 and 218, and lying Northeasterly of the following described line:
Beginning at a point in the Northwesterly line of said Lot 14, distant 127.00 feet
Northeasterly of the Northwesterly corner of said Lot 14; thence running Southeasterly
along a line parallel with and distant 127.00 feet Northeasterly of the Southwesterly line
of said Lot 14 as measured along the Northwesterly and Southeasterly lines thereof, a
distance of 218.08 feet; thence running Southeasterly 36.14 feet, more or less, to a point
in the Southeasterly line of said Lot 14, said point being distant 146.12 feet
Northeasterly of the Southwesterly corner of said Lot 14 and there terminating, and Lots
17, 18, 34, 35, and the southeasterly 40 feet of Lot 7 lying southwesterly of State
Highway 52-218; (3800-88 W Broadway Ave except 3839 Lakeland Ave N; 3700-10 W
Broadway Ave; 3735-43 Lakeland Ave N; 3930 & 3934 W Broadway Ave)
(2) That portion of Lot 2 commencing at the most southerly corner thence northeasterly
along the southeast line of Lot 2 a distance of 119.3 feet; thence northwesterly to the
most easterly corner of Lot 35; thence southwesterly to the most westerly corner of Lot
2; thence southeasterly to the point of beginning. (3920 W Broadway Ave)
(b) AUDITOR'S SUBDIVISION NO. 315:
(1) Lots 2 through 7 and lots 11 and 12. (3752-58 W Broadway Ave, 3745-55 Lakeland Ave
N) Amended, Ord 14-15
(c) GLENWOOD TERRACE:
(1) Lots 23 through 27, Block 3. (3218 Oakdale Ave N, 3253 W Broadway Ave)
(d) JENSEN'S ADDITION:
(1) Block 4, Lot 6 lying south of the north 210.54 feet thereof.(3606 Lake Drive N)
(Deleted per Ord 16-16 and added to R-1)
(e) REARRANGEMENT OF BLOCK 2, LAKESHORE ADDITION:
(1) Lots 6 through 14.(3978 W Broadway Ave N) (Deleted per Ord 10-19 and moved to R-B)
Section 550.12, subd (1)(f)
(e) SECTION 6, TOWNSHIP 29, RANGE 24:
(1) The south 709 feet of that part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter lying
west of the east 990 feet thereof and east of State Highway No. 100. (3644 & 3650 N
Lilac Drive)
(2) The south 660.6 feet of the west 165 feet of the east 990 feet of Southwest Quarter
(3646-50 Unity Ave N)
(f) SECTION 16, TOWNSHIP 118, RANGE 21:
(1) Commencing at a point located 1,200.5 feet east of the northwest corner of the
southwest quarter of the northwest quarter; thence east a distance of 89.68 feet to the
westerly line of Zane Avenue; thence south a distance of 75 feet; thence west a distance
of 89.68 feet; thence north a distance of 75 feet to the point of beginning. (4209 Zane
Ave N)
Section 550.14 (rev 2014)
Section 550.14 "B-3" District. Subdivision 1. The "B-3" District shall consist of the following
property:
Addresses listed in italics are subject to change without notice. Where in conflict, legal
description is correct.
(a) AUDITOR'S SUBDIVISION NO. 179:
(1) Lot 22, except that part lying northwesterly of the Southeasterly 50 feet thereof and
lying southwesterly of alley. (part 4112 W Broadway Ave)
(2) Those portions of Lots 20 and 23 described as follows: Commencing at the most
northerly corner of Lot 20, thence southeasterly 121.65' along the northeasterly line of
Lot 20, thence southwesterly to a point on the northeasterly line of T.H. 52 distance
150' southeasterly from the southeasterly line of Lake Drive, thence northwesterly
along the northeasterly line of T.H. 52 to the southeasterly line of Lake Drive, thence
northeasterly along the southeasterly line of Lake Drive to the point of beginning.(4180
Lakeland Ave N)
(4175 W Broadway Ave N removed and placed in DD-1 per Ord 10-07)
(3) The part of Lot 45 described as follows: Commencing at a point in the Southwesterly
line of Lot 45, distant 149.3 feet Southeasterly from Northwesterly corner thereof
thence Southeasterly to the most Southerly corner thereof thence Northeasterly to the
most Easterly corner thereof thence Northwester 62.34 feet along the Northeasterly
line of Lot thence deflecting to the left 82 degrees 08 min a distance of 49.6 feet
thence deflecting to the left 89 degrees 45 min a distance of 25.8 feet thence
Southwesterly 80.49 feet more or less to beginning. (4175 W Broadway Ave No)
(Amended Ord 02-04, Removed and added to DD-1 per Ord 10-07)
(b) AUDITOR'S SUBDIVISION NO. 180:
(1) All that part of Lot 14, lying Southwesterly of the center line of U.S. Highway No. 52
and 218, and lying northeasterly of the following described line: Beginning at a point
in the Northwesterly line of said Lot 14, distant 127.00 feet Northeasterly of the
Northwesterly corner of said Lot 14; thence running Southeasterly along a line parallel
with and distant 127.00 feet Northeasterly of the Southwesterly line of said Lot 14 as
measured along the Northwesterly and Southeasterly lines thereof, a distance of
218.08 feet; thence running Southeasterly 36.14 feet more or less, to a point in the
Southeasterly line of said Lot 14, said point being distant 146.12 feet Northeasterly of
the Southwesterly corner of said Lot 14 and there terminating. (3839 Lakeland Ave N)
(c) AUDITOR'S SUBDIVISION NO. 315:
(1) All of lot 8 and the southeasterly 33 feet of lot 7. (3776 W Broadway Ave), (Deleted
Ord 14-14 moved to RB)
Section 550.14 (d) (rev 2014)
Section 550.14, (d) (Rev. 2010)
(c) PARKER'S FIRST ADDITION TO ROBBINSDALE PARK:
(4561-65 W Broadway, 4614 41 ½ Ave N, 4123-4139 W Broadway, 4609 41 ½ Ave N, 4628
41st Ave N, 4133 W Broadway, and 4135 W Broadway removed and added to DD-1 per Ord 10-
07)
(1) Block 5, Lots 2 through 16. (4510 40 ½ Ave N) (Deleted per Ord 10-19 and moved to
RB)
(2) Block 8 Lots 1 through 8. (4001-39 W Broadway Ave)
(d) PARKERSIDE:
(1) Block 6 (4000 W Broadway Ave)I
(2) Block 7, the southeasterly 10' of Lot 10 and Lots 11-12 (4030 Lakeland Ave N)
(e) RESIDENCE PARK:
(1) South half of Lot 14 and Lot 15, Block 9, Residence Park. (3601 Noble Ave N)
(f) THE FISHER MANOR:
(1) Block 1. (4100 & part 4112 W Broadway Ave, 4109 Lakeland Ave N)
(g) URBAN'S ADDITION: All of Urban’s Addition (4125-39 Lakeland Ave N except as
follows:)
(1) except Lot 8, and the northwesterly 20' front and rear of that part of Lot 7 lying
southwesterly of the northeasterly 22 feet thereof, Block 2. (NOT 4130-38 W
Broadway)
(2) except the southeasterly 25 feet front and rear of that part lying southwesterly of the
northeasterly 22 feet of Lot 7, Block 2. (NOT 4126-28 W Broadway)
(3) except Lots 9 & 10. (NOT 4140 AND 4144 West Broadway), Amended, Ord 10-08)
(h) VANDEMARK ADDITION:
(1) Lots 4 and 5, Block 2. (3801-07 VanDemark Ave N)
Section 550.14 (k) (rev 2014)
(i) SECTION 5, TOWNSHIP 29, RANGE 24 - GOVERNMENT LOT 3:
(1) That part which lies southwest of the southwest right-of-way line of West Broadway
Avenue; (3600 W Broadway Ave)
except, the west 33 feet thereof for France Avenue North;
except, the south 33 feet thereof for 36th Avenue North;
except, beginning at the intersection of the east right-of-way line of France Avenue
North with the Southwest right-of-way line of West Broadway Avenue, said point
being 476.91 feet north of the South line of said Section 5 and distant 33 feet east of
the West line of said Section 5; thence on an assumed bearing of South along said East
right-of-way line of France Avenue North 75.00 feet; thence North 70 degrees, 42
minutes, 00 seconds East 49.58 feet to a point o the Southwest right-of-way line of
West Broadway Avenue which lies 75.00 feet southeasterly from the point of
beginning; thence northwesterly to the point of beginning;
except, beginning at the intersection of the North right-of-way line of 36th Avenue
North with the Southwest right-of-way line of West Broadway Avenue; thence North
89 degrees, 19 minutes, 23 seconds West along said North right-of-way line 100.00
feet; thence North 26 degrees, 02 minutes, 18 seconds East 85.67 feet to a point on
said
southwest right-of-way line which lies 100.00 feet northwesterly from the point of
beginning; thence southeasterly to the point of beginning;
together with, that part of vacated West Broadway Avenue described as follows:
Beginning at a point 100.00 feet northwesterly of the intersection of the north line of
36th Avenue North and the southwest line of said West Broadway Avenue; thence run
northeasterly to a point on the northeast line of said West Broadway Avenue distant
230 feet northwesterly of its intersection with the south line of said Section 5; thence
run northwesterly on the northeast line of said West Broadway Avenue to a point
thereon distant 230 feet southeasterly of its intersection with the west line of said
Section 5; thence run southwesterly of its intersection with the west line of said
Section 5; thence run southwesterly to a point on the southwest line of said West
Broadway Avenue distant 75 feet southeasterly of its intersection with the east line of
France Avenue North; thence southeasterly to the point of beginning.
Section 550.14, subd (1)(k)(1) cont. (rev. 2014)
(j) SECTION 6, TOWNSHIP 29, RANGE 24: (Amended, Ord. No. 00-03)
(1) That part lying north of 40th Avenue North, east of West Broadway, southeasterly of
Lot 10, and southwesterly of Lots 8 and 9 of Block 6, Parkerside. (part of 4100 W
Broadway Ave)
(k) SECTION 16, TOWNSHIP 118, RANGE 24:
(1) All of Section 16, Township 118, Range 24, lying within the City of Robbinsdale,
north of 42nd Avenue (Rockford Road) and west of Zane Avenue, excepting that part
described as follows: Commencing at a point located 1,200.5 feet east of the northwest
corner of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter; thence east a distance of
89.68 feet to the westerly line of Zane Avenue North; thence south a distance of 75
feet; thence west a distance of 89.68 feet; thence north a distance of 75 feet to the
point of beginning. (5900-12 42nd Ave N)
Section 550.20
(Revised 2000)
Section 550.20 "NG" District. Subdivision 1. (Repealed per Ordinance 00-12)
550.22 (rev. 2010)
Section 550.22 "DD-1" District. Subdivision 1. The "DD-1" Downtown District shall consist of
the following property:
(a) AUDITOR’S SUBDIVISION NUMBER 179:(Added, Ord. No. 00-03; Deleted Lots 47
and 48 (Twin City Federal lot, 4133, 4139, 4145, 4155, Twin City lot and 4165 Hubbard
Avenue)per Ord No. 10-05 and added to DD-2)
(1) That part of Lot 45, Auditor’s Subdivision No. 179, Hennepin County, Minnesota,
described as follows: Beginning at a point in the Southerly line of 42nd Avenue North,
as now laid out and opened, distant 66.33 feet Westerly from the corner formed by the
intersection of the Southerly line of 42nd Avenue with the Westerly line of Minneapolis
& Bottineau Prairie Road, now known as West Broadway; then Westerly along the
Southerly line of said 42nd Avenue North, a distance of 81.25 feet, more or less, to the
Northeasterly line of Hubbard Avenue, as now laid out and opened, in the City of
Robbinsdale, Minnesota: thence Southeasterly along the Northeasterly line of said
Hubbard Avenue a distance of 139.3 feet; thence Northeasterly a distance of 68.24 feet
to a point 95.3 feet Southeasterly from the point of beginning; then Northwesterly a
distance of 95.3 feet to the point of beginning (formerly 4707 42nd).(See Ord 02-04)
(2) That part of Lot 45, Auditor’s Subdivision No. 179 bounded by a line described as
follows: Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Lot 45, thence Southeasterly
43.98 feet along the Northeasterly line thereof: thence deflecting 97 degrees 52 minutes
to the right a distance of 49.6 feet; thence deflecting 89 degree 45 minutes to the left a
distance of 25.8 feet to the actual point of beginning of land to be described: thence
Northwesterly 48.3 feet along the last described line and the extension thereof: thence
Northeasterly to a point on the Northeasterly line of said Lot 45, a distance of 21.39 feet
Southeasterly from the Northeasterly corner of said Lot 45; thence Northwesterly along
the Northeasterly line of said Lot 45 to the Northeasterly corner thereof; thence West
along the North line of said Lot 45, a distance of 66.33 feet; thence deflecting to the left
122 degrees 46 minutes, a distance of 95.3 feet; thence Southwesterly a distance of 68.24
feet to a point on the Southwesterly line of said Lot 45, a distance of 139.3 feet
Southeasterly from the most Westerly corner thereof; thence Southeasterly along the
Southwesterly line of Said Lot 45 a distance of 10 feet; thence Northeasterly to the actual
point of beginning, according to the recorded plat thereof, and situate in Hennepin
County, Minnesota also known as 4181 West Broadway. (See Ord 02-04)
(b) PARKER’S FIRST ADDITION TO ROBBINSDALE PARK:
(1) Lots 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9, Block 4. (4101 W Broadway Ave & 4600 41st Ave/Broadway Court)
(c) RAY MATTSON ADDITION:
(1) Lots 1, 2, and 4, Block 1. (4180 and 4168 W Broadway Ave & 4165 Lakeland Ave N)
550.22 (d) (rev. 2010)
(d) RAY MATTSON 2ND ADDITION:
(1) Lots 1, and 3, Block 1. (4148 & 4160 W Broadway Ave)
SECTION 6, TOWNSHIP 29, RANGE 24 (Added, Ord. No. 00-03; deleted and added to DD-
2 per Ord 10-05)
(e) PARKERS FIRST ADDITION TO ROBBINSDALE PARK:
(1) Commencing at the most northerly corner of Lot 2, thence southeasterly along the
northeasterly line thereof 26.14 feet, thence southwesterly to a point in the southwesterly
line thereof distant 29.27 feet southeasterly from the most westerly corner thereof,
thence northwesterly to the most westerly corner thereof, thence northeasterly to the
point of beginning, Block 4. (4133 W Broadway Ave)
(2) Commencing at the most easterly corner of Lot 2, thence northwesterly along the
northeasterly line thereof to a point distant 26.14 feet southeasterly from the most
northerly corner thereof, thence southwesterly to a point in the southwesterly line distant
29.27 feet southeasterly from the most westerly corner thereof, thence south to the most
southerly corners thereof, thence northeasterly to the beginning, Block 4. (4135 W
Broadway Ave) [Moved from B-4 per Ord 05-05]
550.23
Section 550.22 "DD-2" District. Subdivision 1. The "DD-2" Downtown Transition and transit
District shall consist of the following properties:
(a) AUDITOR’S SUBDIVISION NUMBER 179:(Added, Ord. No. 10-05)
(1) Lot 46 (4719 42nd Ave N)
(2) Lots 47 and 48 (Twin City Federal lot, 4133, 4139, 4145, 4155, Twin City lot and
4165 Hubbard Avenue))
(b) SECTION 6, TOWNSHIP 29, RANGE 24 (Added, Ord. No. 10-05)
(1) That part of the Southeast ¼ of the Northwest ¼, Section, Township 29, Range 24,
lying southwesterly of Lots 46 thruogh 49 and northeasterly of a line drawn parallel
with and 25 feet northeasterly from the centerline of track of Burlington Northern
Railroad (4125 Railroad Avenue North)
Section 550.18
Section 550.18 "B-W" District. Subdivision 1. The "B-W"District shall consist of the
following Property:
(a)
Section 550.25
Section 550.25 "FP" Flood Plain District. Subdivision 1. The "FP" Flood Plain District
shall consist of all lands designated as either a numbered or unnumbered A zone by the
Flood Plain Insurance Rate Map contained as part of the Flood Insurance Study prepared
by the Federal Insurance Administration. These lands correspond to the following areas:
(a) That area abutting Grimes Avenue Pond and Rice Lake, north part, on all sides at an
elevation equal to or less than 838 feet.
(b) That area abutting Rice Lake, south part, on all sides at an elevation equal to or less
than 832 feet.
(c) That area abutting Crystal Lake on all sides at an elevation equal to or less than 855
feet.
(d) That area abutting Ryan and Twin Lakes and adjoining water course on all sides at an
elevation equal to or less than 856 feet.
Section 550.27
Section 550.27 “P” District Subdivision 1. The “P” (Public Facilities) district shall consist of
the following properties.
Addresses listed in italics are subject to change without notice. Where in conflict, legal
description is correct.
(a) AUDITOR’S SUBDIVISION NO. 48
(1) All of that part of Lot 4, Hennepin County, Minnesota, except the South 20.00 feet
thereof. (4601 Toledo) (Added per Ord No 00-07)
(b) AUDITOR'S SUBDIVISION NO. 179:
(1) Lots 49, 50 (4117 Hubbard) (Added per Ord No 00-05)
(2) That part of Lot 19, Auditor’s Subdivision No. 179, described as follows: The
Northwesterly 128.5 feet of that part of Lot 19, Auditor’s Subdivision No. 179, lying
southeasterly of Robbinsdale Lakeview Terrace, except the northeasterly 60 feet thereof,
according to the plat thereof on file or of record in the office of the Register of Deeds in and
for said County described in Certificate of Title No. 463076 dated the 14th day of April 1971;
(Added per Ord No 00-07)
(3) The Northwesterly 236.5 feet of the following legal description: That part of Lot 19,
commencing at a point on the southwesterly line of Lake Road Avenue 128.5
Southeasterly from the North line of said lot; thence Southeasterly along the
Southwesterly line of Lake Road Avenue to its intersection with the Northwest line
of 41st Avenue North; thence Southwesterly along the Northwesterly line of 41st
Avenue North to the South line of said Lot 19; thence West along the South line of
said lot to the Southwest corner thereof; thence Northwesterly along the
Southwesterly line of said Lot 19 to a point in said line distant 128.5 feet
Southeasterly at right angles from the Northwesterly line of said Lot 19 to the point
of beginning, Auditor’s Subdivision No. 179, Hennepin County, as described in
Certificate of Title No. 187321 dated the 1st day of August, 1952. (4100 Lakeview
Avenue, City Hall and Spanjers Park) (Added per Ord No 00-07)
(c) AUDITOR’S SUBDIVISION NO. 230:
(1) All of that part of Auditors Subdivision No. 230, Hennepin county, Minnesota,
except the south 198.00 feet thereof. (3507 Oakdale) (Added per Ord No 00-07)
Section 550.27(d)
(d) NORTH MEMORIAL CAMPUS ADDITION (Added, Ord No. 00-07 from RB)
(1) Lot 5, Block 1 (3310 Oakland)
(e) PARKERS FIRST ADDITION TO ROBBINSDALE PARK
(1) Lot 1 Block 3 (4127 Hubbard) (Added, Ord 00-05)
(f) ROBBINSDALE PARK:
(1) Lots 13-22, Block 8 and part of Block 15 (Part of 4139 Regent) (Added per Ord. No.
00-06)
(g) SUBDIVISION BLOCK SEVEN ROBBINSDALE PARK:
(1) Part of Blocks 2 and 3 and all of Block 1 (Part of 4139 Regent) (Added per Ord.
No. 00-06)
(h) SECTION 6, TOWNSHIP 29, RANGE 24:
(1) All that part of the following described tracts: (Added per Ord. No. 00-06)
All of that part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 29, Range
24 described as follows: Beginning at the Southeast corner thereof; thence North along the East line
thereof a distance of 481 feet; thence West parallel with the South line of said Quarter Quarter a
distance of 30 feet; thence south parallel with the East line of said Quarter Quarter to the South line of
said Quarter Quarter; thence East along said South line to the point of beginning; also
Commencing on the South line of said Quarter Quarter at a point 30 feet West from the Southeast
corner thereof; thence North parallel with the East line of said Quarter Quarter a distance of 481
feet; thence West parallel with the South line of said Quarter Quarter a distance of 128 feet; thence
South parallel with the East line of said Quarter Quarter to the South line thereof; thence East along
said South line to the point of beginning, also
Beginning at a point in the South line of said Quarter Quarter distant 158 feet West from the
Southeast corner thereof; thence North parallel with the East line thereof to the North line thereof;
thence West along said North line to a point therein distant 330 feet West of the Northeast corner of
said Quarter Quarter; thence South parallel with the East line of said Quarter Quarter a distance of
330 feet; thence South parallel with the East line of said Quarter Quarter a distance of 1290.5 feet,
more or less, to the South line of said Quarter Quarter; thence East along said south line to the point
of beginning.
embraced within the following described tract:
Commencing at the Southeast corner of said Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter; thence
North along the East line thereof, a distance of 461 feet; thence West parallel with the South line of
said southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter a distance of 172 feet; thence North parallel with the
East line of said Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter; a distance of 708.33 feet; thence West
parallel with the South line of said Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter, a distance of 119
feet; thence North parallel with the East line of said Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter, a
distance of 1119.94 feet, more or less to the south line of 38th Avenue North, said South line of 38th
Avenue North being the South line of the North 30 feet of said Southwest Quarter of the Southwest
Quarter; thence West along the South line of 38th Avenue North, a distance of 339 feet, said point
being the East line of Toledo Avenue; thence South parallel with the East line of said Southwest
Quarter of the Southwest Quarter, to a point distant 630 feet West and 630.25 feet North of the
Southeast corner of said Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter; thence West parallel with the
South line of said Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter, a distance of 30 feet; thence South
parallel with the East line of said Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter, the South line of said
Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter, thence East along the South line of said Southwest
Quarter of the Southwest Quarter to the point of beginning.
(Per Certificate of Title No. 473061)
AND
The East One—half of that part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest quarter of Section 6,
Township 29, Range 24, described as follows: Beginning at a point on the South line of said
Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter, distant 660 feet West of the Southeast corner thereof;
thence running West along said line 330 feet to the West line of the East 30 acres of said southwest
Quarter of the Southwest quarter of said Section 6; thence North along the West line 660.6 feet;
thence running East parallel with the South line of said Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter, a
distance of 330 feet to a point which is 660 feet West of the East line of said Southwest Quarter of the
Southwest Quarter; thence South 660.25 feet to the point of beginning, except the South 108 feet of
the west 116 feet thereof.
(Per Warranty Deed Doc. No. 2837993) (3730 Toledo)

 Section 550.14 (rev 2014)
Section 550.14 "B-3" District. Subdivision 1. The "B-3" District shall consist of the following
property:
Addresses listed in italics are subject to change without notice. Where in conflict, legal
description is correct.
 (a) AUDITOR'S SUBDIVISION NO. 179:
(1) Lot 22, except that part lying northwesterly of the Southeasterly 50 feet thereof and
lying southwesterly of alley. (part 4112 W Broadway Ave)
(2) Those portions of Lots 20 and 23 described as follows: Commencing at the most
northerly corner of Lot 20, thence southeasterly 121.65' along the northeasterly line of
Lot 20, thence southwesterly to a point on the northeasterly line of T.H. 52 distance
150' southeasterly from the southeasterly line of Lake Drive, thence northwesterly
along the northeasterly line of T.H. 52 to the southeasterly line of Lake Drive, thence
northeasterly along the southeasterly line of Lake Drive to the point of beginning.(4180
Lakeland Ave N)
(4175 W Broadway Ave N removed and placed in DD-1 per Ord 10-07)
(3) The part of Lot 45 described as follows: Commencing at a point in the Southwesterly
line of Lot 45, distant 149.3 feet Southeasterly from Northwesterly corner thereof
thence Southeasterly to the most Southerly corner thereof thence Northeasterly to the
most Easterly corner thereof thence Northwester 62.34 feet along the Northeasterly
line of Lot thence deflecting to the left 82 degrees 08 min a distance of 49.6 feet
thence deflecting to the left 89 degrees 45 min a distance of 25.8 feet thence
Southwesterly 80.49 feet more or less to beginning. (4175 W Broadway Ave No)
(Amended Ord 02-04, Removed and added to DD-1 per Ord 10-07)
 (b) AUDITOR'S SUBDIVISION NO. 180:
 (1) All that part of Lot 14, lying Southwesterly of the center line of U.S. Highway No. 52
and 218, and lying northeasterly of the following described line: Beginning at a point
in the Northwesterly line of said Lot 14, distant 127.00 feet Northeasterly of the
Northwesterly corner of said Lot 14; thence running Southeasterly along a line parallel
with and distant 127.00 feet Northeasterly of the Southwesterly line of said Lot 14 as
measured along the Northwesterly and Southeasterly lines thereof, a distance of
218.08 feet; thence running Southeasterly 36.14 feet more or less, to a point in the
Southeasterly line of said Lot 14, said point being distant 146.12 feet Northeasterly of
the Southwesterly corner of said Lot 14 and there terminating. (3839 Lakeland Ave N)
(c) AUDITOR'S SUBDIVISION NO. 315:
 (1) All of lot 8 and the southeasterly 33 feet of lot 7. (3776 W Broadway Ave), (Deleted
Ord 14-14 moved to RB) 
 Section 550.14 (d) (rev 2014)
Section 550.14, (d) (Rev. 2010)

(c) PARKER'S FIRST ADDITION TO ROBBINSDALE PARK:
(4561-65 W Broadway, 4614 41 ½ Ave N, 4123-4139 W Broadway, 4609 41 ½ Ave N, 4628
41st Ave N, 4133 W Broadway, and 4135 W Broadway removed and added to DD-1 per Ord 10-
07)

(1) Block 5, Lots 2 through 16. (4510 40 ½ Ave N) (Deleted per Ord 10-19 and moved to
RB)
(2) Block 8 Lots 1 through 8. (4001-39 W Broadway Ave)
(d) PARKERSIDE:
(1) Block 6 (4000 W Broadway Ave)I
(2) Block 7, the southeasterly 10' of Lot 10 and Lots 11-12 (4030 Lakeland Ave N)
(e) RESIDENCE PARK:
 (1) South half of Lot 14 and Lot 15, Block 9, Residence Park. (3601 Noble Ave N)
(f) THE FISHER MANOR:
(1) Block 1. (4100 & part 4112 W Broadway Ave, 4109 Lakeland Ave N)
(g) URBAN'S ADDITION: All of Urban’s Addition (4125-39 Lakeland Ave N except as
follows:)
(1) except Lot 8, and the northwesterly 20' front and rear of that part of Lot 7 lying
southwesterly of the northeasterly 22 feet thereof, Block 2. (NOT 4130-38 W
Broadway)
(2) except the southeasterly 25 feet front and rear of that part lying southwesterly of the
northeasterly 22 feet of Lot 7, Block 2. (NOT 4126-28 W Broadway)
(3) except Lots 9 & 10. (NOT 4140 AND 4144 West Broadway), Amended, Ord 10-08)
 (h) VANDEMARK ADDITION:
 (1) Lots 4 and 5, Block 2. (3801-07 VanDemark Ave N)
Section 550.14 (k) (rev 2014)
 (i) SECTION 5, TOWNSHIP 29, RANGE 24 - GOVERNMENT LOT 3:
 (1) That part which lies southwest of the southwest right-of-way line of West Broadway
Avenue; (3600 W Broadway Ave)

 except, the west 33 feet thereof for France Avenue North;
 except, the south 33 feet thereof for 36th Avenue North;
except, beginning at the intersection of the east right-of-way line of France Avenue
North with the Southwest right-of-way line of West Broadway Avenue, said point
being 476.91 feet north of the South line of said Section 5 and distant 33 feet east of
the West line of said Section 5; thence on an assumed bearing of South along said East
right-of-way line of France Avenue North 75.00 feet; thence North 70 degrees, 42
minutes, 00 seconds East 49.58 feet to a point o the Southwest right-of-way line of
West Broadway Avenue which lies 75.00 feet southeasterly from the point of
beginning; thence northwesterly to the point of beginning;
 except, beginning at the intersection of the North right-of-way line of 36th Avenue
North with the Southwest right-of-way line of West Broadway Avenue; thence North
89 degrees, 19 minutes, 23 seconds West along said North right-of-way line 100.00
feet; thence North 26 degrees, 02 minutes, 18 seconds East 85.67 feet to a point on
said
southwest right-of-way line which lies 100.00 feet northwesterly from the point of
beginning; thence southeasterly to the point of beginning;
together with, that part of vacated West Broadway Avenue described as follows:
Beginning at a point 100.00 feet northwesterly of the intersection of the north line of
36th Avenue North and the southwest line of said West Broadway Avenue; thence run
northeasterly to a point on the northeast line of said West Broadway Avenue distant
230 feet northwesterly of its intersection with the south line of said Section 5; thence
run northwesterly on the northeast line of said West Broadway Avenue to a point
thereon distant 230 feet southeasterly of its intersection with the west line of said
Section 5; thence run southwesterly of its intersection with the west line of said
Section 5; thence run southwesterly to a point on the southwest line of said West
Broadway Avenue distant 75 feet southeasterly of its intersection with the east line of
France Avenue North; thence southeasterly to the point of beginning. 
Section 550.14, subd (1)(k)(1) cont. (rev. 2014)

 (j) SECTION 6, TOWNSHIP 29, RANGE 24: (Amended, Ord. No. 00-03)
 (1) That part lying north of 40th Avenue North, east of West Broadway, southeasterly of
Lot 10, and southwesterly of Lots 8 and 9 of Block 6, Parkerside. (part of 4100 W
Broadway Ave)
 (k) SECTION 16, TOWNSHIP 118, RANGE 24:
 (1) All of Section 16, Township 118, Range 24, lying within the City of Robbinsdale,
north of 42nd Avenue (Rockford Road) and west of Zane Avenue, excepting that part
described as follows: Commencing at a point located 1,200.5 feet east of the northwest
corner of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter; thence east a distance of
89.68 feet to the westerly line of Zane Avenue North; thence south a distance of 75
feet; thence west a distance of 89.68 feet; thence north a distance of 75 feet to the
point of beginning. (5900-12 42nd Ave N) 

550.16 (rev. 2010)
Section 550.16 "B-4" District. Subdivision 1. The "B-4" District shall consist of the
following property:
Addresses listed in italics are subject to change without notice. Where in conflict, legal
description is correct.
 (a) AUDITOR'S SUBDIVISION NO. 179: (Amended, Ord. No. 00-03 by deleting Lots
47, 48) (Amended, Ord. No. 00-05 by deleting Lots 49, 50) (Amended, Ord No. 10-05
deleting Lot 46, 4719 42nd Ave N & adding to DD-2; Amended, Ord 10-08, deleted 4122-
24 West Broadway and moved to DD-1)
(1) Lots 40, 41, 43, 44, and 51. (4606-42nd Ave N, part 4222 W Broadway Ave, 4117
Hubbard Ave N)
That portion of Lot 45, described as follows: Commencing at a point in the
northeasterly line of Lot 45 a distance of 21.39 feet southeasterly from the
northeasterly corner thereof, thence southeasterly a distance of 22.59 feet along
said northeasterly line thereof, thence deflecting to the right 97 degrees 52' a
distance of 49.6 feet, thence deflecting to the right 90 degrees 15' a distance of
22.5 feet, thence northeasterly in a line to the beginning. (4179 W Broadway Ave)
(Deleted per Ord 10-07 and moved to DD1)
(2) That part of Lot 22, lying northwesterly of the Southeasterly 50 feet thereof and
lying southwesterly of alley. (4122-24 W Broadway Ave)
 (b) ISLEMOUNT PARK, 4TH ADDITION:
 (1) Lot 14, Block 1. (3900 Lake Drive N)
 (c) PARKERS FIRST ADDITION TO ROBBINSDALE PARK:
(1) Commencing at the most northerly corner of Lot 2, thence southeasterly along
the northeasterly line thereof 26.14 feet, thence southwesterly to a point in the
southwesterly line thereof distant 29.27 feet southeasterly from the most westerly
corner thereof, thence northwesterly to the most westerly corner thereof, thence
northeasterly to the point of beginning, Block 4. (4133 W Broadway Ave)
(2) Commencing at the most easterly corner of Lot 2, thence northwesterly along the
northeasterly line thereof to a point distant 26.14 feet southeasterly from the most
northerly corner thereof, thence southwesterly to a point in the southwesterly line
distant 29.27 feet southeasterly from the most westerly corner thereof, thence
south to the most southerly corners thereof, thence northeasterly to the beginning,
Block 4. (4135 W Broadway Ave) [Moved to DD1 per Ord 05-05]
(1) Lot 1, Block 5. (4089 W Broadway Ave, 4629 41st Ave N)
550.16, subd (1)(c)(4) (rev. 2010)
That part of Lot 1, Block 4, which lies northeasterly of a line described as
follows: Beginning at a point on the northwesterly line of said lot 1, distant 97.39
feet southwesterly from the most northerly corner of said lot 1; thence
southeasterly, to a point on the southeasterly line of said lot 1, distant 97.39 feet
southwesterly from the most easterly corner of said Lot 1 and said line there
terminating. (4139 W Broadway Ave) (Deleted per Ord 10-07)
(d) PARKERSIDE ADDITION:
 (1) All of Block 5 (4080 W Broadway)
 (2) The northwesterly 30 feet of Lot 10, Block 7 (Robin Center Buffer)
(2) The Northeasterly 75 feet of Lots 1-9, Block 8.(Robin Center Buffer)
(e) RAY MATTSON ADDITION:
(1) Lot 5, Block 1.(4601 Lake Drive N)
(Amended, Ord 10-08 RAY MATTSON 2ND ADDITION moved to DD-1)
 (g) ROBBINSDALE MALL ADDITION:
 (1) Lots 1, 2, and 3, Block 1.(3435-3505 W Broadway Ave, 3500-3508 France Ave N)
 (h) ROBBINSDALE PARK:
 (1) Lots 28 through 38, Block 4. (4205-39 W Broadway Ave, 4714-40 42nd Ave N)
 (i) ROBIN CENTER.

 (j) SHUMWAY'S FIRST ADDITION:
(1) Lots 4 through 9, Block 3. (4200 W Broadway Ave, 4228 W Broadway Ave, part
4222 W Broadway)
 (k) THE FISHER MANOR:
 (1) Block 2. (4080 W Broadway)
 (2) The Northeasterly 75 feet of Lots 1-5, Block 5. (Robin Center Buffer)
550.16, subd (1)(j) (rev. 2010)
URBAN'S ADDITION: (removed and added to DD-1 per Ord 10-08)

 (l) SECTION 6, TOWNSHIP 29, RANGE 24:
 (1) That part lying north of Block 3, Parker's 1st Addition to Robbinsdale Park and
south of Rockford Road (42nd Avenue) westerly of Lots 46, 47, 48, and 50 of
Auditor's Subdivision No. 179, and east of the railroad tracks. (4125 Railroad) 