______________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
100-1
ROCKFORD CITY CODE
100 General Provisions
101. City Code
101.01. City Code.
Subd. 1. How Cited. This code of ordinances shall be known as The Rockford City
Code and may be so cited.
Subd. 2. Additions. New ordinances proposing amendments or additions to the
code shall be assigned appropriate code numbers and shall be incorporated into the code as of
their effective date. Reference or citation to the code shall be deemed to include such
amendments and additions. When an ordinance is integrated into the code, there may be
omitted from the ordinance the title, enacting clause, section numbers, definitions of items
identical to those contained in this ordinance, the clause indicating date of adoption, and
validating signatures and dates. In integrating ordinances into the code, the clerk-treasurer, in
cooperation with the city attorney, may correct obvious grammatical, punctuation, and spelling
errors; change reference numbers to conform with sections, articles, and chapters; substitute
figures for written words and vice versa; substitute dates for the words "the effective date of this
ordinance"; and perform like actions to insure a uniform code of ordinances without, however,
altering the meaning of the ordinances enacted.
Subd. 3. Numbering. Each section number of this code consists of two component
parts separated by a decimal. The first digit of the number refers to the chapter number and the
digits after the period refer to the position of the section within the chapter. If the chapter is
divided into parts, the figure immediately to the left of the decimal corresponds to the part
number.
Subd. 4. Title Headings; Cross References. Chapter, part, section, subdivision,
and other titles shall not be considered part of the subject matter of this code but are intended
for convenience only and not necessarily as comprehensive titles.
Subd. 5. Copies. Copies of this code shall be kept in the office of the
clerk-treasurer for public inspection or sale for a reasonable charge, as determined by the
council.
101.02. Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following
words have the meaning given them in this section.
Subd. 1. City. “City” means City of Rockford.
Subd. 2. State. “State” means State of Minnesota.
Subd. 3. Clerk-Treasurer. “Clerk-Treasurer” means the city Clerk-Treasurer.
Subd. 4. Person. “Person” means any natural individual, firm, partnership,
association, or corporation. As applied to partnerships or associations, the term includes the
partners or members; as applied to corporations the term includes the officers, agents, or
employees.
______________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
100-2
Subd. 5. Code. “Code” means the Rockford City Code.
101.03. Statutory Rules Adopted. The definitions and rules of construction,
presumptions, and miscellaneous provisions pertaining to construction contained in Minnesota
Statutes, Chapter 645 are adopted by reference and made a part of this code. As so adopted,
references in that chapter to laws and statutes mean provisions of this code and references to
the legislature mean the council.
101.04. Existing Rights and Liabilities. The repeal of prior ordinances and
adoption of this code are not to be construed to affect in any manner rights and liabilities
existing at the time of repeal and the enactment of this code. Insofar as provisions in this code
are substantially the same as pre-existing ordinances, they shall be considered as continuations
thereof and not as new enactments. Any act done, offense committed, or right accruing, or
liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred or assessed prior to the effective date of this
code is not affected by the enactment of this code.
101.05 Hearings.
Subd. 1. General. Unless otherwise provided in this code, or by law, every public
hearing required by law, ordinance, or resolution to be held on any legislative or administrative
matter shall be conducted in accordance with this section.
Subd. 2. Notice. Every hearing shall be preceded by ten days mailed notice to all
persons entitled thereto by law, ordinance, or regulation unless only published notice is
required. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. Failure to give the
notice or defects in it shall not invalidate the proceedings if a good faith effort has been made to
comply with this subdivision.
Subd. 3. Conduct of Hearing. At the hearing, each party in interest shall have an
opportunity to be heard and to present such evidence as is relevant to the proceeding. The
council may adopt rules governing the conduct of hearings, records to be made, and such other
matters as it deems necessary.
Subd. 4. Record. Upon the disposition of any matter after hearing, the council
shall have prepared a written summary of its findings and decisions and enter the summary in
official council minutes.
101.06. Penalties.
Subd. 1. Petty Offenses. Whenever an act or omission is declared by this code to
be a petty offense or a petty misdemeanor, any person violating the provision shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $300. (Amended by Ordinance 01-06, passed
September 25, 2001.)
Subd. 2. General Misdemeanors. In any other case, unless another penalty is
expressly provided in this code, any person violating any provision of this code, or any rule or
regulation adopted in pursuance thereof, or any other provision of any code adopted in this code
by reference, including any provisions declaring an act or omission to be a misdemeanor, shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to
______________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
100-3
exceed ninety days or both, plus, in either case, the costs of prosecution. (Amended by
Ordinance 01-06, passed September 25, 2001.)
Subd. 3. Separate Violations. Unless otherwise provided, each act of violation and
every day on which a violation occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense.
Subd. 4. Application to City Personnel. The failure of any officer or employee of
the city to perform any official duty imposed by this code shall. not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for violation unless a penalty is specifically provided for such
failure.
Subd. 5. Separability. If any ordinance or part thereof in the Rockford City Code or
hereafter enacted is held invalid or suspended, such invalidity or suspension shall not apply to
any other part of the ordinance or any other ordinance unless it is specifically provided
otherwise.
101.07. Purpose and Intent. Administrative enforcement procedures established
pursuant to this chapter are intended to provide the city with an informal, cost-effective and
more efficient alternative to criminal prosecution of civil litigation for certain violations of the city
code. The city retains the right to enforce provisions of this code by bringing criminal charges or
commencing civil litigation in any case where the city determines it is appropriate or necessary,
but finds that an administrative process is beneficial to the residents of the city and finds that
such a process is a legitimate and necessary alternative method of enforcement of code
violations. (Added by Ordinance 06-07, June 27, 2006)
Subd. 1. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter. the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICER. Any officer of the Wright County Sheriff’s Department
or any employee of the city who has received official authority by the City Council to
enforce the city code.
CODE OFFENSE. A violation of any section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of the
city code and is subject to a civil penalty determined according to a schedule adopted by
resolution of the City Council from time to time and payable directly to the City
Treasurer. Each day the violation exists constitutes a separate CODE OFFENSE.
Subd. 2. Administrative Notice. A Code Compliance Officer may issue, either in
person or by United States first class mail, an administrative notice to any person suspect or
known to have committed a code offense and/or to the owner of property upon which a code
offense is being committed. The administrative notice shall identify the code offense, the
location in which the code offense occurred or is occurring, and the recommended corrective
action for the code offense. The administrative notice may also state that the alleged violator
has, at the discretion of the Code Compliance Officer, up to 15 days to correct or abate the code
offense. If the alleged violator and/or owner upon which a code offense is being committed is
unable to correct or abate the code offense within the prescribed time. he or she may request
an extension from the Code Compliance Officer. Any extension granted by the Code
Compliance Officer shall specifically state the date of expiration. If the code offense is not
corrected or abated, as outlined in the administrative notice, within the prescribed time, the
Code Compliance Officer may issue a citation, as provided below.
______________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
100-4
Subd. 3. Citation. A Code Compliance Officer is authorized to issue a citation
upon the belief that a code offense has occurred, whether or not an administrative notice has
first been issued in regard to the code offense. The citation shall be given to the person
responsible for the violation and/or to the owner of the property upon which the violation has
occurred, either by personal service or by United States first class mail. The citation shall state
the nature of the code offense, the time and date the code offense occurred, the civil penalty
applicable to that code offense as set forth in a schedule of civil penalties which shall be
adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time, and the manner for paying the civil
penalty or requesting a hearing before a Hearing Officer to contest the citation.
Subd. 4. Responding to Citation, Payment. Once a citation is issued, the alleged
violator and/or the owner of the property upon which the violation has occurred shall, within 15
days of the time of issuance of the citation, either pay the civil penalty set forth in the citation or
request a hearing in writing according to the procedure set forth in this section. The civil penalty
may be paid either in person at City Hall, or by United States first class mail, postage prepaid
and postmarked within the prescribed 15 days. Payment of the civil penalty shall be deemed to
be an admission of the code offense.
Subd. 5. Requesting a Hearing. Any person contesting a citation issued pursuant
to this chapter may, within 15 days of the time of issuance of the citation, request a hearing
before a Hearing Officer. Any request for a hearing before a Hearing Officer shall be made in
writing on a form provided by the city for such a request and either delivered personally to the
city at City Hall or mailed to the city by United States first class mail, postage prepaid and
postmarked within the prescribed 15 days. The hearing shall be held at City Hall within 30 days
of the date the city received a timely written notice that a hearing has been requested.
Subd. 6. Hearing Office. The City Council shall by resolution from time to time
appoint a list of persons authorized to act as a Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer is
authorized to conduct an informal hearing to determine if a code offense has occurred. The
Hearing Officer may be compensated by the city for such hearings and related findings. The
Hearing Officer shall have the authority to uphold or dismiss the citation or reduce or waive the
civil penalty imposed upon such terms and conditions as the Hearing Officer shall determine.
The Hearing Officer’s decision shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city for such
purpose. The Hearing Officer’s decision is final, except as provided in this chapter for appealing
the Hearing Officer’s decision in limited cases to the City Council.
Subd. 7. Appeal of Hearing Officer Decision.
(1) The Hearing Officer’s decision shall be applicable to the City Council only for the
following matters:
(a) An alleged failure to obtain a required permit (such as, without limitation,
a conditional use permit), license (such as, without limitation, a liquor
license), or other approval from the City Council as required by the city
code;
(b) An alleged violation of a permit (such as, without limitation, a conditional
use permit), license (such as, without limitation, a liquor license), other
approval, or the conditions attached to the permit, license, or approval,
that was issued by the City Council; or
______________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
100-5
(c) An alleged violation of regulations governing a person or entity who has
received a license issued by the City Council.
(2) An appeal to the City Council of the Hearing Officer’s decision must be made in
writing on a form provided by the city for such an appeal and must be served on
the City Clerk by United States first class mail, postage prepaid, within ten days
after the date of the Hearing Officer’s decision.
(3) A timely appeal will be heard by the City Council after a notice of hearing is
served by the city upon the appellant in person or by certified mail at least ten
days in advance of the date of the hearing. The parties to the hearing will have
an opportunity to present oral or written arguments regarding the Hearing
Officer’s decision.
(4) The City Council shall consider the record, the Hearing Officer’s decision, and
any additional arguments before making a determination. The City Council is not
bound by the Hearing Officer’s decision, but may adopt all or part of the Hearing
Officer’s decision. The City Council’s decision may be vowed upon and given at
the hearing or may be given in writing within 15 days of the hearing.
Subd. 8. Failure to Pay.
(1) In the event a person charged with a code offense fails to pay the civil penalty
and correct or abate the code offense for which a citation was issued within the
prescribed time, a late charge of 15% shall he imposed thereon for each seven
days the civil penalty remains unpaid and the code offense remains uncorrected
or unabated beyond the due date.
(2) An unpaid civil penalty and accrued late charges will constitute a personal
obligation of the person to whom the citation was issued and the city shall have
the right to collect such unpaid civil penalty and accrued late charges, together
with the city’s costs and reasonable attorneys, in a criminal or civil proceeding.
(3) Pursuant to M.S. § 429.101 and M.S. § 514.67, as they may be amended from
time to time, and other applicable law, a lien in the amount of the civil penalty and
accrued late charges may be assessed quarterly or annually against the property
where the code offense occurred and collected in the same manner as taxes.
Any such assessment shall not preclude the city from issuing additional citations
for a continuing code offense.
(4) The city may suspend or revoke a license or permit or other approval associated
with the code offense if the civil penalty and accrued late charges are not timely
paid.
Subd. 9. Subsequent Violations. If a second citation for a code offense is issued
by the city to the alleged violator and/or the owner of the property upon which the violation has
occurred within 24 months of the issuance of a previous citation for the same code offense, the
civil penalty shall increase by 25% over the scheduled civil penalty amount. If a third citation for
a code offense is issued by the city to the alleged violator and/or the owner of the property upon
which the violation has occurred within 24 months of the issuance of a previous citation for the
same code offense, the civil penalty shall increase by 50% over the scheduled civil penalty
______________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
100-6
amount. If a fourth citation for a code offense is issued by the city to the alleged violator and/or
the owner of the property upon which the violation has occurred within 24 months of the
issuance of a previous citation for the same code offense, the civil penalty shall increase by
100% over the scheduled civil penalty amount.
Rockford City Code
200-1
200 Council and Administration
201. The Council
201.01 Meetings.
Subd. 1. Time. Regular meetings of the council shall be held on the 2nd Tuesday
and 4th Tuesday of each calendar month at 6:00 P.M. Meetings will be adjourned no later than
11:00 p.m. unless a majority vote of council agrees to continue meetings beyond that time. Any
unfinished business from the adjourned meeting shall be tabled to the next regularly scheduled
council meeting. Any regular meeting falling upon a holiday shall be held on the following
business day at the same time and place. All meetings, including special and adjourned
meetings, shall be held in the city hall unless otherwise directed by the council. If any council
meeting is directed by council to be held in a location other than city hall, the clerk-treasurer
shall post a notice in city hall at least 24 hours prior to the meeting stating the time, location and
purpose of the meeting. Notice shall be posted in the official newspaper of the changed location
of the council meeting when possible to do so. (Ordinance No. 14-05, adopted July 22, 2014)
Subd. 2. Special Meetings. Special meeting of the council refers to any meeting
other than a regular or an adjourned regular meeting. Special meetings of the council may be
called by the Mayor or any other two members of the council at least three days (72 hours)
before the called meeting. Such a call occurs by filing a written statement with the clerk
containing, as a minimum, the following: the names and positions of the individual or individuals
calling the meeting; the time and place of the special meeting; and a request asking the clerk to
give the council members proper notice. The clerk must mail, at least one day before the
meeting, a notice to all of the council members stating the time and place of the meeting. For a
special meeting to be valid, all members must receive notification unless those not notified are
present. In addition to the notice to council members, public notice is necessary. In addition to
the notice to council members, public notice is necessary. The clerk must post written notice of
the date, time, place and purpose of the special meeting on the principal bulletin board of the
city. In addition to posted notice, the city must also mail or deliver notice to each person who
has filed with the city a written request for notice of special meetings. The city must post and
mail or deliver public notice at least three days before the meeting. An emergency meeting is a
special meeting the council calls because of circumstances that, in the judgment of the council,
require immediate council consideration. The council must make good faith efforts to provide
notice of the meeting by telephone or by any other method used to notify the council members
and must include the subject of the meeting. (Ordinance 94-06, adopted April 12, 1994)
Subd. 3. First Meeting. At the first regular council meeting in January of each year
the mayor, with council approval, shall (1) designate the depository of city funds; (2) designate
the official newspaper; (3) choose an acting mayor from the council who shall perform the duties
of the mayor during the disability or absence of the mayor from the city or, in case of vacancy in
office of mayor, until a successor has been appointed and qualifies; (4) appoint such officers
and employees and such members of boards, commissions, and committees as may be
necessary.
Subd. 4. Open Meetings. All council meetings, including special and adjourned
meetings, shall be open to the public, except as may be otherwise provided by law. (Ordinance
No. 94-11, adopted June 28, 1994)
Rockford City Code
200-2
Subd. 5. Quorum. A majority of the entire council shall be a quorum to transact
business, and less than a quorum may recess a meeting to a future date. In the event of
vacancies, the "entire council" shall be temporarily reduced to include only those members
legally entitled to participate, and the quorum shall be a majority of the temporarily reduced
“entire council”. (Ordinance 96-05, adopted July 15, 1996)
201.02 Mayor.
Subd. 1. Presiding Officer. The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the council.
In the absence of the mayor, the acting mayor shall preside. In the absence of both, the next
senior councilmember shall call the meeting to order and shall preside until the council
members present at the meeting choose one of their number to act temporarily as presiding
officer.
Subd. 2. Duties of Presiding Officer. The presiding officer shall preserve order,
enforce the rules of procedure herein prescribed, and determine without debate, subject to the
final decision of the council on appeal, all questions of procedure and order. Except as
otherwise provided by statute or by these rules, the proceedings of the council shall be
conducted in accordance with “Robert’s Rules of Order Revised”.
Subd. 3. Appeals. Any member may appeal to the council from a ruling of the
presiding officer. If the appeal is seconded, the member may speak once solely on the question
involved and the presiding officer may explain his ruling, but no other councilmember shall
participate in the discussion. The appeal shall be sustained if it is approved by a majority of the
members present exclusive of the presiding officer.
Subd. 4. Participation in Meetings. Except as otherwise provided by law or this
section, the presiding officer shall not be deprived of any of the privileges of a councilmember
by reason of his acting as presiding officer, including the power to move, second, and debate
from the chair.
Subd. 5. Term. The term of the office of the Mayor for the City shall be four years
beginning with the term commencing January 1989. (Subd. 5 added by Ordinance 87-4, passed
May 26, 1987.)
201.03 Minutes.
Subd. 1. Recording. Minutes of each council meeting shall be kept by the clerktreasurer,
or, in his absence, by the designate of the council. Ordinances, resolutions, and
claims shall be recorded in the minutes.
Subd. 2. Approval and Publication. The minutes of each meeting shall be reduced
to typewritten form, shall be signed by the clerk-treasurer and the mayor. At the next regular
council meeting, approval of the minutes shall be considered by the council. The minutes need
not be read aloud, but the presiding officer shall call for any additions or corrections. If there is
no objection to a proposed addition or correction, it may be made without a vote of the council. If
there is an objection, the council shall vote upon the addition or correction. If there are no
additions or corrections, the minutes shall stand approved.
Rockford City Code
200-3
201.04 Agenda.
Subd. 1. Order of Business. Each meeting of the council shall convene at the time
and place appointed therefore. Order of business shall be reviewed and established by council
annually. (Ordinance 06-12, November 28, 2006)
Subd. 2. Variation of Order. The order of business may be varied by the presiding
officer; but all public hearings shall be held at the time specified in notice of hearing.
Subd. 3. Written Agenda. An agenda of the business and claims for each regular
council meeting shall be prepared by the clerk-treasurer for said meeting. Any councilmember
wishing an item to be placed on the agenda to be considered by the council must have it filed in
the office of the clerk-treasurer by 12:00 P.M. on the Wednesday prior to the regular council
meeting. Any other person wishing an item to be placed on the agenda to be considered by the
council must provide a letter to the clerk-treasurer setting for his request, by 12:00 P.M. on the
Wednesday prior to the regular council meeting or must have a councilmember place his matter
on the agenda in accordance with the above rule. Copies of the agenda shall be made available
to the public.
Subd. 4. Additions. By majority vote of the members of the council in attendance
at the regular scheduled meeting, additional business may be added to the agenda for
consideration at the meeting in session.
Subd. 5. Open Forum. Open forum will be the first agenda item after roll call. Any
citizen may bring a concern to the council with the understanding that the presentation be
limited to less than three minutes and that a decision or action may not be made by the council
at that time. (Ordinance 88-7, adopted June 13, 1988)
201.05 Quorum and Voting.
Subd. 1. Forum. At all council meetings a majority of the council members elected
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a small number may adjourn from
time to time and the council may punish non-attendance by a fine not exceeding $5.00 for each
absence from any regular meeting unless a reasonable excuse is offered.
Subd. 2. Recording of Votes. The votes of members on any question pending
before the council may be by voice vote, standing vote, or in any other manner of voting which
signifies the intention of the members; but if the vote is not unanimous, there shall be a roll call
and the names of those voting for and against the question shall be recorded in the minutes. If
any member, being present, does not vote, the minutes, as to his name, shall be marked
“Present -- Abstain.”
Subd. 3. Majority of Passage. A majority vote of all members of the council shall
be necessary for approval of any ordinance. Except as otherwise provided by statute, a majority
of those voting shall prevail in all other cases.
Rockford City Code
200-4
201.06 Ordinances, Resolutions and Motions.
Subd. 1. Form. Every ordinance and resolution shall be presented in writing and
the title shall be read in full before a vote is taken thereon. An ordinance or resolution shall be
read in full only at the request of the mayor or a member of the council. All motions shall be
stated in full before they are submitted to a vote by the presiding officer. They shall then be
recorded by title in the minutes by the clerk-treasurer.
Subd. 2. Recording. Every ordinance and resolution passed by the council shall
be signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk-treasurer. Every ordinance shall be
incorporated into the text of appendices of the code with the original passed version of the
ordinance retained in an ordinance book in chronological order. Every resolution shall be filed in
the resolution book.
Subd. 3. Amendments and Repeals. Every ordinance or resolution repealing a
previous ordinance or resolution or a section or subdivision thereof shall give the title of the
ordinance or resolution to be repealed in whole or in part. No ordinance or resolution or section
or subdivision thereof shall be amended by reference to title alone, but such an amending
ordinance or resolution shall set forth in full each section or subdivision to be amended.
201.07 Amendment or Suspension of Rules. The rules for the conduct of council
meetings established by 201.02 through 201.07 may be temporarily suspended by a majority
vote of all council members. 201.01 through 201.07 shall not be repealed or amended except by
majority vote of the whole council, after notice has been given at some preceding council
meeting.
Rockford City Code
200-5
202. Council Salaries
202.01 Definition. For purposes of this code, "meeting" shall include regular,
workshop, special, emergency, or any and all other properly noticed meetings of the City
Council. (Ordinance No. 15-03, adopted December 22, 2015)
202.02 Compensation.
Subd. 1. The Mayor and Council members shall be paid compensation for all
meetings based on the rate listed below. (Ordinance No. 15-03, adopted December 22, 2015)
Subd. 2. Effective January 1, 2017, Council members shall be compensated at the
rate of $4,500 per year, and the Mayor at the rate of $6,600 per year. (Ordinance No. 15-03,
adopted December 22, 2015)
Subd. 3. If the Mayor or Council members shall fail to serve a complete year, the
compensation set forth in this subdivision shall be pro-rated and made payable within ten (10)
days of the end of the abbreviated term. (Ordinance No. 15-03, adopted December 22, 2015)
Subd. 4. Compensation for the Mayor and Council members shall be paid quarterly at
the last regular Council meeting of that quarter, except that if the Mayor or a Councilmember
shall, for any reason, vacate his or her position, the compensation shall be paid as provided in
Subdivision 3 as set forth herein.
Rockford City Code
200-6
203. Elections
203.01 Date. The regular city election shall be held biennially on the first
Tuesday after the first Monday in November in every even-numbered year.
Rockford City Code
200-7
204. Clerk-Treasurer
204.01 Offices Combined. Pursuant to M.S. 412.591, the separate offices of
clerk and treasurer are abolished. The duties assigned by statute to the clerk and the treasurer
shall be performed by the clerk-treasurer. The council shall provide for an annual audit in
accordance with state law.
Rockford City Code
200-8
205. Administrator
205.01 Position Re-defined. The existing position of administrator is hereby
affirmed as chief administrative officer of the city and shall encompass the duties prescribed
hereinafter.
205.02 Appointment of Administrator. The administrator shall be appointed by a
majority of the council for an indefinite term. He may be removed from office after thirty (30)
calendar days written notice only by a majority of the council with or without cause. If he has
served as administrator for one (1) year, written charges and a public hearing on the charges
before the council shall be provided if requested by the administrator prior to the date wherein
his removal takes place. The public hearing must be held within thirty (30) calendar days after
presentation of the charges and he must receive the charges at least ten (10) calendar days
before the public hearing.
205.03 Qualifications. The administrator must have considerable knowledge of
municipal government operation, proper procedures, public relations, personnel management,
finances, purchasing and all administrative requirements for proper municipal operation. He
must have knowledge of or ability to acquire full knowledge of all laws affecting the municipality.
He must have the ability to encourage harmonious relations with municipal employees and the
general public. He must have the ability to coordinate development, to collect and analyze
material for reporting and to initiate and implement standards of procedure, operation and
organization.
He shall have a Bachelor's degree in public administration or its equivalent and work experience
in municipal administration. He shall be selected solely on the basis of his executive,
administrative and educational qualifications.
205.04 Duties and Responsibilities. The administrator shall be responsible to the
council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city and to that end shall be empowered
and required to:
(1) Be cognizant of the affairs of all departments, offices and divisions of the city
except as otherwise provided by law and carry out any other responsibilities
placed under his jurisdiction by this section or by subsequent council action.
(2) Interview and screen prospective city employees as permitted by law and shall
make recommendations to the council before the council makes any
appointment; he shall also rake recommendations for terminating and
suspending employees and may suspend any employee until the next council
meeting when the council shall affirm, modify or rescind the suspension.
(3) Prepare and submit an annual capital improvement plan and fiscal budget to the
council and keep the council advised of the financial condition of the city and
make such recommendations as he may from time to time determine desirable
and necessary.
(4) Attend and participate in discussions at all meetings of the council and other
official bodies as directed by the council.
(5) Make recommendations for enforcement of all laws and ordinances.
Rockford City Code
200-9
(6) Assist with all personnel matters for the city in conjunction with policy established
by the council.
(7) Issue purchase orders for previously budgeted items, when directed by council
action, when the amount thereof does not exceed $5,000 after receiving
estimates, quotations, sealed bids, proposals and/or contracts. (Ordinance No.
85-2, adopted March 26, 1985) (Ordinance No. 01-08, adopted September 25,
2001) (Ordinance No. 05-14, adopted October 25, 2005)
(8) The administrator shall represent the city at official functions as directed by the
council and maintain good public relations with the citizens of the community.
(9) Recommend from time to time the adoption of such measures as he may deem
necessary or expedient for the health, safety and welfare of the community or for
the improvement of the administration.
(10) Monitor all consultant and contract work performed for the city.
205.05 Compensation and Benefits and Employment Conditions. The
administrator shall receive such compensation as the council shall fix from time to time by
resolution and by the terms of an employment agreement.
205.06 Delegation of Administrator Duties and Responsibilities. All duties and
responsibilities assigned to the City Administrator shall be delegated to the Deputy Clerk, in the
absence of the City Administrator. (Ordinance No. 91-04, adopted April 25, 1991) (Ordinance
No. 02-07, adopted May 28, 2002)
Rockford City Code
200-10
206. Personnel
206.01 Purpose. It shall be the purpose of this Chapter to establish a uniform
and equitable system of municipal personnel administration for the city to be applicable to all
employees of the city, except where the city shall otherwise hereafter provide, and to insure:
(1) That employment with the city shall be as attractive as possible from a career
perspective.
(2) That all appointments, promotions and separation will be fair and based on job
performance.
(3) That the position classification and compensation plans will be based on the
principle of like compensation for like work.
The end result should be employees doing their jobs to the best of their ability to benefit the
citizens of the city. No provision of this Chapter is intended to violate, supersede, or conflict
with any applicable constitution, statute, or regulation, whether state or federal. To the extent of
conflict with any such statute or regulation, the statute or regulation shall control. The
employment relationship between the City and the employee is not for any fixed term. The City,
in its sole discretion, reserves the right to revoke, suspend, amend, modify, or change any of the
procedures set forth in the Personnel Chapter of the City Code and further the Personnel
Chapter is not intended as an employment contract. (Ordinance 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991.)
206.02 Scope. Except as otherwise specifically provided, this chapter applies to
all employees of the city defined as follows:
(1) Full-time Employee - forty (40) hours per week.
(2) Regular Part-time Employee - Minimum of twenty-five (25) hours per week but
less than forty (40) hours per week. (Ordinance 89-15, adopted November 28,
1989)
(3) Part-time Employee - Less than twenty-five (25) hours per week and except the
following:
(a) Elected officials.
(b) Members of appointed commissions and committees.
(c) Volunteer firefighters and other volunteer personnel.
(d) Persons engaged by appointment or under contract to supply expert,
professional, technical, or any other service.
(e) Temporary employees including seasonal, student, or employees hired to
meet the immediate requirements of any emergency situation.
Rockford City Code
200-11
206.03 Appointments.
Subd. 1. Merit. Every full-time appointment to city service shall be made by the
council on the basis of merit and fitness for the position. Every appointment to part-time
positions shall be made by the City Administrator and Public Works Director on the basis of
merit and fitness for the position. In the case of part-time employment, the council shall formally
approve the number of part-time positions to be hired, the level of compensation and the
duration of employment. The City Administrator and Public Works Director shall make
appointments independently, governed by the policies and requirements as established herein.
When required by law or by the council, merit and fitness shall be ascertained by written, oral, or
other examinations designed to evaluate the ability of the candidate to discharge the position for
which the examination is held. Merit shall include without limitation all job-relevant background,
education, experience or training. Fitness shall be determined by a physical at the time of
application for employment and at regularly recurring times as set forth in individual department
policies. Such examinations are to be paid for by the City and the physician's report is to be
made directly to the Council and the employee. In no case shall any irrelevant disability be
considered. As a condition of employment, prospective employees shall sign such releases as
may be necessary to release the physician's report to the City.
Subd. 2. Non-Eligible. No local official or employee shall be the immediate
supervisor of a related person. Further, a local official or employee of the City shall not
influence or attempt to influence the hiring, transfer, suspension, promotion, discharge, reward,
discipline, or the adjustment of grievances of a related person. A “related person” is defined as
any parent, parent-in-law, spouse, child, grandchild, brother, brother-in-low, sister, sister-in-law,
grandparent, grandparent-in-law, aunt, aunt-in-law, uncle, uncle-in-law, niece, niece-in-law,
nephew, or nephew-in-law of any current city employee or any current mayor or council
member. (Ordinance 2016-01, adopted February 23, 2016)
Subd. 3. Duration of Employment. After an employee has successfully completed
the orientation period after hire or promotion, he/she shall be designated as a regular employee.
Such designation shall be employed to differentiate between these employees and orientation,
temporary or part-time employees. The term “regular” shall not be used to define duration of
employment with the city. (Ordinance 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
206.04 Probationary Period.
Subd. 1. Purpose. The orientation period shall be regarded as an integral part of
the terms and conditions of employment and shall be utilized for observing the employee's work,
for securing the most effective adjustment of the employee to the position, and for terminating
such orientation employments as may be deemed necessary in the sole discretion and
judgment of the council. (Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
Subd. 2. Duration. Every original appointment and every promotional appointment
is subject to a minimum orientation period of six (6) months. “Rehired” employees shall be
required to satisfy the orientation period as if newly hired or promoted to the position to which
they return. Vacation time and other benefits shall not accumulate unless the employee is
designated a regular employee but shall accumulate from the date of employment. Sick leave
and funeral leave are not paid during the original appointment orientation period. (Ordinance
No. 89-15, adopted November 28, 1989)(Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
Rockford City Code
200-12
Subd. 3. Termination. The council may in its sole discretion terminate an
orientation employee or an employee not advancing to Step C for the job as defined in “The
Compensation Plan” within the maximum time as stated in “The Compensation Plan” without the
right of appeal or hearing unless he is a veteran, in which case the procedure prescribed in
Minnesota Statutes §197.46 shall be followed. The employee so terminated shall be notified in
writing of the reasons for termination. (Ordinance 89-15, adopted November 28,
1989)(Ordinance 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
Subd. 4. Completion. Prior to completion of the initial orientation period, the
appropriate supervisor and the administrator shall recommend to council in writing, dismissal,
extension of the orientation period, or hiring as a regular employee. (Ordinance No. 91-06,
adopted July 23, 1991)
206.05 Compensation.
Subd. 1. Amount. Employees of the city shall be compensated according to the
salaries rates and schedules established by a “Compensation Plan” prepared by the
administrator and the clerk/ treasurer, presented to council no later than the first Regular
Council Meeting in November. The council may adopt, reject, or modify such proposal and
adopt such proposal as modified. Council may make any such action retroactive. Original
appointment to any position shall be made at the starting salary established for the position and
advancement shall be by successive steps as established by the “Compensation Plan.” Council
may, upon the recommendation of the administrator, if the applicant demonstrates greater
qualifications than minimally required for the position, or on conditions of extreme difficulty in
recruiting at the entrance rate, make an exception to the starting salary of a position. The
“Compensation Plan” is not a seniority plan calling for automatic pay increases based upon
length of service if it is clear that the level of competence varies greatly from one employee to
another, it is equally clear that deserving and efficient employees should be awarded merit
increase. Also, such increases should be withheld from employees whose service is not wholly
satisfactory. Advancement will be based upon criteria set with the job description information.
Advancement through the pay rates established for a position will be the first pay period
following the anniversary date determined by the employee's hiring date or position
reclassification. Cost of living pay increases, if approved by council, for employees who have
reached the last step of the “Compensation Plan” will be the first pay period of the calendar
year. (Ordinance No. 89-15, adopted November 28, 1989)
(1) On-Call Duty Requirements. The Public Works department employees are
required to rotate a schedule for on call duty which starts on Wednesday and
ends on Tuesday each week. The On-Call Duty consists of taking care of the
wastewater treatment facility and water operations on Saturday and Sunday, as
well as any other unrelated duties as assigned. The employee shall complete the
lab work in the morning on Saturday and Sunday and check the water pump
houses, wells and open the compost site when applicable. The employee shall
also return to work on Saturday and Sunday afternoons to check the SCADA
system, lift stations, streets, river level and the compost site when applicable.
The On-Call employee shall also be required to report back to the city to handle
any emergencies occurring after normal working hours. The On-Call employee is
expected to be within thirty (thirty) minutes of city limits at all times during their
week-long assignment. Employees serving this assignment shall receive the
following Friday off to avoid overtime as the hours of service on Saturday and
Sunday constitute four hours of work each day. Employees working on-call shall
Rockford City Code
200-13
be allowed to use a city vehicle during their week of service; however, employees
may not use the city vehicle for any personal or non-work related purposes.
(2) On Call Duty Compensation. Public Works employees serving an on-call
assignment shall be compensated at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) per hour for
the period of time that they are not reporting to work. As an example, the on-call
assigned employee would typically work 40 hours during their week-long
assignment. The on-call assigned employee would then receive on-call
compensation for the remaining unworked hours, equaling a total of 120 hours in
this example, which would then be subject to payment as on-call compensation.
This on-call compensation shall apply to any overtime hours worked during the
week of assignment. (Ordinance 17-01, adopted February 14, 2017)
Subd. 2. Temporary and Part-time Employees. Temporary and part-time
employees are not entitled to paid sick leave, funeral leave, vacation leave or holidays. Regular
part-time employees who work twenty-five (25) or more regularly scheduled hours per week and
who do not provide their services to the city pursuant to a written contract, are entitled to the pro
rata sick leave, funeral leave, vacation leave and holiday pay specified elsewhere in this
Chapter. (Ordinance No. 89-15, adopted November 28, 1989)
Subd. 3. Normal Work Week. The normal work week shall consist of forty (40)
working hours or less for regular part-time employees and part-time employees as set by
council in any regularly scheduled seven (7) day week. The work week is Saturday through
Friday. The normal work year consists of two thousand eighty (2,080) hours, including all
authorized absences.
(1) Lunch periods shall begin and end at the employee's assigned work area.
Supervisors are responsible for scheduling lunch periods. The normal lunch
period shall normally not be part of the compensated work day.
(2) Rest period are fifteen (15) minutes and shall be allowed during each half of a
full-time employee's shift. Part-time employees working more than four (4) hours
daily are allowed one rest period daily. Rest periods are to begin and end at the
employee's assigned work area and are scheduled by the supervisor.
Subd. 4. Payday. The date upon which compensation is paid to the employees of
the City of Rockford, Minnesota shall be established and amended by Resolution of the City
Council. (Ordinance 14-03, adopted April 22, 2014)
206.06 Overtime.
(1) Supervisors are responsible for scheduling work in their departments to minimize
overtime and may authorize overtime when emergencies arise. All overtime shall
be authorized by the administrator and/or city council. All hourly employees, as
in the provisions of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), shall receive
time and one-half their regular hourly rate for all work performed in excess of
forty (40) hours including holidays and vacation days, including vacation days,
excluding sick days, in any regular work week or, at the employee's request, may
receive compensatory time off for each hour of overtime. (Ordinance No. 91-03,
adopted April 9, 1991) (Ordinance 2012-03, adopted June 12, 2012)
Rockford City Code
200-14
Once an employee has requested that overtime be booked as compensatory
time, the employee may not be paid for this compensatory time without council
approval or unless otherwise set forth in this Chapter. Compensatory time off
may not be used during the last two (2) weeks of employment once an
employee's resignation has been submitted.
All compensatory time off must be noted on the leave calendar posted in city hall.
The estate of any orientation or regular full time hourly employee who dies while
employed by the city shall be entitled to receive the value of the employees'
accrued unused compensatory time in cash. (Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July
23, 1991)
(2) Full time salaried employees may receive compensatory time off for work
performed in excess of forty (40) hours including holidays, excluding sick or
vacation days, in any regular work week, with approval of the administrator.
Booking compensatory time for full time salaried employees is for record keeping
purposes only and is NOT to be considered a termination nor a retirement
benefit. (Ordinance No. 91-03, adopted April 9, 1991)
All compensatory time off must be noted on the leave calendar posted in city hall.
(3) Employees that must return to work for a scheduled evening meeting or an
emergency shall be compensated for a minimum of two hours. However, if the
meeting or the emergency extends beyond the two hours, the employee shall be
compensated for the actual hours worked. (Ordinance 06-11, adopted
November 28, 2006)
206.07 Holidays. The following calendar days and such other days as the city
council may fix are deemed holidays with time off with full pay for all full-time and regular parttime
employees. If the holiday falls on a Saturday, the previous Friday shall be designated as
the official holiday and if the holiday falls on the Sunday, the following Monday shall be
designated as the official holiday. With the exception of the floating holiday, the city hall
will be closed and the city may not conduct official/ ordinary business on a holiday such as
holding a meeting or hearing, collecting utility bills, or issuing licenses or permits. Request for
floating holiday shall be in writing by the employee and shall be approved by the department
supervisor and the administrator. (Ordinance 10-01, adopted January 26, 2010)
Holiday Date
New Year's Day January 1
Martin Luther King Day 3rd Monday in January
President's Day 3rd Monday in February
Memorial Day Last Monday in May
Independence Day July 4
Labor Day 1st Monday in September
Veteran's Day November 11
Thanksgiving Day 4th Thursday in November
Day after Thanksgiving Day 4th Friday in November
Christmas Eve (4 hours) December 24 (only if it falls on a
regularly scheduled work day)
Rockford City Code
200-15
Christmas Day December 25
Floating Holiday As scheduled
Full-time salaried employees with two (2) or more years of continuous service will receive one
(1) extra holiday which may be employee birthday or a floating holiday.
Full holiday pay will be granted to all regular and orientation employees for full-time or regular
part-time positions. Employees shall be at work on the work day immediately preceding and the
work day immediately following a holiday to be eligible for that holiday with the following
exceptions:
(1) When an official holiday occurs during a scheduled vacation, the charge against
the employee's earned vacation shall be reduced by one day.
(2) When requested in advance in writing to and approved in writing by the
administrator when receiving compensatory time off or a floating holiday.
(3) Illness when verified to the supervisor and/or the administrator.
(4) By council action under extraordinary circumstances responding to a petition
request by the employee in writing.
Regular part-time employees will receive pro-rata holiday pay for holidays for which they would
otherwise be scheduled to work. Holiday pay cannot allow a regular part-time employee to
receive more pay than their normal average work week pay. (Ordinance No. 97-15, adopted
October 27, 1997)
206.08 Funeral Leave. Full time employees working forty (40) hours per
week, not serving the orientation period, are allowed three (3) days paid funeral leave or five (5)
days paid funeral leave due to the death of a spouse, child or parent. Regular part-time
employees who work twenty-five (25) or more regularly scheduled hours per week, not
serving the orientation period, are allowed pro-rata paid funeral leave. Paid funeral leave is
allowed for parent, spouse, child, grandchild, brother, sister, grandparent, parent-in-law,
brother/sister-in-law and grandparent-in-law. Additional leave may be taken and will be
deducted from compensatory time or vacation leave and must be approved in advance by the
supervisor or administrator. Attendance at a funeral not listed as eligible paid funeral leave may
be authorized by the supervisor or administrator and will be deducted from compensatory time
or vacation leave. Employees not eligible for paid funeral leave or employees who have no
earned accumulated compensatory time or vacation leave may attend a funeral when
authorized by the supervisor or administrator without pay. (Ordinance No. 89-15, adopted
November 28, 1989)(Ordinance No. 90-01 adopted February 13, 1990)(Ordinance No. 91-06
adopted July 23, 1991)(Ordinance 10-01, adopted January 26, 2010)
206.09 Vacation With Pay.
Subd. 1. Amount Allowed. Full-time hourly employees shall earn paid vacation as detailed
herein. Regular part-time employees will receive a prorated schedule of the same.
Years of Service Annual Earned Vacation Max Vacation Banked
0 through 2nd year 80 hours 160 hours
3rd through 5th year 120 hours 200 hours
Rockford City Code
200-16
6th through 10th year 160 hours 240 hours
11th through 20th year 200 hours 280 hours
21st year or more 240 hours 320 hours
*After 6 months an employee may start using vacation earned.
(Ordinance No. 90-14, adopted December 20, 1990)(Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23,
1991)(Ordinance No. 02-17, adopted December 23, 2002)(Ordinance 10-01, adopted January
26, 2010)(Ordiance No. 18-05, adopted February 13, 2018)
Subd. 2. Accumulation. Vacation earned shall be posted monthly to each
employee’s account commencing January 30, 2010. On January 29, 2010, each employee’s
vacation account shall be brought current for any vacation accrued from the last anniversary
date to January 29, 2010. For instance, accrual of two hundred forty (240) hours of vacation per
year would be posted at twenty (20) hours each month. After December 31, 2010, employees
shall not be allowed to accumulate vacation time beyond the maximum banked amount
identified in the table above. Once an employee has reached the maximum banked amount the
employee will stop earning vacation time until the accumulated amount is reduced below the
maximum allowed amount. Council may, under exceptional circumstances, permit an employee
to take up to twenty (20) hours of vacation before it has accrued. (Ordinance 90-14, adopted
December 20, 1990)(Ordinance 10-01, adopted January 26, 2010)
Subd. 3. Accrual During Leave. For the purpose of accruing vacation or sick
leave, an employee using earned vacation leave or sick leave is considered to be working.
Vacation leave shall not be earned by any employee during a leave of absence without pay,
except a military reserve leave of absence without pay, or time otherwise not worked or paid.
Subd. 4. Administration. Supervisors are responsible for scheduling vacation
leave and should take into consideration seasonal demands. The employee who requests time
off first shall be given priority. Should two employees simultaneously request the same vacation
time off, the senior employee shall be given preference. Vacation leave shall normally be
scheduled in weekly periods but at no time in increments of less than one (1) hour. All vacation
leave must be noted on the leave calendar posted in city hall. (Ordinance No. 10-02, adopted
February 23, 2010)
Authorized vacation pay may be paid to the employee in advance of his/her departure upon
written request to the administrator not less than three (3) working days prior to the last working
day before departure.
Vacation leave shall not accrue during an employee's leave of absence without pay, except in
the case of a job-related injury or illness.
Employees shall not be entitled to a cash payment in lieu of vacation leave, except upon
termination in good standing or upon written request to and approval of the council or the
administrator, under exceptional circumstances. (Ordinance No. 89-5, adopted March 28, 1989)
Subd. 5. Terminal Leave. Any regular full-time employee or regular part-time
employee leaving the employ of the city in good standing after giving at least two (2) weeks
notice of termination of employment shall be compensated for all unexpired vacation time
accrued and unused to the date of separation including current year accrual for the following
Rockford City Code
200-17
year use. (Ordinance No. 90-14, adopted December 20, 1990)(Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted
July 23, 1991)
Subd. 6. Proceeds to Employee's Estate. The estate of any regular full-time
employee or regular part-time employee who dies while employed by the city shall be entitled to
receive the value of the employee's accrued unused vacation time in cash. (Ordinance No. 91-
06, adopted July 23, 1991)
206.10 Sick Leave.
Subd. 1. Amount For The Year 2010. Beginning with the adoption of this policy
and ending December 31, 2010, sick leave shall be a benefit provided to all regular full-time and
regular part-time employees which shall be accrued at the rate of eight (8) hours per month for
full-time employees and on a pro-rata basis for regular part-time employees. The first twentyone
(21) hours of sick time each year shall not accrue and shall be set aside to pay for the
employee’s disability insurance.
Subd. 2. Amount For The Year 2011 and Future. Beginning on January 1, 2011,
sick leave shall be a benefit provided to all regular full-time and regular part-time employees
which shall be accrued at the rate of ten (10) days annually for full-time employees and on a
pro-rata basis for regular part-time employees. The maximum amount of sick leave to be
accumulated by an employee is four hundred eighty (480) hours. Once an employee has
reached the maximum banked amount the employee will stop earning sick time until the
accumulated amount is reduced below the maximum allowed amount. There is no cash value
to the sick leave accumulated under this section. (Ordinance 10-06, adopted August 10, 2010)
Subd. 3. Purpose and Administration. Sick leave shall be granted to employees
not on personal leave when the employee is unable to perform work duties due to illness,
disability, the necessity for medical, dental, or chiropractic care, childbirth or pregnancy
disability, or exposure to contagious disease where such exposure may endanger the health of
others with whom the employee would come in contact in the course of performing work duties.
Sick leave may be granted by the administrator in order to care for a sick family member
requiring attention. To be eligible for sick leave, the employee shall:
(1) Report as soon as possible to the supervisor or administrator the reason for
absence.
(2) Keep the supervisor informed on the condition.
(3) If the employee is out of work more than five (5) days due to an illness or serious
health condition or disability the employee will not be allowed to return to work
until the required form is completed by their physician stating that they are
capable of performing their job or listing any work restrictions. The city requires a
physician’s form to return to work for any serious illness, injury or medical
condition that may affect an employee’s job performance even if they are absent
less than five (5) days. (Ordinance 10-01, adopted January 26, 2010)
The administrator shall be notified by the supervisor of all employees absent on sick leave. Sick
leave shall not be granted for less than one-half hours. (Ordinance No. 04-17, adopted
December 14, 2004)
Rockford City Code
200-18
Subd. 4. Penalty. Using or claiming sick leave for a purpose not authorized shall
be cause for disciplinary action.
Subd. 5. Accrual During Leave. For the purpose of accruing vacation or sick
leave, an employee using earned vacation leave or sick leave is considered to be working. Sick
leave shall not be earned by any employee during a leave of absence without pay, except a
military reserve leave of absence without pay, or time otherwise not worked or paid.
Subd. 6. Sick Leave Buy-Back. Any regular full-time or regular part-time employee
leaving the employ of the city in good standing after giving at least two (2) weeks notice of such
termination of employment shall be compensated for all unused accrued sick leave accrued
prior to January 30, 2010 as follows: (Ordinance 04-17, adopted December 14,
2004)(Ordinance 10-01, adopted January 26, 2010)
(1) After ten (10) years of continuous service paid as termination pay at twenty-five
(25) percent the employee's rate of pay at the time of termination.
(2) After fifteen (15) years of continuous service paid as termination pay at fifty (50)
percent the employee's rate of pay at the time of termination.
(3) After twenty (20) years of continuous service paid as termination pay at seventyfive
(75) percent the employee's rate of pay at the time of termination.
Sick leave accumulated after January 29, 2010 shall not be paid out to employees upon
termination of employment. The accumulated sick leave prior to January 30, 2010 will be saved
in a separate sick leave bank to be used or paid out at termination per the policy in effect on
January 28, 2010. (Ordinance 10-01, adopted January 26, 2010)
206.11 Injury Leave. Injury leave shall be granted to regular and orientation fulltime
and regular part-time (twenty-five (25) hours weekly or over) employees who are
incapacitated as a result of injury or occupational disease incurred, subject to the condition that
the injury or disease qualifies the employee for benefits from Worker's Compensation insurance.
During such injury leave, the employee shall be entitled to full compensation and employee
benefits for a period not to exceed six (6) months while absent from work by reason of such
injury or disease. The amount of any compensation shall be reduced by any payment received
by the injured employee from Worker's Compensation Insurance. In no case shall the
employee's net compensation, including Worker's Compensation insurance benefits, exceed the
employee's regular rate of net compensation. Compensation for injury leave shall be terminated
upon the date of certification of a competent medical authority, approved by the administrator
that the employee can return to duty. (Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
The city reserves the right to require the employee to see a physician selected by the
administrator for evaluation, such examination paid for by the city. The employee shall sign
such releases as may be necessary to release the evaluation to the city.
Whenever an employee is injured on the job, a report of such accident shall be made
immediately to the supervisor and the administrator. This report shall give all known details and
circumstances pertaining to the injury. Such employee shall fill out such forms and reports as
are required under Worker's Compensation law and regulations and by the city's Worker's
Compensation insurance carrier.
Rockford City Code
200-19
206.12 Leaves Without Pay. The council may grant any regular full-time or
regular part-time employee a leave of absence without pay for a period not exceeding one
hundred and twenty (120) calendar days except that council may extend such leaves to a
maximum period of one (1) year in case the employee is disabled or where extraordinary
circumstances, in council's judgment, warrant such extension. In no instances shall an
employee be granted a personal leave without pay if he/she can use accumulated
compensatory time, accumulated sick leave or accumulated vacation time. No vacation
benefits, holiday leave, or sick leave shall accrue during a leave of absence without pay.
Employees shall request such leaves in writing in advance of the date so desired. In unusual
circumstances, the administrator may grant an employee leave without pay, not to exceed one
working day, without first obtaining council approval. All leave without pay shall be subject to
cancellation by council if at any time it is found that the employee is using the leave for
purposes other than specified. (Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
City-paid benefits, if desired, shall be kept in force and paid by the employee during the entire
leave of absence. Upon reinstatement following leave of absence without pay, the employee
may be reinstated in the position, or a like position, he/she vacated at the inception of the leave.
If the leave was granted for medical reasons, council may require a written statement from the
attending physician, confirming the employee's ability to perform his/her duties. Failure to report
for work within three (3) working days of the expiration of the leave shall be considered a
resignation.
206.13 Absence Without Leave. Any absence of an employee from scheduled
duty that is not promptly reported to, and authorized by, the administrator and/or council shall be
deemed an absence without leave for which compensation shall not be paid. Unauthorized
absence of an employee for three (3) consecutive working days shall be considered as a
resignation, except in cases where the conditions of such absence were beyond the employee's
control. Such termination shall not be considered a resignation in good standing, and the
employee shall not be eligible for separation benefits.
206.14 Jury or Witness Duty. When an employee performs jury
duty or is subpoenaed as a witness in court or voluntarily serves as a witness in a case in which
the city is a party, the employee is entitled to compensation from the city equal to the difference
between his/her regular pay based on an eight (8) hour day and the amount received as a juror
or witness. Time spent on jury duty shall not be counted as time worked in computing overtime.
Employees shall notify the administrator as soon as possible after receiving notice to report for
jury duty and will be responsible for insuring that a report of jury duty is completed by the Clerk
of Court each week so the city will be able to determine the amount of compensation due for the
period involved. An employee excused or released from jury duty during his/her regular working
hours shall report to work immediately unless there is less than two (2) hours remaining in the
regular working day and then he/she will report to the administrator that he/she will report to
work the next working day.
206.15 Military Leave. Every employee to whom Minnesota Statutes §192.26 or
§192.261 or U.S.C.A., Title 38, §2021 applies is entitled to the benefits afforded by those
sections subject to the conditions therein prescribed.
206.16 Affirmative Action. It is the policy and intent of the city to provide equality
of opportunity in employment to all persons. This policy prohibits discrimination because of race,
color, creed, religion, national origin, political affiliation, disability, marital status, status with
regard to public assistance, affectional preference, sex or age (except where sex or age is a
Rockford City Code
200-20
bona fide occupational qualification) in all aspects of its personnel policies, programs, practices,
and operations.
206.17 Schools and License. Employees shall attend such schools and obtain
such licenses as the council may require. Fees and other expenses for attending such schools
shall not be at the employee's expense.
206.18 Political Activities. All employees and officers of the city shall be
governed by the current state and federal statutes regarding political activities.
206.19 Officials Under Worker's Compensation Act. Pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes §176.011, Subd. 9, Clause 5, the elected officials of the city and those municipal
officers appointed for a regular term of office are hereby included in the coverage of the
Minnesota Worker's Compensation Act.
206.20 Outside Employment. Employees of the city will obtain prior approval
from the administrator and council before engaging in any other employment, activity, or
enterprise for private gain.
Subd. 1. Determining Factors. In determining whether such outside employment
or activities for private employment constitute a conflict of interest with public duties or are
inconsistent or incompatible with public employment, the following, though not necessarily
limited to shall be considered:
(1) The use for private gain or advantage of city time, facilities, equipment and
supplies, or the badge, uniform, prestige or influence of city employment.
(2) Receipt or acceptance by the employee of any money or other consideration
from anyone other than the city for the performance of an act which the
employee would be required or expected to perform in the regular course of
his/her duties as employee.
(3) The performance of an act in other than his/her capacity as an employee, which
act may later be subject directly or indirectly to the control, inspection, review,
audit or enforcement by such employee.
(4) Potential conflicts with the best interest of the city.
Subd. 2. Discipline. Failure to notify administrator/ council of outside employment
by the employee shall be cause for disciplinary action as outlined in this Chapter.
206.21 Group Insurance. (Ordinance No. 89-15, adopted November 28,
1989)(Ordinance No. 07-15, adopted December 11, 2007)
(1) A group health/dental insurance program shall be provided for all full-time
orientation and regular full-time employees. The city shall pay 60% of dependent
coverage for health insurance only. Employees electing to take the dependent
health and/or dental coverage will have the balance deducted from their
paycheck twice a month. (Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
Rockford City Code
200-21
(2) Regular part-time employees who work twenty-five (25) or more regularly
scheduled hours per week, orientation or regular, shall be allowed to participate
in the group health/dental insurance program if the administrator or
clerk/treasurer is notified within thirty (30) days of employment in writing. The
City will pay a pro-rated amount of the employee’s health and dental premium
and a pro-rated amount of the employee’s dependent health insurance premium
based on number of hours worked per year (i.e., an employee working 1,664
hours per year, the City pays 80% of single coverage and 48% of family health
insurance). Employees electing to take this coverage will have the insurance
premiums deducted from their paycheck twice a month. (Amount set by
Insurance Section of Compensation Plan.) (Ordinance No. 90-14, adopted
December 20, 1990)(Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)(Ordinance
06-01, January 10, 2006)
(3) Any employee enrolled in the city's health coverage terminated for reasons other
than disability may elect to continue health coverage for the employee and
dependents for eighteen (18) months or until he/she is re-employed, whichever
occurs first, provided the employee pays the cost of such continuation of
coverage to the employer or insurer. Within five (5) days after the termination,
the city shall notify the employee of the right to continue coverage (Minn. Stat.
§62A.17). It shall be the responsibility of the city clerk to so notify the terminated
employee.
(4) The City shall pay the premium for life insurance for $25,000 for all orientation
and regular full-time and regular part-time employees. (Ordinance No. 90-05,
adopted May 22, 1990)(Ordinance No. 91-06 passed July 23, 1991)(Ordinance
No. 18-05, adopted February 13, 2018)
(5) Short and Long Term Disability Insurance Program. A group short and long term
disability insurance program shall be provided for all regular full time employees
and regular part time employees who work twenty-five (25) or more hours per
week and all those employees shall participate in the group disability insurance
program. (Amended by Ordinance 07-15, adopted December 11, 2007)
(a) Beginning with the adoption of this policy and ending on December 31,
2010, the city will pay the premiums by deducting time from each
employee’s sick time bank per month. Each employee is required to
maintain their sick time bank at a minimum of twenty-one (21) hours.
(Ordinance 10-01, adopted January 26, 2010)
(b) Beginning January 1, 2011, the city will pay the short and long term
disability insurance as part of the benefits for full and part time
employees. The premium will be pro-rated for part-time employees as
listed in Section 206.21.(2) above. (Ordinance 07-15, adopted December
11, 2007)(Ordinance 10-01, adopted January 26, 2010)
(6) Minnesota Deferred Compensation Plan. Employees are offered the option to
contribute to the Minnesota Deferred Compensation Plan (MNDCP) offered
through the Minnesota State Retirement Systems (MSRS). Employees shall
notify the payroll clerk of the contributions to be deducted each payroll. The city
shall be responsible for depositing the contributions into the MNDCP account.
Rockford City Code
200-22
(7) Minnesota Deferred Compensation Plan Roth 457(b). Employees are offered the
option to contribute to the MNDCP pre-tax option of the Roth 457(b). Employees
are responsible for notifying the payroll clerk that they are enrolling in this plan
and the amount of their contributions which will be contributed each payroll. The
contributions will be taxed and deposited into the Roth 457(b) account and the
MNDCP each payroll. (Ordinance 2012-01, adopted February 14, 2012)
(8) Healthcare Savings Plan. The employees are eligible to participate in the
Minnesota Post-employment Healthcare Savings Plan (HSP) as established by
MN Statutes 352.98 and outlined in the MSRS Trust and Plan Documents. All
available and applicable funds collected by the employer on behalf of the
employee will be deposited into the employee’s post-employment health care
savings plan account after calculation of the available and applicable termination
pay is made pursuant to Ordinance 206.10 entitled “Sick Leave.”
0-10 years of service 25% of frozen bank of sick leave is contributed into the
HSP
11-15 years of service 50% of frozen bank of sick leave is contributed into the
HSP
16-20 years of service 75% of frozen bank of sick leave is contributed into the
HSP
21+ years of service 100% of frozen bank of sick leave contributed into the HSP
As an example, an employee with 20 years of service is eligible to receive 75%
of their sick leave accumulated prior to January 30th, 2010 (frozen sick bank,
pursuant to Ordinance 206.10); with 75% of that calculated amount contributed
into the HSP. All employees must participate in this plan unless you:
(a) Are a foreign national; or,
(b) Have comprehensive health insurance coverage for life; or,
(c) Are eligible for TRICARE retiree medical benefits or VA medical benefits
due to a service connected disability. (Ordinance 16-02, adopted May 26,
2016)
(9) All city employees that work at least twenty (20) hours per week are required to
contribute to the Public Employee Retirement Association PERA at a percentage
rate of gross pay which is established each calendar year. The employer is also
required to contribute a percentage of the employee’s gross pay which is
established each calendar year. The employer will deposit the PERA into the
employees account each payroll cycle. (Ordinance 2012-01, adopted February
14, 2012)
206.22 Exposure to Hazardous Substances. Any employee routinely exposed to
hazardous substances or harmful physical agents as defined in the Minnesota Employee Right
Rockford City Code
200-23
to Know Act of 1983 (Laws 1983, Ch. 316, 182.65-182.675) shall be trained before being
assigned or reassigned work exposing him/her to such substances or agents and shall be given
training annually thereafter. Training shall include an explanation of how and where information
about hazards is stored in the workplace, how the hazards are labeled, and where to obtain
specific information. The administrator and the public works supervisor shall provide for such
training and for compliance with the Minnesota Employee Right to Know Act of 1983, including
the establishment of specific policies to insure compliance with the state law and regulations.
An employee acting in good faith has the right to refuse to work under conditions which the
employee reasonably believes present an imminent danger of death or serious physical harm to
the employee.
206.23 Resignation. Any employee wishing to leave the employ of the city in
good standing except for mandatory retirement under Section 206.28 shall file with the
administrator, at least fourteen (14) days before leaving, a written resignation stating the
effective date of the resignation and the reason for leaving. The administrator shall notify
council as soon as possible when an employee submits a written resignation. Failure to comply
with this procedure may be considered cause for denying the employee future employment by
the city and denying termination leave benefits.
Employees who resign in good standing shall receive pay for unused accrued compensatory
time (206.06), vacation (206.09), and sick leave (206.10).
206.24 Layoffs. After at least two (2) weeks notice to the employee, the council
may lay off any employee whenever such action is necessary because of shortage of work or
funds, the abolition of a position, or changes in organization. No regular or orientation full-time
employee shall be laid off while there is a regular part-time, part-time or temporary employee
serving in the same class of position for which the regular or orientation full-time employee is
qualified, eligible, and available. The administrator, at his discretion, may recommend lay off
based on qualifications. (Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
Recall shall be on the basis of qualifications as compared among those on layoff status for a
particular classification. Notice of recall, recommended by the administrator and approved by
council, indicating position and department shall be sent by certified mail to the employee's last
known address. The employee has fifteen (15) working days from date of notice to report and
failure to report within that time shall be considered a resignation. The open position will then
be offered to the next person on the recall list following the procedure explained above.
206.25 Grievance Policy. It is the policy of the city insofar as possible to prevent the
occurrence of grievances and to deal promptly with those which occur. When any employee
grievance comes to the attention of a supervisory employee, the supervisor shall discuss all
relevant circumstances with the employee, and the employee's representative if the employee
so desires, consider and examine the causes of the grievance, and attempt to resolve it to the
extent that he/she is able and authorized to do so. The supervisory employee should
immediately consult with the administrator and document action taken at this level. If the
grievance is not dealt with to the employee's satisfaction at the administrator level within
fourteen (14) days, the employee may bring it before the council, which shall then take up the
matter at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
No employee shall be disciplined for seeking redress through the grievance procedure or as a
result of his/her testimony. (Ordinance 91-02, adopted March 12, 1991)
Rockford City Code
200-24
206.26 Cause for Disciplinary Action.
(1) Employees shall be subject to disciplinary action and possible immediate
termination for failing to fulfill their duties and responsibilities. (Ordinance 10-01,
adopted January 26, 2010)
(2) An adequate reason or cause for disciplinary action shall include, but is not
limited to, each of the following kinds of conduct:
(a) Conduct or performance on the job which indicates a lack of ability to
adequately perform the duties of the position or classification held by the
employee.
(b) Conduct or performance on the job which indicates a failure to produce
the quality of work the position or classification requires.
(c) Conduct or performance on the job which demonstrates insubordination,
which is defined as a refusal to follow appropriate written or oral
procedures, instruction or directions from a supervisor or the
administrator.
(d) The solicitation or acceptance of money or anything of value to influence
the decisions of an employee in public matters or as a reward for such
decisions.
(e) Being under the influence of alcohol, narcotics or any other controlled
substance while on the job except drugs prescribed by the employee’s
physician. No employee shall drive any vehicle or equipment owned,
leased or under the control of the city while under the influence of alcohol,
narcotics or controlled substances, whether or not prescribed by a
physician, if such operation would threaten the safety of the employee,
other persons, or property.
(f) Sleeping on the job.
(g) Conduct or performance on the job which demonstrates a deliberate
attempt to cause poor morale or disrespect among employees by actions
or attitude on the job.
(h) Habitual or excessive tardiness in reporting for scheduled working hours.
(i) Being absent from a scheduled work assignment during working hours
without permission.
(j) Stealing, misappropriation or conversion of city property or the property of
other employees.
(k) The willful violation of any reasonable city rule or regulation which has
been adopted in written form and is known, or reasonably should be
known, to the employees involved.
Rockford City Code
200-25
(l) Has engaged in political activities restricted under Section 206.18 of this
Chapter.
(m) Personal appearance or lack of cleanliness while on the job which
exhibits symptoms of lack of hygiene, bringing unpleasantness to citizens
of the city or other city employees.
(n) Reporting for a scheduled work assignment in clothing or other aspects
contributing to appearance, which the supervisor or administrator has
reasonably advised the employee is not acceptable or appropriate for the
work assignment or duties performed by that employee.
(o) Has been convicted of a felony.
(p) Has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or
casting doubt on the employee's ability to properly perform his/her job.
(q) If an employee has been charged with the commission of a felony, he/she
may be suspended without pay pending a valid disposition of the charge.
If final resolution of the charge does not result in a valid conviction, the
council shall determine whether the conduct of the employee involved
moral turpitude or casts doubt on the ability of the employee to perform
his job; and if council so determines, such conduct shall constitute
“cause” for appropriate disciplinary action. Any such determination may
be appealed according to the grievance procedure.
(r) If an employee has been charged with the commission of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude, he/she may be suspended without pay pending
a valid disposition of the charge. If final resolution of the charge does not
result in a valid conviction, the council shall determine whether the
conduct of the employee involved moral turpitude or casts doubt on the
ability of the employee to perform his/her job; and if so determined, such
conduct shall constitute “cause” for appropriate disciplinary action. Any
such determination may be appealed according to the grievance
procedure.
(s) Conduct which constitutes harassment as defined in Section 206.30.
(Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
(t) Retaliatory action taken against any person because such person
reported harassment, investigated harassment, was a witness in or
participated in any way in an investigation of harassment. (Ordinance No.
89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
(u) An employee who carry’s a gun on their person, or store it in their desk,
locker, or any city building or city vehicle. (Ordinance No. 03-04, adopted
June 24, 2003)
206.27 Disciplinary Action/At Will. (Ordinance No. 92-03, adopted March 5,1992)
Subd. 1. In General. City employees shall be subject to disciplinary action for
failing to fulfill their duties and responsibilities, including observance of work rules adopted by
Rockford City Code
200-26
the council. Employment with the City shall be “at-will”, and may be changed or terminated by
the City at any time for any lawful reason. No contract of employment shall be binding upon the
City unless it is in writing and is signed by the Mayor and City Clerk on behalf of the City. The
terms and conditions of employment may be changed by the City at any time for any lawful
reason. There is no guarantee of employment for any specific length of time, nor are the
guidelines in the personnel ordinance intended to create any express or implied contract rights.
Subd. 2. Disciplinary Actions. The City has no fixed set of graduate disciplinary
steps which are required to be adhered to in all instances. The discipline taken could result in,
but may not include, a written reprimand, suspension from work with or without pay, or
immediate termination. The action taken will be based on the circumstances as reviewed by the
Council. The City reserves the right to evaluate each situation as it occurs and determine the
appropriate action. All supervisor initiated termination must be approved by Council.
Should the employee have any challenges or questions regarding a discipline that may be
issued, the employee has the right to a hearing before Council.
Subd. 3. Definitions.
(1) Written Reprimand. A written reprimand may state that the employee is
being warned, description of the warning, timetables and goals for
improvement and an outline of future penalties/reprimands, should the
problem continue. The employee shall be given a copy of the reprimand
and sign the original copy. The signature of the employee does not mean that
he/she agrees with the reprimand but that he/she has received it. The reprimand
shall be placed in the employee's file but shall be removed from the file after two
(2) years from the date of issuance if there has been no subsequent reprimand
and if no other disciplinary action has been instituted.
(2) Suspension. An employee may be suspended by the supervisor pending
investigation of an allegation of misconduct. If the allegations prove false, the
statements shall be removed from the employee's personnel file, and the
employee shall receive compensation to which he/she would have been entitled
had the suspension not taken place.
(3) Termination. The Council may, as a disciplinary action, dismiss any employee. A
notice shall contain the reason for the termination, the procedure for requesting a
hearing and the employee's rights under the veteran's preference law if he/she is
a veteran.
(4) Hearing. An employee requesting a hearing before council regarding disciplinary
actions, must submit a written request to the City Clerk, within five (5) working
days of the notification of the action. The Council shall consider the matter within
ten (10) working days from that date of request, unless the city and employee
agree on an earlier or later date. If the action involves the removal of a veteran,
a hearing shall be held in accordance with the MN Statutes, Section 197.46. Any
employee may examine his/her personnel file in the presence of the
Administrator at a mutually convenient time or may be given copies of his/her file
at the employee's request and expense.
Rockford City Code
200-27
Subd. 4. Other Disciplinary Actions. The following other disciplinary actions may
be taken against any employee:
(1) Involuntary demotion.
(2) Withholding a salary increase or decreasing the employee's salary. The
employee shall be notified in writing of the action and reasons thereof. A copy of
the notice shall be placed in the employee's file. In no case shall an employee's
salary be decreased below the minimum of the salary range of the class or below
the applicable minimum wage.
206.28 Retirement Policy.
Subd. 1. General Rule. Every regular full-time and regular part-time employee of the
city shall automatically be retired upon reaching the age of seventy (70) years, except as
provided in Subd. 2, and except where retirement at an earlier age is necessary as a bona fide
occupational qualification. This section does not apply to veterans (Minn. Stat. §197.46).
(Ordinance No. 91-06, adopted July 23, 1991)
Subd. 2. Retention After Age 70. If the administrator finds that the interests of the
city will best be served by allowing a person to remain in the employ of the city after reaching
seventy (70) years of age because the employee's services are especially needed or a suitable
replacement would be especially difficult to find, the administrator may recommend to the
council no later than sixty (60) days before the employee's retirement date that the employee be
retained after the employee's seventieth (70th) birthday. Unless the council disapproves such
retention within three (3) weeks after receipt of the recommendation of the administrator, the
administrator may continue the employment of such person for one (1) year. Any such
employee may be retained for successive one-year periods until reaching the age of seventyfive
(75) upon the annual recommendation of the administrator and approval of the council.
Subd. 3. Retirement Pay. Retiring employees who leave the city service in good
standing shall receive pay for unused accrued compensatory time (Section 206.06), vacation
(Section 206.09), and sick leave (Section 206.10).
206.29 Personnel Ordinance Distribution to Employees. Current employees shall
receive a copy of the personnel ordinance within a week of publication and new employees shall
be given a copy upon being made an offer of employment.
All amendments shall be distributed to employees upon publication. Notice shall be given to all
employees of intent to amend the personnel ordinance including date of council meeting at
which the amendment will be considered. The employee(s) may be heard by council but
attendance is on the employee's own time.
206.30 Harassment.
Subd. 1. Policy and Purpose.
(1) This section is intended to provide each employee as well as private citizens
seeking city services or having business with the city the protection necessary to
work and function in a productive environment, free of harassment as defined in
this section. Harassment is a form of employee misconduct which seriously
Rockford City Code
200-28
undermines the integrity of the employee relationships and relationships between
members of the public and the city.
(2) It is the policy of the city to maintain a work environment free from harassment.
Harassment on the part of any employee toward a co-worker, subordinate,
supervisor or private person will neither be condoned nor tolerated. All
employees are responsible to uphold the highest standards of conduct, honesty
and integrity to assure proper performance of city business and to maintain
public trust. It is essential to this policy to ensure that harassment does not occur
and that city employees are sensitive to the adverse effects of harassment.
(Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
Subd. 2. Harassment Defined. Harassment includes, but is not limited to slurs,
jokes, other verbal, graphic or physical conduct relating to an individual's race, color, sex,
religion, national origin, handicap, age, sexual preference, any unwelcome sexual advances,
requests for sexual favors and other verbal, graphic or physical conduct of a discriminatory
nature. (Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
Subd. 3. Reporting Harassment. Any employee who believes he/she or another
employee or a member of the public is the victim or subject of harassment by a city employee is
strongly encouraged to report the harassment to his/her supervisor or, if such supervisor is
alleged to be a perpetrator of harassment, to that supervisor's superior. For purposes of this
paragraph the mayor shall be deemed the superior of the city administrator. (Ordinance No.
89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
Subd. 4. Content of Report. The person reporting harassment, to the extent
possible, shall provide the following information:
(1) Specific facts about any incident;
(2) Dates of incidents;
(3) Identity of the perpetrator;
(4) Identity of witnesses;
(5) Recommendation as to remedial measures. (Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted June
12, 1989)
Subd. 5. Investigations. Upon receipt of a report of harassment, the person who
received the report shall conduct, or cause to be conducted, a thorough investigation of the
allegations. (Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
Subd. 6. Discipline. Any employee found to have committed harassment shall be
disciplined in accordance with Section 206 27. (Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
Subd. 7. Retaliatory Action. No employee shall take any retaliatory action against
any person because such person reported harassment, was a witness in an investigation of
harassment or participated in any way in an investigation of harassment. It shall not be a
retaliatory action to discipline an employee who makes a false report of harassment if it is
shown:
Rockford City Code
200-29
(1) There was absolutely no basis in fact for the report; and
(2) The report was made for the purpose of harassing, vexing, mollifying, vilifying,
embarrassing, or intimidating the alleged perpetrator of harassment. (Ordinance
No. 89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
Subd. 8. Confidentiality. All reports, investigations, results of investigations,
identities of parties and witnesses, and disciplinary action taken as a result of harassment shall
be kept as confidential as possible consistent with federal and state privacy laws and
regulations. (Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
Subd. 9. Criminal Investigation. If an investigation of harassment reveals possible
criminal activity, the investigator shall immediately report such activity to the chief of police or
the city attorney who shall determine if further investigation or prosecution shall be taken.
(Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
Subd. 10. Supervisor's Responsibilities. All supervisory personnel shall take
affirmative steps to prevent harassment including, but not limited to, discussing this ordinance
with their subordinates in general meetings, at the time employee evaluations are made,
informing all subordinates of their rights and obligations under this ordinance, and taking
measures to sensitize subordinates as to what constitutes harassment and its impact individuals
and the work environment. (Ordinance No. 89-6, adopted June 12, 1989)
(Personnel Chapter amended by ordinance 87-17, passed November 24, 1987.)
(Entire Personnel Chapter amended by Ordinance 89-15, passed November 28, 1989, by
changing “Permanent Part-time Employee” to read “Regular Part-time Employee” throughout.)
(Entire Personnel Chapter Amended by Ordinance 91-06, passed July 23, 1991, by changing
“Permanent Employee” to “Regular Employee”; changing “Probationary Employee” to
“Orientation Employee”; and “Probationary Period” to “Orientation Period” throughout.)
Rockford City Code
200-30
207. Fire Department
207.01 Establishment. For the proper protection of the lives and property of the
city, there is hereby organized a volunteer fire department to .be known as the Rockford Fire
Department.
207.02 Complement. The department shall consist of not less than twenty
firefighters and not more than a number equal to ten percent (10%) of the area served by the
fire department.
207.03 Officers. The officers of the department shall be a chief and an assistant
chief. The chief and assistant chief shall be elected annually at the first meeting held in
December, subject to confirmation by the council.
207.04 Chief's Duties.
Subd. 1. Supervision. The chief or In his absence the assistant chief shall have
supervision over all the apparatus and other equipment, examine the same as often as
necessary and see to it that it is properly kept, cared for, and placed.
Subd. 2. Drills and Fires. The chief shall order drills and practices as often as is
advisable and see to it that all members of the department understand their work. He shall have
full power and absolute control at all fires.
Subd. 3. Reports. The chief shall in January of each year make a report to the
council of the calls answered by the department, within and without the city limits, stating the
approximate loss or damage of each, type, location, response time and number of personnel
responding.
Subd. 4. Inspections of Buildings and Premises. (Ordinance No. 05-12, adopted
October 11, 2005)
(1) The chief of the fire department, or any subordinate designated by him/her, may,
at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premises within his/her jurisdiction
for the purpose of making any inspection, or investigation which, under the
provisions to the state fire code, he/she or they may deem necessary to be
made. Private dwellings shall not be entered without the consent or permission of
an adult occupant.
(2) It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to inspect, or cause to be
inspected by the fire department officers or members, all buildings and premises,
except the interior of private dwellings, as often as may be necessary for the
purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to
cause fire or any violations of the provisions or intent of the state fire code and of
any other ordinance affecting the fire hazards, and to insure compliance in all
places of assembly with all laws, regulations and orders dealing with
overcrowding, use of decorative materials, maintenance of exit ways, and
maintenance of fire alarm and fire detecting systems, and fire extinguishing
systems and appliances.
Rockford City Code
200-31
(3) The chief of the fire department or an inspector thereof, upon the complaint of
any person or whenever he/she or they shall deem it necessary, shall inspect
any building and premises within their jurisdiction.
207.05 Members. As vacancies occur or as it may be deemed necessary, new
members may be accepted into the department, subject to approval of the council. No new
member shall be accepted into the department who is under the age of 18 or over the age of 45.
Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to prohibit a member who is 45 years of age or more
from continuing as a member of the department if such person became a member prior to
attaining the age of 45. (Ordinance 90-10, adopted June 26, 1990.)
207.06 Meetings. The department shall meet at least once a month.
207.07 Equipment. All equipment and apparatus acquired by the department,
either by purchase or contribution, shall become and remain the property of the city.
207.08 Outside Service. The department is hereby authorized to answer fire
calls outside of the city limits and when so doing shall be considered as on duty as firefighters of
the city.
207.09 Relief Association. The members of the department may form and
organize a Volunteer Firefighters Relief Association, pursuant to state law.
207.10 Firefighter Banquets. The council may authorize and pay for up to two
banquets per year for the members of the fire department and one guest for each member.
(Ordinance No. 84-1, adopted April 24, 1984)
207.11 Establish fees. This ordinance is adopted for the purposed of authorizing
the City of Rockford to charge for fire service as authorized by Minnesota Statutes.{{366.011,
366.012, and 415.01.
Subd. 1. Definitions
A. “Fire service” means any deployment of fire fighting personnel and/or equipment
to extinguish a fire or perform any preventative measure in an effort to protect
equipment, life, or property in an area threatened by fire. It also includes the
deployment of fire fighting personnel and/or equipment to provide fire
suppression, rescue, extrication, and any other services related to fire and
rescue as may occasionally occur.
B. “Fire service charge” means the charge imposed by the City for receiving fire
service.
C. “Motor vehicle” means any self-propelled vehicle designed and originally
manufactured to operate primarily upon public roads and highways, and not
operate exclusively upon railroad tracks. It includes semi trailers. It does not
include snowmobiles, manufactured homes, all terrain vehicles, or park trailers.
D. “Fire protection contract” means a contract between the City and a town or other
city for the City to provide fire service.
Rockford City Code
200-32
E. “Mutual aid agreement” means an agreement between the City and a town or
other city for the City’s fire department to provide assistance to the fire
department of a town or other city. (Ordinance 10-05, adopted November 23,
2010)
Subd. 2. Parties who may be charged for fire services.
A. Owner(s) of property which receives fire services.
B. Anyone who received fire services as a result of a motor vehicle accident or fire.
C. Owners of property in towns or cities to which the City provides fire service
pursuant to a fire protection contract.
Subd. 3: Fee Schedule. The following fee schedule shall apply to fire services
provided to a person, an entity, and to property of all types:
Ladder 11 $300/hour
Engine 11 $200/hour
Tanker 11 $100/hour
Tanker 12 $100/hour
Grass 11 $ 75/hour
6-wheeler $ 50/hour
Rescue 11 $100/hour
Utility 11 $ 75/hour
Responders $ 10/hour
Subd. 4. Billing and Collection:
A. Parties requesting and receiving fire services may be billed directly by the City.
Additionally, if the party receiving fire services did not request services but a fire
or other situation exists which, at the discretion of the fire department personnel
in charge requires fire service, the party will be charged and billed. All parties will
be billed whether or not the fire service is covered by insurance. Any billable
amount of the fire charges not covered by a party’s insurance remains a debt of
the party receiving the fire service, the owner of the property to which services
were provided, or both. All billings under this subdivision shall be based upon
the fee schedule set out in Subdivision 3 above.
B. Parties billed for fire service shall have 30 days to pay. If the fire service is not
paid by that time, it will be considered delinquent and the City will send a notice
of delinquency.
C. If the fire service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after this notice of
delinquency is sent, the City will use all practical and reasonable legal means to
collect the fire service charge. The party receiving fire service shall be liable for
all collection costs incurred by the City including, but not limited to, reasonable
attorney fees and court costs.
D. If the fire service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after the notice of
delinquency is sent, the City Council may also, on or before October 15 of each
Rockford City Code
200-33
year, certify the unpaid fire service charge to the county auditor in which the
recipient of the services own real property for collection with property taxes. The
county auditor is responsible for remitting to the city all charges collected on
behalf of the city. The City must give the property owner notice of its intent to
certify the unpaid fire service charge by September 15 of the year prior to which
the service charge will appear on the property tax statement. (Ordinance 10-05,
adopted November 23, 2010)
Subd. 5: Mutual Aid Agreement. When the City fire department provides fire
service to another fire department pursuant to a Mutual Aid Agreement, the billing will be
determined by the Mutual Aid Agreement. (Ordinance 10-05, adopted November 23,
2010)
Subd. 6: Application Of Collections To Budget. All collected fire charges will be
credited to the Fire Department budget, and shall be used to reduce the total amount of
funds needed to operate the fire department prior to the determination of how much
each entity that contracts with the City for fire service (including the City itself) is required
to pay. (Ordinance 10-05, adopted November 23, 2010)
Subd. 7: Enforcement. The Rockford Fire Chief, or his authorized representative,
or the City may use discretion in enforcing this ordinance, taking into account any unique
circumstances that may exist in a particular case. (Ordinance 10-05, adopted November 23,
2010)
207.12 False Alarms.
Subd. 1. Purpose. The City finds that the occurrence of false alarms is a threat to
the public health and safety by causing the unnecessary mobilization of emergency personnel
and their diversion from other locations or activities in which assistance may be needed. Many
false alarms are caused by equipment which is inadequately maintained or by inadvertent
activation of a system by a person legitimately on the premises. The City also recognizes that
persons suspecting the existence of an emergency should seek assistance immediately. In
order to balance these goals, the City seeks to allow a limited number of false alarms but to
seek reimbursement for excessive false alarms in order to encourage proper maintenance of
alarm system and security practices. (Ordinance 10-05, adopted November 23, 2010)
Subd. 2. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, certain words or terms are
defined as follows:
A. “Alarm system” means any equipment or device, designed or intended to signal
the presence of an emergency such as a fire, unauthorized intrusion, crime in
progress or medical emergency.
B. “Alarm use” means the individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind occupying the premises where an alarm
system is maintained. If the occupant cannot be readily determined, the term
"alarm user" means the owner of the Premises as determined by the real estate
records of the County.
Rockford City Code
200-34
C. “False Alarm” means the activation of an alarm system when a condition
requiring emergency fire, police or ambulance responses does not in fact exist
and which is caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or
maintenance, animal movement, insect infestation or the actions of a person or
persons legitimately on the premises. Activations caused by utility mishaps,
weather or climatic conditions, act of God or other circumstances beyond the
control of the alarm user shall not constitute false alarms. (Ordinance 10-05,
adopted November 23, 2010)
Subd. 3. False Alarm Fee Established. An alarm user who incurs more than two
(2) false alarms at one address in any calendar year shall be required to pay a false alarm fee to
the City Clerk for the third and each succeeding false alarm. The fee shall be established by the
City Council by resolution. The responding fire or police department shall file a written report of
each false alarm with the City Clerk. Upon receipt of a report of false alarm at a particular
address, the City Clerk shall notify the alarm user of the provisions of this chapter and any fees
due. The alarm user shall have ten days after receipt of the notice to pay the fee required by this
chapter. (Ordinance 10-05, adopted November 23, 2010)
Subd. 4. Assessment. On or before September 1 of each year, the City Clerk shall
list the total of unpaid false alarms against each lot or property to which they are attributable
under this chapter. After notice and hearing, the City Council may charge the unpaid fees
against the properties as special assessments for certification to the county auditor for collection
along with current taxes the following year. (Ordinance 10-05, adopted November 23, 2010)
Subd. 5. Penalties. An alarm user who neglects or fails to pay the false alarm fee
established under the authority of this chapter within the prescribed time period shall disconnect
and cease using the alarm system immediately until such fee is paid. Violation of this chapter is
a misdemeanor. (Ordinance 10-05, adopted November 23, 2010)
Rockford City Code
200-35
208. Parks and Recreation Commission
208.01 Establishment. There is hereby created the Rockford Parks and
Recreation Commission.
208.02 Scope and Purpose. The scope of the activity of this commission shall
consist of advising the council and other city advisory commissions regarding matters relevant
to the parks and recreation functions of the city. The general purpose of this commission is to
monitor and reflect the attitudes and concerns of the citizens of the city relative to the parks
system and recreational programs, and to advise the council of citizen attitudes and policy
matters relevant to the parks and recreation functions in the city.
208.03 Duties and Responsibilities. The responsibilities of the commission shall
be to:
(1) Develop and recommend to the council, and upon their adoption, monitor the
execution of a comprehensive plan and park classification system for the parks
and recreation functions in the city and from time to time, make
recommendations for any changes it deems necessary.
(2) Annually report to the council regarding achievements toward fulfillment of such
comprehensive plan and recommended amendments.
(3) Frequently visit city parks and keep informed of current recreation programs in
order to continually review and evaluate the parks system development and
recreation programming.
(4) Develop and recommend methods to stimulate positive public interest in parks
and recreation functions.
(5) Develop and recommend feasible methods of discouraging vandalism and
destruction of park facilities.
(6) Develop and recommend feasible methods of financing recommended park
improvements.
(7) Serve as a forum for the citizens of the city to voice their opinions regarding
parks and recreation activities and functions.
(8) Promote coordination with the school district serving the city, encouraging the
interchangeable use of city and school district facilities and programs to the best
interest of citizens.
(9) Encourage dissemination of information to and coordination with city
organizations interested in the park and recreation functions such as garden
clubs, athletic groups, civic organizations and the like.
(10) Encourage coordination with the other communities and agencies to the extent
appropriate in matters pertinent to the parks and recreation functions.
Rockford City Code
200-36
(11) Develop and transmit recommended capital improvements annually to the
council for inclusion in the capital improvements program.
(12) Review and make recommendations to the council on development proposals
consistent with adopted policies, ordinances, regulations and the comprehensive
plan.
(13) Review and recommend items to be included in the parks and recreation annual
budget.
208.04 Members and Terms. The commission shall consist of five (5) members.
Members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor upon the majority consent of the
council for staggered terms of three years, except that any person appointed to a term for which
his predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of such terms. Upon
expiration of his term of office, the member shall continue to serve until his successor is
appointed. (Ordinance 87-3, adopted March 9, 1987.)
208.05 Qualifications of Membership. Members of the commission shall be
residents of the city while serving on the commission and shall represent as broad a range as
possible of interests in the parks and recreation functions.
208.06 Chair. The chair shall be appointed annually by the mayor with majority
consent of the council. The chair may be removed by the mayor with the majority consent of the
council. The chair shall assure fulfillment of the following responsibilities in addition to those
otherwise described:
(1) Preside over meetings of the commission.
(2) Appear or appoint a representative to appear as necessary before other city
advisory commissions and the council to present the viewpoint of the commission
on matters pertaining to parks and recreation functions as they relate to business
under consideration by said commissions or council.
(3) Review all council, planning commission, and other advisory commission minutes
and inform the parks and recreation commission of matters therein relevant to
the parks and recreation functions.
(4) Provide the liaison with other governmental and volunteer units in matters
relating to the parks and recreation functions for the purpose of obtaining and
providing timely information. The vice chair shall be appointed annually by the
chair. The vice chair shall perform such duties as may be assigned by the chair
and shall assume the responsibilities of the chair in absence of the chair.
208.08 Resignations, Removals, and Vacancies. Commissioners may resign
voluntarily or may be removed from office by the mayor with the consent of the majority vote of
the council. Three of five unexcused absences from duly called commission meetings shall
constitute automatic resignation from office. Vacancy in the commission shall be filled by
mayoral appointment with the majority consent of the council. Each member shall before
entering upon the disposition of his duties, take an oath that he will faithfully perform the duties
of his office.
Rockford City Code
200-37
208.09 Compensation. Commissioners shall be paid the third week in December
in an amount as established by City Council resolution annually. (Ordinance No. 02-12,
adopted August 27,2002)
208.10 Rules and Procedures. The commission shall adopt such rules and
procedures not inconsistent with these provisions as may be necessary for the proper execution
and conduct of business.
208.11 Meetings. The commission shall hold one regular every other month at
city hall, unless otherwise specified, the meeting time and day to be established by the
commission at its first meeting of the calendar year for each year. Official minutes of each
meeting shall be kept by the designated member and filed in the office of the clerk-treasurer one
week after the meeting. (Ordinance #11-10, adopted December 13, 2011)
208.12 Staff. The administrator/planner shall serve as staff liaison to the
commission. The staff shall perform such ministerial duties on behalf of the commission as may
be assigned.
208.13 Ex-officio Members. The mayor shall appoint a councilmember to serve
as an ex-officio member to the commission, privileged to speak on any matter, without a vote,
who shall provide a liaison between the commission and the council.
208.14 Quorum. A majority of the entire commission shall be a quorum to
transact business, and less than a quorum may recess a meeting to a future date. In the event
of vacancies, the “entire commission” shall be temporarily reduced to include only those
members legally entitled to participate, and the quorum shall be a majority of the temporarily
reduced “entire commission”. (Ordinance No. 96-06, adopted August 19, 1996)
Rockford City Code
200-38
209 Escrow Deposits
209.01 Intent. Certain licensed and permitted activities carried on in the city
require the assistance of the city engineer, city attorney, city planner, or other city personnel.
As these activities primarily benefit private persons rather than the city as a whole, it is
appropriate that the cost of these services be borne by those benefiting thereby. Sections
209.01-209.06 are intended to provide a method whereby this end will be furthered.
209.02 Escrow Deposit Required. Applications for subdivision approval,
rezoning, conditional use permits, planned unit developments, zoning variances, sewer
connection permits, liquor licenses, building permits, annexation petitions, and other municipal
considerations may require a cash deposit which shall be placed in an applicant's escrow
account in an amount sufficient to pay all engineering, legal, and planning fees incurred by the
city, and such other costs as may be made the applicant's responsibility, in connection with the
application/ petition and the supervision, inspection and investigation of the permitted activity.
The deposit shall be held in the account and shall be credited to the applicant making the
deposit. All engineering, legal, and planning fees, and such other costs as may be made the
applicant's responsibility, incurred in connection with an application shall be charged to the
applicant's escrow account and credited to the city. (Ordinance No. 95-14, adopted September
26, 1995)
209.03 Fee Schedule. The Council shall establish fees for services rendered by
the city attorney, city engineer, city planner, and other city personnel. The fee schedule shall be
provided to all persons making applications listed in 209.02 upon request.
209.04 Individual Fees. Based on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to 209.03,
the clerk-treasurer shall determine the amount of the escrow deposit required after consultation
with the city attorney, city engineer, city planner, and other city personnel whose services may
be required. All time, services, and materials to be billed to an escrow account shall be
itemized.
209.05 Enforcement.
Subd. 1. Application. The application listed in 209.02 shall not be accepted or
processed by the city unless accompanied by an escrow deposit as provided in this chapter.
Subd. 2. Deficits. If at any time it appears that a deficit will occur in any escrow
account, the clerk-treasurer may then require an additional deposit in the escrow account
sufficient to cover the additional expenses. Failure to make such additional deposits, or to pay
to the city money owed for legal, engineering or other services for which the applicant is by
ordinance made responsible in connection with an application in 209.02 shall be grounds for
denial or revocation of the permit or license, or cessation of work on a particular project. Such
permit or license shall be revoked only after a hearing preceded by ten days written notice.
209.06 Refund. Any money remaining in an applicant's escrow account after
payment of all required engineering, legal, and other fees shall be returned to the applicant.
Rockford City Code
200-39
210. Civil Defense
210.01 General.
Subd. 1. Policy. Because of the existing and increasing possibility of the
occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting from enemy attack,
sabotage, or other hostile action, or from fire, flood, earthquake or other natural causes, and in
order to insure that preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with such disasters, and
generally, to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health, and
safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and
declared to be necessary:
(1) To establish a local organization for civil defense;
(2) To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during civil defense
emergencies;
(3) To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other political
subdivisions of this state and of other states with respect to the carrying out of
civil functions.
Subd. 2. Purpose. It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the
policy of the city that all civil defense functions of this city be coordinated to the maximum extent
practicable with the comparable functions of the Federal government, of this state and of the
states and localities, and of private agencies of every type, to the end that most effective
preparations and use may be made of the nation’s manpower, resources, and facilities for
dealing with any disaster that may occur.
210.02 Definitions.
Subd. 1. Civil Defense. “Civil defense” means the preparation for and the carrying
out of all emergency functions, other than functions for 'which military forces are primarily
responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused
by enemy attack, sabotage, or natural causes. These functions include, without limitation,
firefighting services, police services, medical health services, rescue, engineering, air-raid
warning services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense,
evacuation of persons froze stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency
transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration
of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other
activities necessary or incidental to preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions.
Subd. 2. Civil Defense Emergency. “Civil defense emergency” means an
emergency declared by the governor under Minnesota Statutes, Section 12.31, or an
emergency proclaimed by the mayor under 210.06.
Subd. 3. Civil Defense Forces. “Civil defense forces” means any personnel
employed by the city and any other volunteer or paid member of the local civil defense agency
engaged in carrying on civil defense functions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
or any rule or order thereunder.
Rockford City Code
200-40
210.03 Civil Defense Agency.
Subd. 1. Created. There is hereby created with the city government a civil defense
agency, which shall be under the supervision and control of a director of civil defense,
hereinafter called the director. The director shall be appointed by the mayor for an indefinite
term and may be removed by him at any time. The director shall serve without salary but shall
be paid for his necessary expenses. The director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration and operation of the civil defense agency, subject to the direction
and control of the mayor. The civil defense agency shall be organized into such divisions and
bureaus, consistent with state and local civil defense plans, as the director deems necessary to
provide for the efficient performance of local civil defense functions during a civil defense
emergency. The civil defense agency shall perform civil defense functions within the city and in
addition shall conduct such functions, outside the city as may be required pursuant to the
provisions of the Minnesota Civil Defense Act of 1951 as amended or this chapter.
Subd. 2. Advisory Committee. There is hereby created within the civil defense
agency a civil defense advisory committee, hereinafter called the “committee”. Members of the
committee shall be appointed by the mayor to represent city departments and other groups
concerned with civil defense. The mayor shall be chairman and the director shall be the
secretary of the committee. The committee shall advise the director and the council on all
matters pertaining to civil defense. Each member shall serve without compensation and shall
hold office at the pleasure of the mayor.
210.04 Powers and Duties of Director.
Subd. 1. Intergovernmental Relations. The director, with the consent of the mayor,
shall represent the city on any regional or state organization for civil defense. He shall develop
proposed mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions within or outside the state
for reciprocal civil defense aid and assistance in a civil defense emergency too great to be
dealt with unassisted and he shall present such agreements to the council for its action.
Such arrangements shall be consistent with the state civil defense plan and during a civil
defense emergency, it shall be the duty of the civil defense agency and civil defense forces to
render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid arrangements. Any
mutual aid arrangement with a political subdivision of another state shall be subject to the
approval of the governor.
Subd. 2. Research. The director shall make such studies and surveys of the
manpower industries, resources and facilities of the city as he deems necessary to determine
their adequacy for civil defense and to plan for their most efficient use in time of civil defense
emergency.
Subd. 3. Planning. The director shall prepare a comprehensive general plan for
the civil defense of the city and shall present such plan to the council for its approval. When the
council has approved the plan by resolution, it shall be the duty of all municipal agencies and all
civil defense forces of the city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as
approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time. The director shall
coordinate the civil defense activities of the city to the end that they shall be consistent and fully
integrated with the civil defense plan of the Federal government and the state correlated with
the civil defense plans of other political subdivisions within the state.
Rockford City Code
200-41
Subd. 4. Training. In accordance with the state and city civil defense plan, the
director shall institute such training programs and public information programs and shall take all
other preparatory steps, including the partial or full mobilization of civil defense forces in
advance of actual disaster, as may be necessary to the prompt and effective operation of the
city civil defense plan in time of a civil defense emergency. He may, from time to time, conduct
such practice air-raid alerts or other civil defense exercises as he may deem necessary.
Subd. 5. City Facilities. The director shall utilize the personnel, services,
equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to the
maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all such departments and agencies
shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and extend such services and facilities
to the local civil defense agency and to the governor upon request. The head of each
department and tine agency, in cooperation with and under the direction of the director, shall be
responsible for the planning and programming of such civil defense activities as will involve the
utilization of the facilities.
Subd. 6. Volunteers. The director shall, in cooperation with existing city
departments and agencies affected, organize, recruit and train air-raid wardens, auxiliary police,
auxiliary firemen, emergency medical personnel, and any other personnel that may be
required on a volunteer basis to carry out the civil defense plans of the city and the state. To
the extent that such emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for civil defense emergencies, they shall be assigned to such department or agency for
purposes of administration and command. The director may dismiss any civil defense volunteer
at any time and require him to surrender any equipment and identification furnished by the city.
Subd. 7. Medical Facilities. Consistent with the civil defense plan, the director
shall provide and equip emergency hospitals, casualty stations, ambulances, canteens,
evacuation centers, and other facilities, or conveyances for the care of the injured or homeless
persons.
Subd. 8. Governor's Orders. The director shall carry out all orders, rules and
regulations issued by the governor faith reference to civil defense.
Subd. 9. Authority. The director shall direct and coordinate the general operations
of all local civil defense forces during a civil defense emergency in conformity with controlling
regulations and instructions of state civil defense authorities. The heads of departments and
agencies shall be governed by his orders in respect thereto.
Subd. 10. Control Center. Consistent with the civil defense plan, the director shall
provide and equip at some suitable place in the city a control center to be used during a civil
defense emergency as headquarters for direction and coordination of civil defense forces. He
shall arrange for representation at the control center by municipal departments and agencies,
public utilities and other agencies authorized by Federal or state authority to carry on civil
defense activities during a civil defense emergency. He shall arrange for the installation at the
control center of necessary facilities for communication with and between heads of civil defense
divisions, the stations and operating units of municipal services and other agencies concerned
with civil defense and for communication with other communities and control centers, within the
surrounding area and with the Federal and state agencies concerned.
Rockford City Code
200-42
Subd. 11. Conscription. During the first 30 days of a civil defense emergency if the
legislature is in session or the governor has coupled his declaration of the emergency with a call
for a special session of the legislature, the director may, when necessary to save life or
property, require any person, except members of the Federal or state military forces and officers
of the state or any other political subdivision, to perform services, for civil defense purposes, as
he directs, and he may commandeer, for the time being, any motor vehicle, tools, appliances or
any other property, subject to the owner's right to just compensation as provided by law.
210.05 Volunteer Personnel.
Subd. 1. Eligibility and Oath. No person shall be employed or associated in any
capacity in the civil defense agency who advocates or has advocated a change by force or
violence in the constitutional form of government of the United States or this state car the
overthrow of any government in the United States by force or violence, or who has been
convicted of or is under indictment for information charging any subversive act against the
United States. Each person who is appointed to serve in the civil defense agency shall, before
entering upon his duties, take an oath in writing before a person authorized to administer oaths
in this state department of civil defense, the director, or ground observer corps supervisor. The
oath shall be substantially in the form prescribed by M.S. 12.43.
Subd. 2. Duties and Compensation. Civil defense volunteers shall be called into
service only in case of a civil defense emergency or a natural disaster for which the regular
municipal forces are inadequate or for necessary training and preparation for such
emergencies. All volunteers shall serve without compensation.
Subd. 3. Identification. Each civil defense volunteer shall be provided with suitable
insignia or other identification as may be required by the director. Such identification shall be in
a form and style approved by the Federal government. No volunteer shall exercise any
authority over the persons or property of others without his identification. No person, except an
authorized volunteer, shall use the identification of a volunteer or otherwise represent himself to
be an authorized volunteer.
Subd. 4. Weapons. No civil defense volunteer shall carry any firearm while on
duty except on written order of the chief of the police department.
Subd. 5. Personnel Policies. Chapter 206 of this code shall not apply to volunteer
civil defense workers, but shall apply to any full-time paid employees of the civil defense
agency.
210.06 Emergency Regulations.
Subd. 1. Emergency Defined. For purposes of Section 210.06, “civil defense
emergency” includes, in addition to the meaning given in 210.02, Subd. 3, disasters caused by
fire, flood, windstorm, or other natural causes.
Subd. 2. Declaration by Mayor. Whenever necessary to meet a civil defense
emergency or to prepare for such an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been
adopted by the governor or the council, the mayor may by proclamation promulgate
regulations, consistent with applicable Federal or state law or regulation, respecting:
protection against air-raids; the sounding of air-raid alarms; the conduct of persons and
the use of property during alarms; the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public
Rockford City Code
200-43
services; emergency health, fire and safety regulations, trials, drills or practice periods required
for preliminary training; and all other matters which are required to protect public safety, health,
and welfare in civil defense emergencies. No regulation governing observation of enemy
aircraft, air attack, alarms, or illumination during air attacks shall be adopted or take effect
unless approved by the state director of civil defense.
Subd. 3. Emergency Regulations. Every proclamation of emergency regulations
shall be in writing and signed by the mayor, shall be dated, shall refer to the particular civil
defense emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the clerktreasurer,
where a copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business
hours. Notice of the existence of such regulation and its availability for inspection at the clerktreasurer's
office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the city hall or other headquarters
of the city and at such other places in the affected area as the mayor shall designate in the
proclamation. By like proclamation the mayor shall modify or rescind any such regulation.
Subd. 4. Review and Expiration. The council may rescind any such regulation by
resolution at any time. If not sooner rescinded, every such regulation shall expire at the end of
30 days after its effective date or at the end of the civil defense emergency to which it relates,
whichever occurs first. Any ordinance, rule or regulation inconsistent with an emergency
regulation promulgated by the mayor shall be suspended during the period of time and to the
extent that such conflict exists.
Subd. 5. Emergency Contracts. During a civil defense emergency the city is,
notwithstanding any statutory or charter provision to the contrary, empowered, through its
governing body acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter into contracts
and incur obligations necessary to combat such disaster by protecting the health and safety of
persons and property, and providing emergency assistance to the victims of such disaster. The
city may exercise such powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without compliance
with time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the
performance of public work, entering into contracts, incurring of obligations, employment of
temporary workers, rental of equipment, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax
levies, and the appropriation and expenditures of public funds including, but not limited to,
publication of ordinances and resolutions, publication of calls for bids, provisions of civil service
laws and rules, provisions relating to tow bids, and requirements for budgets.
210.07 Financial Provisions.
Subd. 1. Accounting. There is hereby established an account in the city general
fund to be known as the civil defense fund. Into this fund shall be placed the proceeds of taxes
levied for civil defense, money transferred from other funds, gifts and other revenues of the civil
defense agency. From it shall be made expenditures for the operation and maintenance of the
civil defense agency and other expenditures for civil defense. Regular accounting,
disbursement, purchasing, budgeting and other financial procedures of the city shall apply to the
civil defense fund insofar as practicable; but budgeting requirements and other financial
procedures shall not apply to expenditures from the fund in any case when their application will
prevent compliance with the terms and conditions of any Federal or state grant of money or
property for civil defense purposes.
Subd. 2. Reporting. The director shall, as soon as possible after the end of each
fiscal year, prepare and present to the council for the information of the council and the public, a
comprehensive report of the activities of the civil defense agency during the year.
Rockford City Code
200-44
210.08 Intergovernmental Cooperation.
Subd. 1. State and Federal Relations. Every officer and agency of the city shall
cooperate with Federal and state authorities and with authorized agencies engaged in civil
defense and emergency measures to the fullest extent possible consistent with the performance
of their other duties. The provisions of this chapter and of all regulations made thereunder shall
be subject to all applicable and controlling provisions of Federal and state laws and of
regulations and orders issued thereunder and shall be deemed to be suspended and
inoperative so far as there is any conflict therewith.
Subd. 2. Special Police. The council may appoint any qualified person holding a
position in any agency created under Federal or state authority for civil defense purposes as a
special policeman of the city, with such police duties and powers within the city incident to the
functions of his position, not exceeding those of a regular policeman of the city, as may be
prescribed in the appointment. Every such policeman shall be subject to the supervision and
control of the chief of police and such other police officers of the city as the chief may designate.
210.09 Prohibited Illumination. Any illumination within the city contrary to the
provisions of this or any other chapter pertaining to civil defense or of any regulation adopted
thereunder or of any Federal or state law, regulation, or order shall be deemed a public
nuisance. Any regular or auxiliary policeman or air-raid warden may abate such nuisance
summarily or may take any other action necessary to enforce such provisions, including entry
on private property and the use of whatever reasonable force is necessary.
210.10 Political or Labor Activity. The civil defense agency shall not participate in
any form of political activity nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes,
nor shall it be employed in a legitimate labor dispute.
Rockford City Code
200-45
211. Unclaimed Property
211.01 Unclaimed Property defined. “Unclaimed property” means any money or
personal property, except animals and motor vehicles, lawfully coming into the possession of
the city and remaining unclaimed by the owner.
211.02 Procedure.
Subd. 1. General. The designated law enforcement agency shall make a
reasonable and diligent effort to find the owner of any unclaimed property and restore the same
to him.
Subd. 2. Motor Vehicles. Abandoned motor vehicles shall be disposed of as
provided by Minnesota Statutes Chapter 168B.
Subd. 3. Animals. Abandoned animals shall be disposed of as provided by
Section 501.09, Subd. 4.
211.03 Found Property. A receipt shall be issued to any person who finds lost or
abandoned property or money and delivers it to the custody of the city. Such person may
indicate in writing that he wishes to assert a claim to such property or money as a finder. If the
finder so indicates, and the property or money remains unclaimed by the owner for 90 days, the
property or money shall be delivered to the finders.
211.04 Perishable or Dangerous Property. Any unclaimed property which is
perishable, or which would lose the greater part of its value by being retained for 90 days, or
which is determined by the designated law enforcement agency to be dangerous shall be
disposed of at the discretion of the designated law enforcement agency in the manner deemed
appropriate by it.
211.05 Money. Any money which is not claimed by the owner within 90 days or
by a finder pursuant to 211.03, or which was seized from illegal gambling, shall be deposited in
the city's general fund.
211.06 Property Seized as Evidence. Any property seized as evidence shall,
when no longer needed as evidence, property returned to the owner, unless otherwise subject
to lawful detention. Such property which is otherwise subject to lawful detention shall be
destroyed or otherwise disposed of as directed by the court.
211.07 Disposal.
Subd. 1. City Use. Any unclaimed property for which no other manner of disposal
is provided by 211.01 - 211.06 and which is not claimed by the owner within 90 days may be
appropriated to city use upon approval of such appropriation by the council.
Subd. 2. Sale. Any property described in Subdivision 1 which is not appropriated
to city use shall be sold by the designated law enforcement agency to the highest bidder at
public auction. Notice shall be published for two successive weeks of the time, place, and
manner of sale. The notice shall also describe the property to be sold.
Rockford City Code
200-46
Subd. 3. Proceeds. The proceeds from a sale of unclaimed property shall be
deposited in the city general fund. A record shall be made of the sale price of each item sold,
and the sale price shall he paid to the former owner, if claim is made within six months of the
sale and satisfactory proof of ownership is presented.
Subd. 4. Unsold Property. Any unclaimed property remaining unsold after public
auction shall be disposed of as directed by the council.
Rockford City Code
200-47
212. Service, License, and Permit Fees
212.01 Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to establish a consolidated and
uniform setting of fees for services, licenses and permits. In the event of conflict between this
general fee section and a fee established by a specific chapter, the later adopted fee shall
prevail. (Ordinance 11-01, adopted January 11, 2011)
212.02 Scope. The following shall be the fees for the licenses, services and
permits listed below:
(1) All fees charged to the escrow account, Section 209.03 shall be Administrative
City Staff - $60.00 per hour; hourly City Staff - $35.00 per hour; and all other fees
for attorney, engineer, planner and development consultant shall be the rate
currently being charged to the City.
(2) Excavation permits Section 301.02 - $100.00
(3) Sewer inspections, Section 401.04, Subd. 2 - $30.00
(4) Water permit and inspection, section 402.02 (8) -$30.00
(5) Utility meter installation fee, Section 402.03, Subd. 4 shall be set by resolution
each year $300.
(6) Discontinued water service, Section 402.08, Subd. 1 - $50.00
(7) Dog licenses, Section 501.06 - neutered or spayed $12.00 every two years, other
$18.00 every two years. This fee will be prorated for persons purchasing their
licenses after July 1st.
(8) Dog tags (in the event of loss), Section 501.07 $5.00.
(9) Fireworks license - $200, Section 611 Sale of Fireworks.
(10) Impoundment of animals, Section 501.09 - $40.00 for first impoundment within
twelve months, $50.00 for every impoundment thereafter within twelve months,
plus actual boarding fees and impoundment costs of the kennel where the animal
is kept.
(11) Kennel permit fee, Section 501.13 charged annually - $40.00
(12) Dance license, Section 601.02 - $100.00, late fee $10.00, lost application $5.00.
(13) Amusement centers and devices, Section 602.05 – one to twelve machines -
$60.00; amusement centers $200.00 plus $5.00 per machine; late fee to twelve
machines - $6.00; late fee amusement centers $20.00; lost application $5.00.
(14) Large assembly fee, Section 603.03 - $300.00.
Rockford City Code
200-48
(15) Rental Housing License, Section 612 - $25.00 per Single Family home, $ 25.00
per duplex, and $75.00 per building for buildings with more than 2 units
(16) Taxi Cab license, Section 607.06 - $50.00, plus $10.00 investigation fee per
driver.
(17) Pawn Shops, Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Goods Dealer, Section 608.05 -
License Fee - $100.00, Section 608.09, Subd. 2 - Investigation Fee - $250.00.
(18) Telecommunication Permit, Section 610.02, Subd. 4 -Permit Fee - $200.00; Lost
application - $5.00.
(19) Intoxicating Liquor licenses, Section 701.06 – On-Sale $4,200.00, late fee
$420.00; (Amended by Ordinance No. 04-02, passed February 10, 2004,) Off-
Sale $100.00, late fee $10.00; Sunday - $200.00, late fee $20.00; Temporary
$40.00, late fee $4.00; lost applications $5.00 per application. (Amended by
Ordinance No. 94-04, passed January 25, 1994.) Liquor Licenses, Section
701.05, Subd. 1 Investigation Fee - $250.00.
(20) 3.2 Malt Liquor licenses, Section 701.06 – On-Sale $180.00, late fee $18.00; Off-
Sale - $30.00, late fee $3.00; Sunday $200.00, late fee $20.00. Temporary -
$10.00, late fee $1.00. Lost applications $5.00 per application. Investigation fee
$250.00
(21) Consumption and display permits, Section 701.06 - $300.00, late fee $30.00, lost
application $5.00. Investigation fee $250.00.
(22) Wine Licensing, Section 701.06 - $180.00, late fee $18.00, lost application $5.00.
Investigation fee $250.00.
(23) Motorized golf car permit fee, Section 805.02 $10.00 per year.
(24) False Alarms - Section 906.03 - $250.00. (Added by Ordinance No. 92-07,
passed March 27, 1992)
(25) Garbage Haulers' License Fee, Section 907.06 (3), $100.00 per year, late fee
$5.00, lost application $5.00.
(26) Conditional Use Permits/Interim Permits, Section 1001.03, Subd. 5 residential
$200.00; commercial/industrial $300.00
(27) Mobile home park fees, Section 1001.15, new mobile home park - $500.00, plus
$5.00 per lot; initial setting of mobile home on lot - $50.00; re-inspection - $10.00
(28) Variance fee, Section 1001.18, Subd. 3(3) $200.00. (29) Rezoning fee, Section
1001.18, Subd. 5(1)(b) $300.00, Comprehensive Plan Amendment - $300.00.
(30) Plat application, Section 1002.04, Subd. 2(1)(e) and Subd. 3(2) - $1,000.00 or
$20.00 per acre whichever is greater, PUD Concept Plan - $300.00, Revised
Final Plat Fee - $500.00.
Rockford City Code
200-49
(31) Exception to subdivision (lot division/consolidation), Section 1002.08(4) - $500.00
(32) Land Alteration Permit Fee, Section 1007 - $200.00
(33) Site plan review by Zoning Administrator for new construction - $300.00
(34) Storage Tank Removal Permit, review by City Fire Marshall $100.00
(35) Sign Permit Fees, Section 1001.08 Subd. 3 states that sign applications shall be
accompanied by a fee the fee shall be $50.00 per permanent wall or freestanding
sign with a value up to $1,000 and an additional $20.00 per additional $1,000.00
value. A $10.00 temporary fee shall be charged for temporary/portable signs.
(36) Street Sweeping $120.00 an hour (minimum of 2 hours).
(37) Rental of Wood Chipper $75.00 an hour (minimum of 2 hours)
(38) Special Home Occupation License fee $30 Section 1001.09 Subd 14 (Ordinance
11-01, adopted January 11, 2011)
(39) Temporary Outdoor Sales Fee, Section 1001.09, Subd. 22 - $25.00
(40) Swimming Pool Fee, Section 1001.09, Subd. 8, 9 & 10
a. In Ground/Permanent Pools – value based
b. Seasonal Pools - $50.00 (Ord. 2012-04, adopted June 26, 2012)
212.03 General License Requirement. All license applications to operate a
business shall provide evidence of compliance with Minnesota Statutes 176.182. Failure to
provide such evidence shall be grounds for denial of a license and terminate the processing of
application. (Ordinance 11-01, adopted January 11, 2011)
Rockford City Code
200-50
213. Code of Ethics for Council, Board and Commission Members
213.01 Purpose. The council confirms its determination that ethical standards
among its members and members of the various city boards and commissions are essential to
the proper conduct of municipal public affairs. By eliminating conflicts of interest and providing
a guide for conduct in city matters, the council strives to promote the faith and confidence of the
citizens of the city in their government. The following standards of conduct are intended to
serve as guidelines for members of the council, boards and commissions in carrying out their
public responsibilities. This policy is in addition to any statutory requirements, attorney general
opinions or court rulings which prescribe allowable actions for council, board and commission
members. (Ordinance No 86-1, adopted February 10, 1986)
213.02 Standards of Conduct.
Subd. 1. No Special Privileges. Council members, or members of any board or
commission, shall not use their positions to secure special privileges or exemptions for
themselves or others or to intentionally jeopardize the position or employment of others.
(Ordinance No 86-1, adopted February 10, 1986)
Subd. 2. Conflict of Interest. Council members or members of a board or
commission may not participate in deliberations in any matter before the council, board or
commission which affects that member's financial interests directly or indirectly or those of a
business with which the member is associated. Whenever such conflict is recognized, the
affected members shall disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote and
disqualify themselves from any further official activity on the issue. (Ordinance No 86-1, adopted
February 10, 1986)
Subd. 3. Agent or Attorney. Council members or members of a board or
commission shall not act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the council or
any board or commission. (Ordinance No 86-1, adopted February 10, 1986)
Subd. 4. Compensation or Gratuity. Council members or members of a board or
commission shall not directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift,
reward or gratuity as an inducement to support or influence any matter or proceeding connected
with, or related to, the duties of the office. (Ordinance No 86-1, adopted February 10, 1986)
Subd. 5. Active Interest. Any councilmember or member of a board or commission
who is an officer, director, partner, agent, proprietor or employee of any firm or has a
proprietary interest of 10 percent or more in any company, business, enterprise or corporation,
partnership, labor union or association doing business with the city shall make known that
interest in writing as provided in the disclosure section of this policy. Nothing in this paragraph
shall be construed as authorizing any contract otherwise prohibited by law. (Ordinance No 86-1,
adopted February 10, 1986)
213.03 Disclosures. No later than thirty (30) days after the date of the adoption
of this policy, existing council, board and commission members shall receive a copy of this
policy and the disclosure form and return the completed form to the city clerk. Council members
elected or appointed subsequent to the date of adoption of this policy shall no later than thirty
(30) days following election or appointment to office complete the disclosure form and return it
Rockford City Code
200-51
to the city clerk. All subsequent applicants for membership on city boards and commissions
shall file a completed disclosure form together with the application form for board/commission
membership. Within thirty (30) days after the acquisition or sale of any property, each
councilmember or member of a board or commission shall file as a public record with the city
clerk, a list of all real property in the city owned by such person, that person's spouse, or child,
or in which the member has a beneficial interest, disclosing each individual item held, and by
whom. Homestead shall be excluded from the above disclosure. Each councilmember and
member of a board or commission shall disclose all positions as officer, director, partner, agent,
proprietor or employee of any firm in which such member has a proprietary interest of 10$ or
more in any company, business, enterprise, corporation, partnership, labor union or association
doing business with the city, and indicate with respect to each such relationship whether
services are gratuitous or for compensation. (Ordinance No 86-1, adopted February 10, 1986)
213.04 Disclosure Form. The disclosure information required by this policy shall
be set forth on a form which shall be made available by the city clerk. (Ordinance No 86-1,
adopted February 10, 1986)
213.05 Discipline. Upon the signed written complaint of any person questioning
adherence to this policy or on the council's own volition, the council shall refer the matter to the
city attorney for investigation and the city attorney shall report the results of his investigation to
the council within forty-five (45) days thereafter. A copy of such report shall be furnished to the
person complained against. Such person may request a hearing on this matter before the
council, which request shall be filed with the city clerk not later than ten (10) days following
receipt by such person of the city attorney's report.
Upon receipt of the city attorney's report and at the conclusion of any hearing on the matter, the
council, by majority vote, may dismiss the complaint as having no merit, may adopt a resolution
of censure, or with respect to members of advisory boards and commissions, the council may
remove a member from such board or commission. In the event the complaint is against a
member of the council, such member shall not participate in the council's deliberations or vote
with respect thereto. (Ordinance No 86-1, adopted February 10, 1986)
Rockford City Code
200-52
214. Workers Compensation
214.01 Coverage. Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 175.011, subdivision
9, clause 5, the elected officials of the city and those municipal officers appointed for a regular
term of office, members of the Planning and Zoning Commission, members of the Park and
Recreation commission, members of the Police Advisory Committee, and members of a council
appointed committee if so designated when appointed are hereby included in the coverage of
the Minnesota Workers Compensation Act. (Ordinance No. 91-05, adopted July 9, 1991)
Rockford City Code
300-1
300 Public Property and Improvements
301. Excavation of Streets
301.01. Permit Required. No person shall dig or cause any digging to be done on
any public street or alley without first securing a permit therefore as herein provided.
301.02. Procedure. Any person desiring to dig or to cause any digging to be done
on any public street or alley shall file with the administrator an application describing the
proposed project, its beginning, course, terminus and depth of such streets or alleys. If the
proposed digging project appears to comply with the ordinances of the city and the law, the
administrator shall forthwith issue a permit therefore which shall authorize the proposed digging
project to begin twenty-four hours thereafter. The applicant shall be responsible for contacting
Gopher State One Call to obtain locations of any underground utilities prior to beginning the
project. No such digging shall unlawfully interfere with any existing utility. A fee shall be charged
per Chapter 212, Subd. 2. (Ord. No. 00-02 adopted April 24, 2000)
301.03. Insurance. No permit shall be issued pursuant to this section unless the
applicant shall provide proof of liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 per person and
$1,000,000 per incident; and $1,000,000 for property damage. (Ord. No. 00-02 adopted April
24, 2000.)
Rockford City Code
300-2
302. Parks
302.01. Reservations.
Subd. 1. Riverside Park and Lions Shelter. The city park and shelter shall be
available for the use of all of the people in the area for picnics. Reservations for use of the
Lions' Shelter may be made through the clerk/treasurer or designee and shall be granted in the
order received. The grant or reservation of the Lions' Shelter shall not prohibit any other person
from using park facilities other than the shelter during the same period as the reservation period.
Subd. 2. Chuck Francis Memorial Lions Center. The Chuck Francis Memorial
Lions Center (Center) shall be available for use by members of the public only upon reservation.
Reservations for the use of the center shall be made through the clerk/treasurer or designee
and shall be granted in the order received. The grant or a reservation for the center shall not
prohibit any other person from using park facilities other than the center during the period of the
reservation.
(1) The council shall, by resolution, establish rental rates for the: Center. The council
may, by resolution, waive rent for the shelter for any charitable, civic, fraternal,
religious, scientific, public safety, literary, educational, or other similar
organizations. The city and its various departments shall not be required to pay
rent for the Center.
(2) The council shall, by resolution, establish a reasonable damage deposit for the
Center. If no deposit is established then the damage deposit shall be $100.00.
The council may, by resolution, waive damage deposit for the shelter for any
charitable, civic, fraternal, religious, scientific, public safety, literary, educational,
or other similar organizations. The city and its various departments shall not be
required to pay damage deposit for the Center. If the Center is left by the user in
a clean undamaged condition, then the deposit shall be returned; otherwise the
cost of cleaning and repairs shall be deducted from the deposit and the
remainder shall be returned to the user. If the cost of cleaning and repair
exceeds the deposit, the person or organization which reserved the center shall
pay the city the excess cost.
(3) The City may refuse to rent the Center to any person or organization that has
previously damaged the Center, refused to pay for damage or cleaning, or
violated Section 302.02 of this code.
Subd. 3. Gazebo Rental. The City Council shall by resolution establish rental rates
for the gazebo. The Council may, by resolution, waive rent for the gazebo for any charitable,
civic, fraternal, religious, scientific, public safety, literary, educational or other similar
organizations. The City and its various departments shall not be required to pay rent for the
gazebo. The Council shall also establish a reasonable damage deposit for the gazebo. (Ord.
00-01, adopted April 24, 2000)
Rockford City Code
300-3
302.02. Regulations.
Subd. 1. Overnight Use. The city park shall not be used or occupied between
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. Overnight camping or parking is prohibited. The
Center may be used until midnight of the day for which it is reserved. The council may allow the
Center to be used after midnight by permit granted upon such reasonable conditions relating to
health, safety, and welfare as the council shall determine. Violation of such conditions shall be
a misdemeanor, and shall be cause for refusal to rent to the organization or person on
subsequent occasions. (Ord. 90-12, adopted November 13, 1990)
Subd. 2. Vandalism. No person shall remove, break, destroy, injure, mutilate,
deface or damage in any way any structure, monument, statue, vase, fountain, fence, railing,
flag pole, vehicle, bench, tree, shrub, fern, plant, flower, fireplace, or other property in the park.
Subd. 3. Noise. Noises or obnoxious behavior reasonably tending to annoy other
persons within or without the park is prohibited.
Subd. 4. Motorized Vehicles Prohibited. No person unless engaged in official city
business or otherwise specifically authorized by the city administrator shall operate a motorized
vehicle in any park or open space within the city. (Ord. 85-4, adopted May 28, 1985)
Subd. 5. Park Rules. The following rules shall apply to person’s using all of the
city’s Parks. Hours are 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(1) Please keep park grounds clean.
(2) No loud music.
(3) No motorized vehicles.
(4) No overnight camping.
(5) Snowmobiles prohibited.
(6) No parking on grass or trailways.
(7) Leash and clean up after your dog.
(8) The City is not responsible for personal injury or lost, stolen or damaged items.
Subd. 6. Skate Park Rules. The following rules shall apply to person’s using the
skate park. Hours are dawn to dusk.
(1) Helmets and other protective gear recommended.
(2) Observers and others not skating are to stay off skate pad.
(3) Do not crowd ramps.
(4) No bikes or motorized vehicles.
(5) No food, beverage, or gum on skate pad.
(6) No profanity, graffiti, vandalism, or littering.
(7) No alcohol, tobacco, or illegal drug use.
Rockford City Code
300-4
(8) The City is not responsible for personal injury, or lost, stolen or damaged items.
(Ord. #03-09, adopted November 10, 2003)
Rockford City Code
300-5
303. Current Services Assessments
303.01. Definition. “Current service” means one or more of the following: weed
elimination from street grass plots adjacent to sidewalks, or from private property; repair of
sidewalks; trimming and care of trees and removal of unsound trees from the public streets; and
abatement of health or safety nuisances pursuant to Chapter 901. (Ord. #10-04, adopted June
22, 2010)
303.02. Weed Elimination. On or before June 1 of each year, the clerk-treasurer shall
publish once in the official newspaper a notice directing owners and occupants of property
within the city to destroy all weeds defined to be a nuisance by 901.02(9) and 901.02(10). In
the event that any owner or occupant shall fail to abate a weed nuisance after published notice,
the city may cause the nuisance to be abated pursuant to Chapter 901. (Ord. #10-04, adopted
June 22, 2010)
303.03. Sidewalk Repair. The repair of bituminous trailways and residential sidewalks
that are part of the trailway system will be funded 100% by the City. Sidewalks that are part of
the trailways but are adjacent to commercial properties will be assessed 50%. The sidewalks
adjacent to churches and schools will be assessed 100%. The administrator or such other
person as the council may designate, may inspect sidewalks to determine if they are in good
repair and safe for pedestrians. (Ord. #10-04, adopted June 22, 2010)
303.04. Street, Alley, and Tree Care, etc.
Subd. 1. Notice. The council shall each year determine what streets and alleys
shall be repaired and proceed according to the city assessment policy and per the regulations of
Minnesota Statues 429 which governs public improvements. The council shall also determine
from time to time the streets on which trees shall be trimmed and cared for and what unsound
trees shall be removed.
Subd. 2. Hearing. At such hearing or any adjournment thereof, the council shall
hear property owners with reference to the scope and desirability of the proposed projects. The
council shall thereupon adopt a resolution confirming the original projects with such modification
as it deems desirable, and shall provide for the doing of the work by day labor through the street
department, or by contract. The clerk-treasurer shall keep a record of the cost and the portion
of the cost properly attributable to each lot and parcel of property abutting on the street or alley
on which the work is done. (Ord. #10-04, adopted June 22, 2010)
303.05. Personal Liability. The owner of property on or adjacent to which a current
service has been performed shall be personally liable for the cost of such service. As soon as
the service is completed and cost determined, the clerk-treasurer shall prepare a bill and mail it
to the owner. Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the clerktreasurer’s
office. (Ord. #10-04, adopted June 22, 2010)
303.06. Assessment. On or before September 1 of each year, the clerk-treasurer shall
list the total unpaid charges for each type of current service against each separate lot or parcel
to which they are attributable under this chapter. After notice and hearing as provided in
Minnesota Statutes 429.061, the council may spread the charges against the property benefited
as a special assessment pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 429.101 and other pertinent statutes
Rockford City Code
300-6
for certification to the county auditor and collection along with current taxes for the following
year, or in annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the council may determine in each case.
(Ord. #10-04, adopted June 22, 2010)
Rockford City Code
300-7
304. Deferment of Special Assessments
(Ord. #94-10, adopted May 24, 1994)
304.01. Definition. Special Assessments refers only to local improvements that
the city has financed with Special Assessments. (Ord. #94-10, adopted May 24, 1994)
304.02. Deferment of Special Assessments for Senior Citizens and Disabled
Persons. M.S. 435.193-195 allows cities to defer special assessment for senior citizens and
disabled persons. (Ord. #94-10, adopted May 24, 1994)
304.03. Criteria. To be eligible for this deferment, a person must meet the
following criteria: He or she must be either at least 65 years old, or retired because of a
permanent and total disability: have an annual income from all sources not to exceed the low
income limit as established by the Department of Housing and Urban Development as used in
determining the eligibility for Section VIII housing; and the deferral applies to special
assessments levied against properties classified as “homestead” pursuant to M.S. Chapter 273.
(Ord. #94-10, adopted May 24, 1994)
304.04. Application. Application must be submitted on a form prescribed by the
county assessor supplemented by the city clerk to establish the qualification of the owner for
such deferment. The application shall be made within 30 days after the adoption of the
assessment roll by the council and shall be renewed each following year upon the filing of a
similar application not later than September 30. (Ord. #94-10, adopted May 24, 1994)
304.05. Interest. Interest shall be charged and due each year on any assessment
deferred pursuant to this Code at a rate equal to the rate charged on other assessments for the
particular public improvement project the assessment is financing. (Ord. #94-10, adopted May
24, 1994)
304.06. Exceptions. In cases where exceptional and unusual circumstances
exist, the City Council may determine that a hardship exists despite the fact that the minimum
income requirements of Section 303.03 are not met; such cases shall be decided by Council on
a case by case basis. (Ord. #94-10, adopted May 24, 1994)
304.07. Termination of Deferment. The option to defer the payment of special
assessments pursuant to this Code shall terminate and all installment amounts previously
deferred, plus applicable interest, shall become due upon the occurrence of any of the following
events:
(1) Request of property owner.
(2) Death of property owner 65 years of age or older or retired because of a
permanent and total disability.
(3) Loss of permanent and total disability status.
(4) Sale, transfer or subdivision of the property or any part thereof.
(5) The City Council determines that hardship no longer exists.
Rockford City Code
300-8
(6) The property, for any reason, loses its homestead status. (Ord. #94-10, adopted
May 24, 1994)
304.08. Administration. If the Council grants the deferment, the Clerk shall notify
the County Auditor and the County Assessor, who shall, in accordance with M.S. 444.23, record
a notice of the deferment with the Register of Deeds setting forth the amount of the assessment.
(Ord. #94-10, adopted May 24, 1994)
304.09. Filing Fee. A filing fee, as established by the Administrator, must be
submitted with the application before council will consider the deferment. (Ord. #94-10, adopted
May 24, 1994)
Rockford City Code
300-9
305. Railway Property
305.01. Damage. It is unlawful to break down or carry away any part of any fence, bars,
or gate at a crossing over any railway track, or plank used for such crossing, or to destroy or
injure any hedge, ditch, or other structure used or intended as a fence to include any railroad
tracks. It is unlawful to use a gate or bars, or opening the same for any purpose, at any railway
crossing, to permit an animal to stray upon a railway track or enclosed right of way, or to leave
such bars down, or gate open, so that animals may stray on such railway track. It is unlawful to
lead, drive, or turn upon such track any animal for grazing or other purposes. (Ord. #01-05,
adopted July 24, 2001)
305.02. Trespass. It is unlawful for a person, not an employee of a railway company,
without permission from such company, on foot or with any animal or vehicle, to enter upon any
railway bridge or trestle, or to, without a permit, ride, operate, or propel any vehicle on or along
the track of a railway. (Ord. #01-05, adopted July 24, 2001)
305.03. Obstruction. No person shall obstruct any public road or street by leaving,
placing, keeping, or causing to be left, placed, or kept any railway car upon or across the same,
or to stop or cause to be stopped any engine or train of cars across any public road or street
except for a sufficient time, not exceeding ten minutes, to couple or separate the cars. (Ord.
#01-05, adopted July 24, 2001)
Rockford City Code
400-1
400 Sewer & Water
401. Sewer System
401.01 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall
have the meaning set out below, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise.
(1) BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) - means the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biological oxidation of organic matter expressed in milligrams per
liter, as determined in accordance with standard laboratory procedure as set out
in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater.
(2) Building Drain - means that part of the tower horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning
five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
(3) Building Sewer - means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal, also called house connection.
(4) Capital Costs - means all reasonable and necessary costs and expenses
incurred by the city in planning, designing, financing, and constructing disposal
system facilities, including, but not limited to, costs and expenses for obtaining
necessary permits, licenses, approvals and grants for design and construction
costs; fees for legal and consulting services; or the acquisition of such facilities.
(5) COD (denoting Chemical Oxygen Demand) - means the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the chemical oxidation of organic matter, expressed in milligrams per
liter, as determined in accordance with standard laboratory procedure as set out
in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater.
(6) Combined Sewer - means a sewer originally designed and currently designated
to receive both surface water runoff and sewage.
(7) Commercial Users - means all users of the system classified as industrial users
in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, U.S. Office of
Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under Division A, B,
C, E, and I, but who are excluded from such definition for the purposes of this
chapter, because they discharge primarily segregated domestic wastes, or
wastes from sanitary conveniences, except that the classification shall not
include such exempted users who are otherwise classified in this chapter as
domestic users, governmental users, or institutional users.
(8) Contract Users - means all users who have a written contract with the city to use
the city sewer system or city wastewater treatment plant.
(9) Debt Service - means the principal and interest necessary to pay bonded
indebtedness.
Rockford City Code
400-2
(10) Deduct Meter – means a separate meter used for irrigation or by a manufacturer
to record water usage not disposed of through the sewer system. The readings
from the deduct meter will reduce the user’s sewer rate (Ord. 09-04, adopted
11-24-09)
(11) Domestic User - means those establishments of which its related occupations, if
any, are usually considered a domestic service and whose discharge consists
solely of sanitary wastes.
(12) Flow - means the quantity of sewage expressed in gallons or cubic feet per
twenty-four hours.
(13) Garbage - means solid wastes resulting froze the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage or
sale of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, vegetables, or condemned food.
(14) General Municipal Flow - means the total sewage flow discharged to the
treatment facilities, minus the flows from industrial users, other municipalities,
and contract users and therefore includes sanitary wastes and infiltration.
General municipal flow, based on the design of the wastewater treatment
facilities, is further defined as flows containing five day BOD concentrations not
greater than 200 mg/1 and suspended solids concentrations no greater than 225
mg/l.
(15) General Municipal User - means any user discharging sewage to the general
municipal flow other than industrial users, municipalities and other contract users.
This category of user includes as sub-categories:
A. Domestic Users
B. Commercial Users
C. Institutional Users
D. Governmental Users, which are not contract users
(16) Governmental User - includes those establishments whose function is the
administration and/or execution of governmental programs as well as the offices
of executives, legislative bodies and agencies which provide general support
services for government.
(17) Industrial User - means any non-governmental user of the wastewater treatment
facilities identified in the Federal Standard Industrial Classifications Manual,
1972, office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under
the following divisions:
A. Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing
B. Mining
C. Manufacturing
D. Transportation, Communication, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services
E. Services
Rockford City Code
400-3
A user in the divisions listed may be excluded and treated as a commercial user
if the city determines it will primarily introduce domestic wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.
The BOD and suspended solids loads from industrial users will be based on the
actual concentrations of those constituents, except that for industrial users with
sewage containing BOD and suspended solids concentrations less than the
concentrations as defined for general municipal flow, the charges shall be based
on concentrations as defined for general municipal flow.
(18) Industrial Wastes - means the solid, liquid or gaseous wastes resulting from any
industrial or manufacturing processes, trade or business, or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources.
(19) Institutional User - means those establishments engaged in activities of a noneconomic
nature, frequently being the performance of services classified as a
governmental or commercial user in this chapter.
(20) Load - means quantities of sewage characteristics such as BOD, SS and other
constituents as expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/1) or pounds per twenty-four
hours (lbs/24 hours).
(21) National Pollution Discharge Elimination System Permit (NPDES Permit) - means
the system for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the discharge of
pollutants from point sources into the navigable waters, the contiguous zone, and
the oceans by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
pursuant to Section 402 and 405 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendment 1972.
(22) Natural Outlet - means any cutlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
(23) Operation and Maintenance Costs (O & M Costs) - means the expenses related
to the costs of the operation, maintenance, replacement and administration of the
city facilities.
(24) Other Wastes - shall mean garbage, municipal refuse, decayed wood, sawdust,
shavings, bark, lime, sand, ashes, oil, tar, chemicals, offal and other substances
except sewage and industrial wastes.
(25) Person - means any individual, firm, company, associations, society, corporation,
municipal corporation, governmental unit, or group.
(26) pH - means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions
in grams per liter of solution.
(27) Process Water - means any water used in the manufacturing, preparation or
production of goods, materials or food. Process water is an industrial waste.
(28) Public Sewer - means any sever owned or operated by a unit or agency of
government.
Rockford City Code
400-4
(29) Replacement Costs - means costs related to the expenditures for obtaining and
installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary to
maintain the capacity and performance during the service life of the city facilities
for which such facilities were designed and constructed. The term “operation and
maintenance” includes replacement.
(30) Sanitary Sewer - means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm
surface and ground water are not intentionally admitted.
(31) Sanitary Wastes - means the liquid and water carried wastes discharged from
sanitary plumbing facilities.
(32) Sewage - means the liquid carried waste products from whatever source derived,
together with such ground water infiltration and surface water as may be present.
(33) Sewage or Wastewater - means the water carried waste products from
residences, public buildings, institutions, industrial establishments or other
buildings including the excrementitious or other discharge from the bodies of
human beings or animals, together with such ground water infiltration and storm
and surface water as may be present.
(34) Sewer - means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage, industrial waste or other
waste liquids.
(35) Sewer Service Charge - means the aggregate of all the charges including the
user charge, debt service charges, industrial cost recovery charges and other
sewer related charges that are billed periodically to users of the city facilities.
(36) Sewer System - means pipe lines or conduits, pumping stations, forcemains, and
all other devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, used for collecting or
conducting sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes to a point of ultimate
disposal.
(37) Sewer Truck Area Charges: These are per acre charges for all undeveloped
property, charged at the time of development. Revenue from these charges is
used to finance new trunk sewers. (Amended Ord 04-18 12-28-04)
(38) Significant Industrial User - means any industrial user who discharges sewage
which constitutes greater than 10% of the design flow or design pollutant loading
of the wastewater treatment plant.
(39) Slug - means any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four hour concentration of flows during the normal operation.
(40) SS (denoting Total Suspended Solids) - means solids that either float on the
surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering, in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
Rockford City Code
400-5
(41) Storm Sewer (sometimes termed “Storm Drain”) - means a sewer which carries
storm. and surface water and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial
wastes other than unpolluted cooling or process water.
(42) Suspended Solids - means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage, other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering, in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods of
the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
(43) Unpolluted Water - means clean water uncontaminated by industrial wastes,
other wastes, or any substance which renders such water unclean or noxious, or
impure so as to be actually or potentially harmful or detrimental or injurious to
public health, safety or welfare, to domestic, commercial, industrial or
recreational use, or to livestock, wild animals, bird, fish, or other aquatic life.
(44) User - means any person, or corporation, or other entity, whether municipal or
otherwise, discharging sewage into the city disposal system facilities.
(45) User Charge - means a charge levied on users of city facilities for the cost of
operation and maintenance of such facilities.
(46) Wastewater Facilities - means the structures, equipment and processes required
to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of
the effluent.
(47) Wastewater Treatment Works or Treatment Works - shall mean an arrangement
of devices and structures for treatment of wastewater, industrial waste, and
sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous for "waste treatment plant" or
“wastewater treatment plant” or “water pollution control plant” or “sewage
treatment plant.”
401.02 Use of Public Sewers.
Subd. 1. Treatment Required. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural
outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this chapter.
Subd. 2. Cesspools. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of sewage except by variance in accordance with Chapter 1001 of this
code.
Subd. 3. Connection Required. The owner of any building or property which is
located within the city and from which wastewater is discharged, shall be required to connect to
a public sewer at his expense within two years of the date said public sewer is operational,
provided that said public sewer is within 150 feet of the structure generating wastewater and
said public sewer is located in a public right-of-way or easement for sewer purposes adjacent to
the property. All future buildings constructed on property adjacent to the public sewer shall be
required to immediately connect to the public sewer. If sewer connections are not being made
pursuant to this subdivision, an official ninety day notice shall be served instructing the affected
Rockford City Code
400-6
property owner to make said connection. Prior to connection the property shall have been fully
assessed for sewer service or there has been paid to the city for the improvement fund a
connection charge equal to the average full assessment in the year prior to the time such
connection is made and the fee set in Section 401.08 has been paid.
Subd. 4. City Connection. In the event an owner shall fail to connect to a public
sewer in compliance with the notice given, the city may undertake to have said connection
made and shall assess the cost thereof against the benefited property and said assessment
shall be a lien against said property. Such assessment, when levied, shall bear interest at the
legal rate for local improvements and shall be certified to the auditor of the county in which the
property is located and shall be collected and remitted to the city in the same manner as
assessments for local improvements. The rights of the city under this subdivision shall be in
addition to any other remedial or enforcement provisions of this chapter.
Subd. 5. Storm and Other Water. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged directly or indirectly any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, waste from on-site disposal systems, unpolluted cooling or process water
to any sanitary sewer except as permitted by the city. Storm water and all other unpolluted
water shall be discharged to a storm sewer, except that unpolluted cooling or process water
shall only be so discharged upon approval by the city or other local unit of government.
Subd. 6. Prohibited Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged, directly or indirectly, any of the following described substances to any public sewer:
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid,
solid or gas.
(2) Any water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or
interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the wastewater
treatment works.
(3) Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel of the wastewater treatment works. (Amended Ord. 07-05, May 8,
2007)
(4) Solid or viscous substances, either whole or ground, in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with
the proper continuation of the wastewater facilities, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, disposable diapers, glass grinding or polishing wastes, stone cuttings or
polishing wastes, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and sanitary napkins, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and
other paper products.
(5) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or substances which either singly or by
interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard
to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and
repair.
Rockford City Code
400-7
(6) Prohibited wastes shall be regulated in accordance with the city's NPDES permit,
Sections 307(a) and 307(b) of the Clean Water Act and all other applicable state
and Federal regulations.
Subd. 7. Discharges Allowed by Permit Only. No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged directly or indirectly the following described substances to any public
sewer unless a permit for the same has been obtained from the city. Application may be made
upon forms provided by the city. Such a permit may be granted by the council only if, in the
opinion of the city, such discharge will not harm the wastewater facilities, nor cause obstruction
to the flow in sewers, nor otherwise endanger life, limb or public property, nor constitute a
nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city may give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of the subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, the city's NPDFS permit, and other pertinent factors. The city may make such
determinations either on a general basis or as to discharges from individual users or specific
discharges, and may prohibit certain discharges from individual users because of unusual
concentrations or combinations which may occur. The substances prohibited are:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150?? F (65?? C).
(2) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or
not, in excess of ten mg/1 or containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between 32?? and 150?? F (0?? and 65?? C).
(Amended Ord. 07-05, May 8, 2007)
(3) Any garbage that has not been ground or comminuted to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particles greater than one-half inch in any
dimension.
(4) Any water or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated
plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
(5) Any water or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing
substances which constitute a nuisance or hazard to the structures, equipment or
personnel of the sewage works, or which interfere with the treatment required to
meet the requirements of the state and Federal government and any other public
agency with proper authority to regulate the discharge from the sewage
treatment plant.
(6) Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that they are in
non-compliance with regulations issued by the appropriate authority having
control over their use or which have caused or may cause damage or hazards to
the treatment works or personnel operating it.
(7) Any water or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0. (Amended Ord. 07-05, May 8,
2007)
(8) Materials which exert or cause:
Rockford City Code
400-8
(a) Unusual concentration of suspended solids (such as, but not limited to,
Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such
as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
(b) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
(c) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater
treatment works.
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting a slug.
(e) Water or water containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or
are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment
plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of the NPDES permit or
requirements of other governmental agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge from the sewage treatment plant.
Subd. 8. City Authority. If any water or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to
be discharged, directly or indirectly to the public sewers, which water or wastes do not meet the
standards set out in or promulgated in this chapter or which in the judgment of the city may have
a deleterious effect upon the treatment works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may take any or
all of the following steps: (Amended by Ordinance No. 03-02 passed June 10, 2003)
(1) Refuse to accept the discharges, or
(2) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, or
(3) Require pretreatment to an acceptable conditions for the discharge to the public
sewers, or
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treatment wastes, or
(5) The discharge of any water from sump pumps into the City sewers will be
deemed a misdemeanor.
(6) Sump pumps must be installed and hard plumbed to the exterior of the building
on all new residential and commercial construction. Certificate of occupancy will
be issued after compliance.
The design and installation of the plant and equipment for pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows shall be subject to the review and approval of the city and subject to the requirements of
40 CRF 403, entitled, “Pretreatment Standards” and all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 93-04, passed April 13, 1993)
Subd. 9. Interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when
they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing ingredients. All
interceptors required under this subdivision shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city
Rockford City Code
400-9
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. Where preliminary
treatment, flow equalizing facilities, or interceptors are provided for any water or wastes, they
shall be effectively operated and maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective condition
by the owner at his expense, and shall be available for inspection by the city at all reasonable
times.
Subd. 10. Industrial Meters. When required by the city, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control structure,
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structures and equipment, when
required, shall be constructed at the owner's expenses in accordance with plans approved by
the city and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
Subd. 11. Measurement Standards . All measurements, tests, and analyses of the
characteristics of water and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with 40 CFR 136 (Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for
analysis of Pollutants); the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, and shall be determined at the control structure provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control structures. In the event that no special structure has been required, the
control structure shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer
from the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewerage works and
to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty-four hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is
appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always,
BOD and suspended solids analyses will be obtained from twenty-four hour composite of all
outfalls whereas pH's will be determined from periodic grab samples.)
Subd. 12. City Testing. The city may conduct such tests as are necessary to
enforce this chapter and employees of the city may enter upon any property for the purpose of
taking samples, obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations relating to such
enforcement. Entry shall be made during operating hours unless circumstances require
otherwise. In all cases where tests are conducted by the city for the purpose of checking to
determine if a previously found violation of this chapter has been corrected, the cost of such
tests shall be charged to the user and added to the user's sewer charge. In those cases
where the city determines that the nature of volume of a particular user's sewage
requires more frequent than normal testing, the city may charge such user for the test, after
giving the user ten days written notice of its intention to do so, and the cost thereof shall be
added to the user's sewer charge. In any case where industrial wastes are discharged to a
public sewer, the city may require the user at his own expense to test his discharge on a regular
basis and to report the test results to the city within a reasonable time. All such tests shall be
ordered by the city and shall be conducted by qualified personnel and in accordance with the
standards set out in Subd. 11 above.
Subd. 13. Accidental Discharges. Accidental discharges of prohibited waste in to
the sewage works, directly or through another disposal system, or to any place from which such
waste may enter the treatment works, shall be reported to the city by the persons responsible
for the discharge, or by the owner or occupant of the premises where the discharge occurred,
immediately upon obtaining knowledge of the fact of such discharge.
Rockford City Code
400-10
Subd. 14. Connections Prohibited. New connections to the sanitary sewer system
shall be prohibited unless sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities, including
capacity for flow, BOD, and suspended solids.
Subd. 15. Private Agreements. No statement contained in this section shall be
construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual or character may be accepted by the
city for treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the industrial concern, in accordance with
applicable regulations and any supplemental agreement with the city.
Subd. 16. City Inspections. The city may conduct inspections to enforce this
chapter and employees of the city may enter upon any property for the purpose to inspect the
pumping of any water into the city's sanitary sewer system. Entry shall be made during
operating hours unless circumstances require otherwise. (Added by Ordinance No. 93-04,
passed 4/13/93.)
401.03 Private Sewage Disposal.
Subd. 1. Regulations Adopted. The provision of Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080
are hereby adopted in their entirety with the following additional regulations: (Added by
Ordinance No. 97-06, passed March 31, 1997)
(1) Multiple Tanks will be required, minimum of two (2) tanks for all systems.
(2) Minimum pump tank capacity will be 1,000 gallons.
(3) Two (2) soil treatment areas must be designated by proper testing for all existing
parcel or parcels to be created or platted and before any building permits will be
issued or platting approval given.
(4) All soil treatment areas must be properly protected at the time of platting and/or
before construction begins on any parcel or adjacent parcel.
(5) Failed systems must be upgraded, replaced or repaired within a minimum of ten
(10) months, or at the discretion of the inspector.
Subd. 2. Private Systems. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not
available under the provision of Section 401.02, the building sewer shall be connected to a
private sewage disposal system complying with the regulations adopted in Subdivision 1, above.
401.04 Building Sewers and Connections.
Subd. 1. License Required. It is unlawful for any persons to engage in the work or
business of installing private sewer service lines and appurtenances for others without a license
therefore from the city.
Subd. 2. License Application. Any person desiring to engage in such work shall
make application to the city on forms to be supplied by the city together with a fee as set forth in
Chapter 212. Each application shall contain a form whereby the applicant agrees to pay the city
the actual cost of repair for any damage caused to the city sewer system by the applicant or any
Rockford City Code
400-11
of his employees or agents. All licenses issued shall be for one year only and each renewal
shall be made by application. A plumber licensed by the State Board of Health shall pay no fee
to the city, but shall show evidence of the state license before the city issues a license.
Subd. 3. License and Bond. Each applicant shall accompany his application with a
certificate of insurance showing public liability insurance coverage with limits of at least $50,000
per person; $100,000 per occurrence and $25,000 for property damage, and a license bond in
the amount of $5,000 with a company and in a form acceptable to the city. The certificate shall
specifically state that such insurance covers underground operations and shall contain a
provision that the coverage afforded under the policies will not be cancelled or materially
changed until at least fifteen days prior written notice has been given to the city. Failure to have
such insurance or bond in effect is grounds for denial or revocation of the license.
Subd. 4. Permit Required. No person, unless authorized, shall uncover, make any
connections with or openings into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof, without first obtaining the written permit from the city. Applications shall be on forms
provided by the city and shall be accompanied by a fee from time to time established by the city.
Subd. 5. Owner Indemnity. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify and
hold harmless the city from any loss or damage to public sewer that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
Subd. 6. Separate Sewers. A separate and independent building sewer shall be
provided for every building; except where two or more buildings are situated on one parcel such
that the parcel may not be subdivided; such a joint use private sewer may be extended to the
rear building or buildings and the whole considered as one joint use private sewer. Special
variances will be considered by the council.
Subd. 7. Existing Sewer Connections. Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are round, on examination and tested by the city
to meet all requirements of this chapter.
Subd. 8. Unused Cesspools. Unused septic tanks, cesspools, leaching pits and
similar devices and structures shall be backfilled or made safe and unusable in a manner
acceptable to the city.
Subd. 9. Size, Slope, Materials and Placement. The size, slope, alignment,
materials of construction of a building sewer, and the method to be used in excavating, placing
of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations. In the absence of
code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 and
applicable American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM) Standards shall apply. Whenever
possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement
floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, such building drain shall be provided with a lifting device by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
Rockford City Code
400-12
Subd. 10. Construction Regulations. The construction of the building sewer and its
connection into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing
code, the sewer specifications included herein or other applicable rules and regulations and the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the Water Pollution Control Federation
(WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9, and the American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM)
all such construction shall be made gas tight and water tight. Any deviation from the prescribed
procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation.
Any new residential or commercial construction commenced after May 10, 1994, is required to
have installed a back flow prevention valve on the building's sanitary sewer service line. (Subd.
10 amended by Ordinance 94-08, passed May 10, 1994.)
Subd. 11. City Inspection. Employees of the city shall be allowed to inspect the
work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
city when the work is ready for final inspection and no underground portions shall be covered
before the final inspection is completed. The connection shall be made under the supervision of
the city or the plumbing inspector.
Subd. 12. Barriers and Restoration. All excavations for building sewer installations
shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
401.05 Main and Lateral Sewer Construction. No sanitary or storm sewers shall
be constructed in the city (except house or building service sewers) except by the city or by
others in accordance with plans and specifications approved by a professional engineer. No
such sewers shall be considered to be a part of the public sewer system unless accepted by the
City.
401.06 Protection from Damage. No unauthorized person shall break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a
part of the public sewer.
401.07 Authority of Inspectors. Duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter at reasonable times. Those employees shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries
except as is necessary to determine the kind and source of the discharge to the public sewer.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this section, the
authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises.
401.08 User Charges. It is the purpose of this section to recover from users of
the city facilities, on an equitable basis, the share of the city facilities' costs attributable to such
users, and to provide funds for the operation and maintenance, debt service, replacement and
improvements of the city.
Subd. 1. Charges Levied. The user charges provided for in this section are hereby
levied and assessed upon each lodge, parcel of land, building or premises having any
connection with, or discharging either directly or indirectly into the sewer system.
Rockford City Code
400-13
Subd. 2. Computation and Notice. The council shall annually determine and fix the
unit costs for use of the city treatment facilities on the basis of flow, BOD, TSS, PH and any
other pollutants, taking into consideration the cost of treatment of such sewage, and may
increase or decrease such unit cost as often and in such amounts as may reasonably be
required to accomplish the purposes of this section. The council shall also determine the costs
per unit for debt service involved with system wide sanitary sewer operations. The city shall
compute the amount due the city for sewer use charges and render a statement thereof, at
periodic intervals, as directed by the council to the owner of any premises using the city
facilities. All amounts due hereunder shall be payable at the office of the clerk or other
designated locations. The clerk shall, in August of each year, provide to the council, an internal
audit report that will address specific areas of concern including: the need to generate sufficient
revenue through "user" charges to cover total 0 & M costs and debt associated with system
wide operations; the necessity of maintaining a proportionate system of user charges; the need
to review the replacement account to determine its proper level of funding; and a review of
industrial users to ensure that each pays its share for the cost of city facilities and industrial
waste treatment. (Amended by Ordinance 90-09, passed June 26, 1990; Ordinance 06-13,
passed December 12, 2006; Ordinance 08-02, passed February 26, 2008)
Subd. 3. Charges, a Lien. Each charge levied pursuant to this section shall be a
lien against the property, and all such charges due on September 30 of each year, more than
thirty days past due, and having been properly mailed to the occupant or owner of the premises,
shall be certified by the council to the county auditor, shall specify the amount thereof, the
description of the premises, the name of the owner thereof, and the amount so certified shall be
expended upon the tax rolls against such premises in the same manner as other taxes, and
collected by the county treasurer and paid to the city along with other taxes.
Subd. 4. Discontinued Service. The city may shut off sewer service when:
(1) the charge for such service, or any other financial obligation imposed on the
present or former owner or occupant of the premises served is unpaid for 60
days or two billing cycles and in default; or
(2) failure of the property owner or occupant to implement and maintain within 30
days all sanitary sewer pretreatment requirements ordered by the City’s Public
Works Director following the discharge of 1) a prohibited substance into the City’s
sanitary sewer system, or 2) prohibited levels of permitted substances such as
PH, BOD, TSS in violation of City ordinance into the City’s sanitary sewer
system. (Amended 12-12-06 Ordinance 06-13)
Subd. 5. Civil Action. Any charges levied pursuant to this section, and which have
been properly sent to the occupant or owner and not paid, may, in addition to all other remedies
available to the city, be recovered in a civil action by the city in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
Subd. 6. Prohibited Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged, directly or indirectly, any of the following described substances to any public sewer:
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid,
solid or gas.
Rockford City Code
400-14
(2) Any water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or
interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the wastewater
treatment works.
(3) Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 5 . 5 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel of the wastewater treatment works.
(4) Solid or viscous substances, either whole or ground, in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with
the proper continuation of the wastewater facilities, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, disposable diapers, glass grinding or polishing wastes, stone cuttings or
polishing wastes, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and sanitary napkins, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and
other paper products.
(5) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or substances which either singly or by
interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard
to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and
repair.
(6) Prohibited wastes shall be regulated in accordance with the city's NPDES permit,
Sections 307(a) and 307(b) of the Clean Water Act and all other applicable state
and Federal regulations.
Subd. 7. Discharges Allowed by Permit Only. No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged directly or indirectly the following described substances to any public
sewer unless a permit for the same has been obtained from the city. Application may be made
upon forms provided by the city. Such a permit may be granted by the council only if, in the
opinion of the city, such discharge will not harm the wastewater facilities, nor cause obstruction
to the flow in sewers, nor otherwise endanger life, limb or public property, nor constitute a
nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city may give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of the subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, the city's NPDFS permit, and other pertinent factors. The city may make such
determinations either on a general basis or as to discharges from individual users or specific
discharges, and may prohibit certain discharges from individual users because of unusual
concentrations or combinations which may occur. The substances prohibited are:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150?? F (65?? C).
(2) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or
not, in excess of twenty mg/1 or containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between 32?? and 150?? F (0?? and 65?? C).
(3) Any garbage that has not been ground or comminuted to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions normally
Rockford City Code
400-15
prevailing in public sewers, with no particles greater than one-half inch in any
dimension.
(4) Any water or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated
plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
(5) Any water or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing
substances which constitute a nuisance or hazard to the structures, equipment or
personnel of the sewage works, or which interfere with the treatment required to
meet the requirements of the state and Federal government and any other public
agency with proper authority to regulate the discharge from the sewage
treatment plant.
(6) Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that they are in
non-compliance with regulations issued by the appropriate authority having
control over their use or which have caused or may cause damage or hazards to
the treatment works or personnel operating it.
(7) Any water or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0.
(8) Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentration of suspended solids (such as, but not limited to,
Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such
as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
(b) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
(c) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater
treatment works.
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting a slug.
(e) Water or water containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or
are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment
plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of the NPDES permit or
requirements of other governmental agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge from the sewage treatment plant.
Subd. 8. City Authority. If any water or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to
be discharged, directly or indirectly to the public sewers, which water or wastes do not meet the
standards set out in or promulgated in this chapter or which in the judgment of the city may have
a deleterious effect upon the treatment works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may take any or
all of the following steps: (Amended by Ordinance No. 03-02 passed June 10, 2003)
Rockford City Code
400-16
(1) Refuse to accept the discharges by plugging or otherwise blocking the premises’
sewer discharge pipe at or before it connects with sanitary sewer main, or within
the sanitary sewer main, or
(2) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, or
(3) Require payment to an acceptable conditions for the discharge to the public
sewer, or
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treatment wastes, or
(7) The discharge of any water from sump pumps into the City sewers will be
deemed a misdemeanor.
(8) Sump pumps must be installed and hard plumbed to the exterior of the building
on all new residential and commercial construction. Certificate of occupancy will
be issued after compliance.
(9) The city shall have authority to immediately discontinue sewer service to a
customer who is found to be discharging wastes into the cities system which are
in violation of this ordinance. (Amended Dec. 12, 2006 06-13)
The design and installation of the plant and equipment for pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows shall be subject to the review and approval of the city and subject to the requirements of
40 CRF 403, entitled, “Pretreatment Standards” and all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 93-04, passed April 13, 1993)(Amended by Ordinance 06-13,
passed 12-12-06)
Subd. 9. Liability for Fines Levied Upon the City. Any person or entity which
discharges prohibited substances into the City sanitary sewer system which causes the
wastewater treatment plant to violate its state discharge permit requirements such that a fine is
Imposed upon the City by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency or other state or federal
agency, shall be liable to the City for the amount of such fine(s). Any such fines shall be paid to
the City within 30 days of billing by the City. (Amended Ordinance 06-13, December 12, 2006)
Subd. 10. Charges for General Users - Domestic, Commercial, Institutional and
Governmental Users.
(1) The city will determine a user fee annually and a SAC fee annually to maintain
the operations, maintenance and debt service for wastewater treatment facilities.
The Sewer Access Connection (SAC) fee is to be paid at the time at which a
building permit or a sewer connection permit is issued for all buildings to be
constructed or connected to the sewer system on or after the effective date of
this chapter. No charge shall be due upon the issuance of a connection permit if
a charge was paid upon issuance of a building permit. The sewer access
connection charge for each building or structure shall be equal to the number of
units of sewage volume which will discharge multiplied by the amount
established by Resolution of the City Council. The sewer access connection
(SAC) charge shall increase as adopted in the CIP per unit of sewage volume for
buildings or structures connecting to the city wastewater collection and treatment
system. The equivalent units of sewage volume shall be, assigned as follows:
Rockford City Code
400-17
(Ordinance 14-04, adopted June 10, 2014)
Standard Sewage Volume Units For Various Residential Dwellings
Single family houses, townhouses, and duplex units 1.0 Unit
Condominiums and apartment units 0.8 Unit
Mobile homes 0.8 Unit
Public housing units subsidized under any Federal
Program for low and moderate income housing 0.8 Unit
Standard Sewage Volume Units for Various Commercial, Public and Institutional Facilities
SAC Criteria
FACILITY PARAMETER SAC
Animal Clinic (humane societies, animal
research, boarding, etc.)
Animal holding areas 17 f.u. 1
Animal runs 34 f.u. 1
Archery (6 feet lane) 6 lanes 1
Arenas (bleachers 18 inches/person) 110 seats 1
Auditoriums (7 square feet/person) 110 seats 1
Automobile Service
Fast service (less than 4 hours per car) 2 service bays 1
Major service (more than 4 hours per car) 14 employees 1
Car Dealership (charge for office, retail,
etc. at established rates)
Fast Service (# service bays x 30%) 2 service bays 1
Major Service (# service bays @ 70% x 1
employee/bay) 14 employees 1
Ballroom (exclude dance floor)
Facility without liquor service 825 square feet 1
Facility with liquor service 590 square feet 1
Bank (exclude cash vault) 2,400 square feet 1
Banquet Room (15 square feet/person)
Food catered 2,060 square feet 1
Food catered with dishwashing 1,180 square feet 1
Food catered with liquor 1,028 square feet 1
Food preparation and dishwashing 825 square feet 1
Food catered with dishwashing and liquor 750 square feet 1
Food preparation, dishwashing and liquor 590 square feet 1
FACILITY PARAMETER SAC
Rockford City Code
400-18
Barber 4 chairs 1
Batting Cages (6 feet/lane) 6 lanes 1
Beauty Salon 4 cutting stations 1
Bingo Hall (used only for bingo) 110 seats 1
Boarding House (dorm rooms) 5 beds 1
Body Shop (major service - more than 4 hours
per car no vehicle washing) 14 employees 1
Bowling Alleys (does not include bar or
dining area 3 alleys 1
Camps (# gallons x occupant or site)
Children's' Camps (central toilet and bath;
overnight, primitive cabins)
(# occupants x 50 gallons occupant) 274 gallons 1
Day Camps (no meals)
(# occupants x 10 gallons/occupant) 274 gallons 1
Labor/Construction Camps
(# occupants x 50 gallons/occupant) 274 gallons 1
Resorts (housekeeping cabins)
(# occupants x 60 gal./occupant) 274 gallons 1
Travel Trailer Parks
with water and sewer hookup
(# sites x 100 gallons/site) 274 gallons 1
with central toilet and showers
(# sites x 75 gallons/site) 274 gallons 1
sanitary dump (sites without hookup)
(# sites x 10 gal./site) 274 gallons 1
Car Wash (CONTACT COB FOR DETERMINATION)
Catering (CONTACT COB FOR DETERMINATION)
Churches (for sanctuary, nave, chancel) 275 seats 1
(7 square feet/person - seating area)
(remainder use other criteria)
(sacristy, ambulatory - no charge)
Cocktail Lounge (no food service) 23 seats 1
Coffee Shop (no food service) 23 seats 1
Correction Facility (prison) 2.5 inmates 1
FACILITY PARAMETER SAC
Rockford City Code
400-19
Court Rooms 1,650 square feet 1
Dorm Rooms: On/off campus students 5 students 1
(charge additional for classrooms)
Daycare (number of children licensed for) 14 children 1
Child/Adult Play Area (not licensed) 490 square feet 1
Dry Cleaners (retail) 3,000 square feet 1
Elderly Housing (100% of current SAC Rate)
(no washer/dryer each unit) 3 people 1
(washer/dryer each unit) 2.5 people 1
*Three bedroom unit with washer/dryer
(separate from formula below)
(# of one bedroom units x 1.5 people/unit)
+ of two bedroom units x 2.0 people/unit)
+ of three bedroom units x 3.0 people/unit)
(total # of people)
Exercise Area/Gym (juice bars - no charge)
(sauna, whirlpool included) 700 square feet 1
No showers 2,060 square feet 1
Fire Station (charge for office, meeting rooms,
etc. at established rates)
Washing (hose tower, trunk) 274 gallons 1
Full time (overnight people)
(75 gal/person)/274 gallons 274 gallons 1
Volunteer (occasional overnight) 14 people 1
Funeral Home 770 square feet 1
(charge viewing areas only - chapel, viewing areas, etc.)
Apartment (1 apartment) 1
Game Room (billiards, video and pinball games)
With bar 590 square feet 1
Without bar 2,060 square feet 1
Golf Course (if showers - use locker room criteria)
18 hole 3
9 hole - par 3 2
Miniature 1
Country club (private)
Dining room (evenings and weekends) 15 seats 1
Rockford City Code
400-20
FACILITY PARAMETER SAC
Bar and grill (bar and grill separate)
Bar 23 seats 1
Grill 15 seats 1
Golf Dome or Driving Range 6 driving stations 1
Greenhouse
Area not open to public 15,000 sq. feet 1
Area open to public 5,000 sq. feet 1
General retail area 3,000 sq. feet 1
Group Home
Secondary treatment (residents leaving during
the day) 5 beds 1
Primary treatment (residents stay all day) 3 beds 1
Guest Rooms (apartment or condominium) (charge SAC as apartment)
Washer/dryer 100% (of Current
No washer/dryer 80% SAC Rate)
No kitchen 50%
Handball and Racquetball Courts 1 court 2
Hospitals (licensed beds or baby cribs) 1 bed 1
(does not include outpatient clinic)
Outpatient clinic (plumbing fixture units) 17 f.u. 1
Sterilizers (4 hours x gpm x 60 minutes) 274 gallons 1
X-ray film processors 274 gallons 1
(continuous operation 9 hours)
(intermittent operation 4 hours)
(operation time (hrs) x gpm x 60 minutes).
Vacuum device (Dental office) 274 gallons 1
(9 hours x gpm x 60 minutes)
Ice Arena
Showers (see LOCKER ROOMS)
Team Rooms (plumbing fixture units) 17 f.u. 1
Bleachers 110 seats 1
Zamboni (if discharge going to sanitary sewer 4
Laundromat (requires water volume for
cycle time, 8 cycles/day) 274 gallons 1
Library (subtract book storage areas, file
areas - charge common plumbing fixture units
in public areas) 17 f.u. 1
FACILITY PARAMETER SAC
Rockford City Code
400-21
Meeting rooms, board rooms, reception,
book checkout offices 2,400 square feet 1
Loading Dock 7,000 square feet 1
Locker Rooms (if showers -20 gallons/person 14 lockers 1
Medical Clinic (See HOSPITALS, Outpatient Clinic)
Meeting Rooms (conference rooms) 1,650 square feet 1
Mini-storage (storage area - no charge)
Living area 1
Public restroom (plumbing fixtures) 17 f.u. 1
Mobile Home 1
Motels and Hotels (assume 2 persons/room) 2 rooms 1
(pools, saunas, Jacuzzis, game rooms, or exercise rooms
exclusively used by guests - no charge)
Breakfast only (complimentary) 45 seats 1
Cocktail hour (complimentary) 55 seats 1
Kitchenettes
(# kitchenettes x 10 gallons/day) 274 gallons 1
Museum 2,400 square feet 1
Nursing Home 3 beds 1
Office
General office (deduct mechanical rooms,
elevator shafts 2,400 square feet 1
stairwells, restroom and storage areas)
Dental, Doctors see hospital
Police Station (charge as office)
Cells (overnight jail) 3 people
(no overnight people - holding area) 14 people 1
Recording/Filming Studios 7,000 square feet 1
Restaurant (drive-in) 9 parking spaces 1
Restaurant (fast food) 22 seats 1
(disposable paper plates, glasses, and silverware)
Restaurant (full service) 8 seats 1
(washable silverware, glasses, and dishes)
Retail Stores (deduct mechanical rooms,
elevator shafts 3,000 square feet 1
stairwells, restrooms and unfinished storage areas)
FACILITY PARAMETER SAC
Rockford City Code
400-22
Rifle Ranges (handgun ranges - 6 feet/lane) 6 lanes 1
Roller Rink (skating area) 825 square feet 1
Rooming Houses (no food service) 7 beds 1
RV Dumping Station (not in association with camp grounds) 1
Schools (Sunday - 30 square feet/student) 55 students 1
Schools (elementary - 15 gallon/student
- 30 square feet/student 18 students 1
Schools (college, TV
[ 30 square feet/student) 18 students 1
Lecture halls (15 square feet/student) 18 students 1
Labs (50 square feet/student) 18 students 1
Dorm rooms (on/off campus students) 5 students 1
Schools (nursery
- number of children licensed for) 14 students 1
Church (nursery - during worship
service only - 30 sq. ft./child) 55 students 1
Nursery (health clubs, bowling alleys, etc.) 2,400 square feet 1
Schools (secondary - 30 sq. ft./student
- 20 gallons/student) 14 students 1
Labs (50 square feet/student) 14 students 1
Service Station
Gas pumping 1
Convenience center 3,000 square feet 1
Service bays 2 bays 1
Car Wash (See CAR WASH)
Swimming Pools (public - pool area) 900 square feet 1
(private residential, townhouse, condominiums, hotels, motels
or apartments - no charge)
Tanning Rooms 3,000 square feet 1
Tennis Courts(public, shower facilities
available) 1 court 2
Theater 64 seats 1
Theater (drive-in - parking spaces) 55 spaces 1
Rockford City Code
400-23
FACILITY PARAMETER SAC
Vehicle Garage
Employees stationed in garage 14 employees 1
Vehicle drivers (per day) 28 drivers 1
Vehicle washing
(# vehicles/day x gpm x minutes/vehicle) 274 gallons 1
Warehouses (assembly areas) 7,000 square feet 1
Office/Warehouse (speculative - must be reviewed on finishing permits)
Minimum 30% office 2,400 square feet 1
Maximum 70% warehouse 7,000 square feet 1
Whirlpool (doctors office/clinic,
therapy - # gal./fill x 8 fills/day) 274 gallons 1
Yard Storage Buildings
(example: lumber storage) 15,000 square feet 1
(customer pickup, no permanent employees)
Plumbing Waste Fixture Units* (17 f.u. = 1 SAC)
Type of fixture Fixture unit value (f. u.)
Drinking fountain 1
Floor drain 2 inch waste (only if hose bib included) 2
3 inch waste (only if hose bib included) 3
4 inch waste (only if hose bib included) 4
Trench drain: per 6 foot section 2
Sinks lab in exam room, bathroom 1
kitchen, and others 2
surgeon 3
janitor 4
Water closet 6
* If not included in list, use plumbing code
The areas listed in the parameters include all interior areas utilized by the public and the
employees for the conduct of the facility.
The number of standard sewage volume units for a facility not included in the above list
shall be determined by the council. A request for determination should be made prior to
the issuance of a building permit.
A. All building permits issued by the city for alterations and/or additions to
existing buildings or structures will be subject to a sewer access
connection (SAC) charge if the addition or alteration will increase
wastewater discharge. The number of equivalent residential units will be
Rockford City Code
400-24
determined in the same manner as above described. (Ordinance No.
09-04, adopted November 24, 2009)
B. All sewer user charges shall be based either upon the amount of water
used per month as per the meter records, or based upon the average
water meter records from November 15th to April 15th applied per
thousand. The property owner may change their billing method in the
month of December each calendar year, with that method of billing being
applied for the duration of the following calendar year. Under the
averaging method, the five months water usage shall be divided by five to
determine the average sewer user charge applied per thousand gallons.
All user charges and rates shall be established by Resolution of the City
Council. (Ordinance 14-06, adopted September 23, 2014)
(2) If a general user does not have a water meter, the user charge for operation and
maintenance, shall be based on the equivalent standard number of sewage
volume units. Therefore, a unit sewage volume shall be 100,000 gallons per
year. (Ordinance No. 09-04, adopted November 24, 2009)
401.09 Maintenance of Sanitary Sewer Laterals:
Subd. 1. Private Utility Lines. Maintenance of sewer laterals, consisting of the service
pipe from the structure located on the property that conveys sewage from the structure to the
sanitary sewer main, shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property served by such
sewer lateral. Maintenance of such sewer lateral shall include, but shall not be limited to,
replacement, repair, unclogging, televising, and prevention of infiltration of ground or surface
water into such sewer lateral. The property owner may not excavate in the right of way of any
City Street without first obtaining the written permission of the City’s Public Works Director, and
may be required to post a bond or cash surety with the City as may be required by the City’s
Public Works Director before beginning work in the City right of way and must observe all
conditions which the Public Works Directors places on such excavation work. All such repair
and replacement of the sewer lateral shall conform to the City Engineer’s standards for such
work, including the type of materials used in the repair or replacement.
Subd. 2. Failure of Property Owner to Maintain Sanitary Sewer Laterals. In the event the
City Public Works Director identifies damage to or a defect in the sanitary sewer lateral, the
property owner whose property is served by such sanitary sewer lateral shall repair such
damage or defect to the sanitary sewer lateral within the time period required by the City’s
Public Works Director. In the event the property owner fails to repair such damage or defect,
the property owner shall be subject to a monthly sewer service fee of $100 in addition to the
property owner’s normal sanitary sewer bill, and such $100 service fee shall continue until such
damage or defect is properly repaired. In addition, the City shall have the authority (but not the
obligation) to repair or replace such defective private sewer laterals and to assess the costs
incurred to the affected properties pursuant to Minn. Stat. 429.101.
Subd. 3. Televising of Sewer Laterals. Periodically, the City may desire to televise the
sanitary sewer lateral from the sewer main to the structure which the sewer lateral serves to
determine the condition of the sewer lateral and whether the sewer lateral is allowing water to
infiltrate into the City’s sanitary sewer system. If a property owner refuses to let the City televise
that portion of the sewer lateral that is not located in the right of way, the property owner shall
Rockford City Code
400-25
be responsible for televising said sewer lateral in a manner acceptable to the City and providing
the City with a copy of such televising within 20 days of request by the City. If the property
owner fails to provide the City with a copy of such televising, the property owner shall be subject
to a monthly sewer service fee of $100 in addition to the property owner’s normal sanitary sewer
bill, and such $100 service fee shall continue until such time as acceptable televising results are
provided to the City by the property owner. (Ordinance 14-01, adopted February 11, 2014)
401.10. Penalties. Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter
shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period
of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violation. Any person who shall continue
any violation beyond the time limit set in the notice shall be guilty of violating this code. In
addition to any penalty assessed for violation of this code, any person violating regulations in
this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the
city by reason of such violation. (Ordinance No. 09-04, adopted November 24, 2009)
Rockford City Code
400-26
402. Water System
402.01 Connections. No person shall make or cause to be made any connection
to the municipal water system, unless the property has been fully assessed for water service or
there has first been paid to the city for the improvement fund a connection charge equal to the
average full assessment, in the year prior to the time such connection is made and the charge
set in Section 402.12 has been paid.
402.02 Permit Required. No person shall open, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public water line or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the utilities superintendent as follows:
(1) No person except a plumber duly licensed by the city or a duly authorized
employee of the city, will be permitted to do any work on service pipe or water
meters connected with the water system.
(2) Application for water service shall be made on printed forms, shall state the legal
description, the PID, and street and official house numbers of the premises to be
supplied, and the nature of the improvement to be done. Application shall be
signed by the owner of such premises or his authorized agent or by the occupant
or person in possession thereof. Each applicant, by such application, shall
subscribe to and be obliged to be bound by such rules and regulations.
(3) The charge for tapping mains and the amount of the utility installation fee
hereinafter specified shall be paid at the time the application is submitted and
before the service is installed.
(4) The plumber requesting the tap shall give notice at least eight business hours in
advance of his need. The plumber must help uncover the rain and locate the tap
if requested by the superintendent.
(5) Only the city crews or the city's authorized contractor may tap into the water
lines, all others are prohibited from doing so.
(6) No water will be turned on until all charges and fees are paid, including any
unpaid usage charges and late payment penalties for the premises.
(7) The written permit must be on display at the site of the work at all times.
(8) The permit and inspection fee for connecting to the water system is assessed in
Chapter 212. (Amended Ord 09-05, 12-22-09)
402.03 Water Meters.
Subd. 1. Control and Regulation. The city shall exclusively own and control the
water meters to be used in the water system. All water meters shall be installed in accordance
with the following regulations:
(1) Water meters may be installed by the utilities superintendent. (Amended Ord 09-
05, 12-22-09)
Rockford City Code
400-27
(2) The service pipe from the city water main to the meter shall be 1" K copper pipe,
unless otherwise directed by the utilities superintendent. (Amended by Ordinance
92-12, passed May 12, 1992.)
(3) The service pipe from the city water main to the meter, where the same enters
the building, shall be brought through the floor in a vertical position.
(4) The meter shall be so located that the bottom is from twelve to eighteen inches
above the finished floor line. The meter shall not be set more than twelve inches,
measured horizontally, from the inside line of the basement wall. Deviation from
these standards may be made only with written permission of the utilities
superintendent. An approved yoke or horn shall be provided to support the meter
in the proper vertical position. Meters larger than one inch shall be set on a
pedestal.
(5) All meter installations shall have a gate valve on the street side of the meter. In
no case shall there be more than twelve inches of pipe exposed between the
point of entrance through the floor and the gate valve. A gate valve shall also be
installed on the house side of the meter.
(6) The consumer is prohibited from obstructing the meter so as to prohibit the
reading, or repairing of the meter.
(7) It shall be unlawful for anyone to misread or to tamper with any meter so as to
avoid charges for water.
(8) It shall be unlawful for anyone to bypass a meter, or otherwise use city water
without making just compensation therefore, except as may be specifically
authorized in this Chapter.
(9) The service pipe from the city water main to the stop box, and the stop box and
cover at the main and boulevard are the property of the city and all persons are
forbidden to interfere with them. (Ordinance 09-05, adopted December 22, 2009)
Subd. 2. Damage. If any meters are damaged by freezing, hot water, etc., either
by carelessness or neglect of the owner or occupant of the premises or other agents, the owner
or occupants must pay for the repairs of such damages. The cost of ordinary maintenance and
repairs of all meters owned by the city shall be borne by the city.
Subd. 3. Testing. At the written request of any user, the utilities superintendent will
test or cause to be tested the meter supplying the premises of such owner or consumer. A
deposit of $25.00 will be required before the meter is disconnected which will be returned to the
owner or consumer if the meter is not found to be registered correctly within 3%, otherwise the
deposit so made shall be retained by the city to cover the cost of such tests. The owner or
consumer may, if he desires, be present at the time any such test is made. The result of any
such test shall be reported to such owner or consumer in every case. If the testing of a meter,
as hereinabove provided, indicates that it registers in excess of 3% error, the charge to the
consumer for water consumed and used during the quarter within which such test is made shall
be adjusted in a fair and equitable manner.
Rockford City Code
400-28
Subd. 4. Installation Fee. A utility installation fee shall be paid by the user when
every water meter is installed. The fee will be as set forth in Chapter 212 for a 3/4 inch meter
and remote reader. The fees for larger meters will be set according to their cost to the city. Fees
paid are not refundable.
402.04 Service Pipe. The service pipe from the stop box to the meter and the
connections thereto shall be the property of the user. The pipe must be protected and
maintained by him. In the event such user shall fail to make any necessary repairs to such
service connections or pipe within twenty-four hours after being notified to do so by the utilities
superintendent, the superintendent shall forthwith disconnect the city water from the premises.
402.05 City Liability. The city shall not be liable for any damages resulting from
stoppage of the supply or flow of water as the result of breaks in any mains, service pipes, or
fixtures, or by reason of the breaking of machinery or stoppage for necessary repair, or any
other interruption of service.
402.06 City Inspection. The superintendent or any authorized employee of the
city shall have free access, at all reasonable hours, to premises to ascertain the location or
condition of all hose connections, pipes and plumbing fixtures.
402.07 Service Initiation.
Subd. 1. Written Authorization and Meter. No person shall turn on city water to
any premises without having written authorization from the plumbing inspector and until a meter
has been placed on the service and in such manner that it will register all water consumed and
all other parts of the plumbing and pipe fitting in and about the premises are in full compliance
with the rules and regulations of this chapter and all other applicable regulations.
Subd. 2. Connection Prohibited. No person shall make any connection with any
service pipe which is not in use between the water mains and the meters, without obtaining a
written permit from the utilities superintendent for the performance of such work. No person
shall make any replacement tap or connect any tap or connection theretofore made in any water
main without shutting off the water in such old tap or connection at the corporation in the water
main.
402.08 Discontinued Service. (Amended Ordinance 06-13, December 12, 2006)
Subd. 1. Voluntary. Any person desiring to discontinue the use of city
water shall notify the utilities superintendent to that effect, who shall have the service at the curb
stop box cut off by authorized personnel. No unauthorized person shall cut off the water service.
Where city water has been turned off, it will be turned on only when:
(1) A fee as set forth in Chapter 212 is paid; and
(2) All unpaid fees, usage charges and late payment penalties are paid.
Subd. 2. Involuntary. In addition to the provisions of 402.08, Subdivision 1, water
service may be shut off at any stop box connection whenever:
Rockford City Code
400-29
(1) The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any person working on any
pipes or equipment thereon which are connected with the watery system, has
violated or threatens to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Any charge for water, service, meter, or any other financial obligation imposed on
the present or former owner or occupant of the premises served is unpaid for 60
days or two billing cycles and in default. (Amended 12-12-06 Ordinance 06-13)
(3) Fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant of the premises served in
connection with any application for service.
(4) Failure of the property owner or occupant to implement and maintain within 30
days all sanitary sewer pretreatment requirements ordered by the City’s Public
Works Director following the discharge of 1) a prohibited substance into the City’s
sanitary sewer system, or 2) prohibited levels of permitted substances such as
PH, BOD, TSS in violation of City ordinance into the City’s sanitary sewer
system.
(5) The owner or occupant of the premises serves, or any person under the control
of the owner or occupant of the premises, discharges a prohibited waste into the
City’s sanitary sewer system in such a manner as to constitute an imminent
public health threat, the City may, on an emergency basis, and without notice to
the owner or occupant, shut off water service to the premises until such time as
the imminent public health threat is alleviated.
Subd. 3. Procedure for Involuntary Termination. A. Except as provided in Section
402.08, Subd. 2 (5) of the City Code, water shall not be shut off until notice and an opportunity
for a hearing has first been given the occupant of the premises and, if different from the
occupant, the application for water service. Notice shall be served by leaving it at the premises
served and, if different than the address served, by mailing copy of the same to the address
shown on the application. The notice shall state the reasons for shut off of water service and
that the same will be shut off on a specified date not less than ten days after the notice is
served if the condition causing the shut off is not rectified. The notice shall further state that a
hearing before the City Council on such shut off may be demanded in writing delivered to the
City Administrator within five business days after service of the notice of shut off. If a hearing is
requested, service shall not be discontinued until such hearing has been held. If, as a result of
the hearing, the City Council finds that a violation has occurred which justifies shut off under this
chapter, the water service may be shut off.
402.09 Emergency Board. (Amended by Ordinance No. 04-12, dated August 10,
2004)
Subd. 1. Board Established. Because critical shortages of water may result from
time to time and such shortage may come about suddenly, emergency procedures are hereby
established. These procedures must be followed at all times, when the emergency board
hereinafter establishes or the council determines that any emergency exists. The emergency
board shall consist of the mayor and the utilities superintendent.
Rockford City Code
400-30
Subd. 2. Powers. Whenever, in the judgment of the emergency board, the
pressure or quantities of water in any part of the city water system have become or are about to
become inadequate for fire or other needs, the emergency board shall declare a water
emergency and shall impose necessary water use restrictions to abate such emergency and
shall post and publicize such restrictions. Thereupon such of the restrictions as are found to be
necessary shall be in effect until the next following council meeting when such restrictions shall
be confirmed, removed or modified. Such restrictions shall remain in effect until removed by
action of the council. Notice of such restrictions shall be published in the city's official and legal
newspaper at the first opportunity, and at such other times as the council deems reasonably
necessary. If necessary to preserve the public health, safety and welfare and/or the water
supply system during an emergency, the emergency board may terminate water service to any
or all users. Such termination if intended to last beyond emergency duration shall be approved
by the city council.
Subd. 3. Watering Ban. The City has an even/odd watering ban which is
determined by your address, for instance, if your address is an odd number, you may water
outdoors on odd numbered days of the month. City Staff and the Wright County Sheriff’s
Department will enforce the water ban. Any one found in violation of this ban will be fined or
prosecuted as a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00. (Amended Ordinance
06-02, January 10, 2006)
402.10 Private Water Supplies. No water pipe of the municipal water supply
shall be connected with any pump, well, pipe, tank or any device that is connected with any
other source of water supply and when such are found, the utilities superintendent shall notify
the owner or occupant to disconnect the same and, if not immediately, the water supply
shall be turned off. Before any new connection to the city system is
permitted, the utilities superintendent shall ascertain that no cross-connections will exist when
the new connection is made.
402.11 Water Rates.
Subd. 1. Rates. Water rates and base fees will be periodically established by a
duly adopted resolution adopted by the council. (Ordinance 14-04, adopted June 10, 2014)
Subd. 2. Responsibility. The owner of the property which is being furnished with
water or sewer by the city shall be responsible for the payment of the said water or sewer bills.
Subd. 3. Due Date and Penalty. The city shall compute the amount due the city for
water and sewer use charges on or about the 15th of each month and render a statement of the
charges due within 15 days, at periodic intervals as directed by the council, to the owner of any
premises using the city facilities. There shall be added to all statements not paid when due a
penalty charge of 10% of all unpaid charges and penalties per month, or $1.00 per month,
whichever is greater for each month or fraction thereof, said statement remains unpaid. It shall
be the duty of the city to endeavor to promptly collect delinquent accounts and in all cases
where satisfactory arrangements have not been made instructions shall be given to discontinue
service by shutting off the water and sewer at the stop box. All delinquent accounts shall be
certified to the clerk/treasurer, who shall prepare an assessment rule each year providing for
assessment of the delinquent amounts against the respective property served. This assessment
role shall be delivered to the council for adoption on or before October 1 of each year, and upon
approval thereof, the clerk/treasurer shall certify to the county auditor the amount due, and the
county auditor shall thereupon enter such amount as part of the tax levy on said premises to be
Rockford City Code
400-31
collected during the ensuing year. Such action may be optional or subsequent to taking legal
action to collect delinquent accounts. (Ordinance 09-05, adopted December 22, 2009)
402.12 Charges for General Users - Domestic, Commercial, Institutional and
Governmental Users.
(1) The city will determine a user fee annually and a SAC fee annually to maintain
the operations, maintenance and debt service for wastewater treatment facilities.
The Sewer Access Connection (SAC) fee is to be paid at the time at which a
building permit or a sewer connection permit is issued for all buildings to be
constructed or connected to the sewer system on or after the effective date of
this chapter. No charge shall be due upon the issuance of a connection permit if
a charge was paid upon issuance of a building permit. The sewer access
connection charge for each building or structure shall be equal to the number of
units of sewage volume which will discharge multiplied by the amount
established by Resolution of the City Council. The sewer access connection
(SAC) charge shall increase as adopted in the CIP per unit of sewage volume for
buildings or structures connecting to the city wastewater collection and treatment
system. The equivalent units of sewage volume shall be, assigned as follows:
(Ordinance 14-04, adopted June 10, 2014)
Standard Water Volume Units
For Various Residential Dwellings
Single family houses, townhouses, and duplex units 1.0 Unit
Condominiums and apartment units 0.8 Unit
Mobile homes 0.8 Unit
Public housing units subsidized under any Federal
program for low and moderate income housing 0.8 Unit
Standard Water Volume Units for Various Commercial,
Public and Institutional Facilities
The areas listed in the parameters include all interior areas utilized by the public
and the employees for the conduct of the facility.
Exhibit A: SAC Criteria
FACILITY PARAMETER WAC
Animal Clinic (humane societies, animal
research, boarding, etc.)
Animal holding areas 17 f.u. 1
Animal runs 34 f.u. 1
Archery (6 feet lane) 6 lanes 1
Arenas (bleachers 18 inches/person) 110 seats 1
Auditoriums (7 square feet/person) 110 seats 1
Rockford City Code
400-32
FACILITY PARAMETER WAC
Automobile Service
Fast service (less than 4 hours per car) 2 service bays 1
Major service (more than 4 hours per car) 14 employees 1
Car Dealership (charge for office, retail,
etc. at established rates)
Fast Service (# service bays x 30%) 2 service bays 1
Major Service (# service bays @ 70% x 1
employee/bay) 14 employees 1
Ballroom (exclude dance floor)
Facility without liquor service 825 square feet 1
Facility with liquor service 590 square feet 1
Bank (exclude cash vault) 2,400 square feet 1
Banquet Room (15 square feet/person)
Food catered 2,060 square feet 1
Food catered with dishwashing 1,180 square feet 1
Food catered with liquor 1,028 square feet 1
Food preparation and dishwashing 825 square feet 1
Food catered with dishwashing and liquor 750 square feet 1
Food preparation, dishwashing and liquor 590 square feet 1
Barber 4 chairs 1
Batting Cages (6 feet/lane) 6 lanes 1
Beauty Salon 4 cutting stations 1
Bingo Hall (used only for bingo) 110 seats 1
Boarding House (dorm rooms) 5 beds 1
Body Shop (major service - more than 4 hours
per car no vehicle washing) 14 employees 1
Bowling Alleys (does not include bar or
dining area 3 alleys 1
Camps (# gallons x occupant or site)
Children's' Camps (central toilet and bath;
overnight, primitive cabins)
(# occupants x 50 gallons occupant) 274 gallons 1
Day Camps (no meals)
(# occupants x 10 gallons/occupant) 274 gallons 1
Labor/Construction Camps
(# occupants x 50 gallons/occupant) 274 gallons 1
Resorts (housekeeping cabins)
Rockford City Code
400-33
(# occupants x 60 gal./occupant) 274 gallons 1
FACILITY PARAMETER WAC
Travel Trailer Parks
with water and sewer hookup
(# sites x 100 gallons/site) 274 gallons 1
with central toilet and showers
(# sites x 75 gallons/site) 274 gallons 1
sanitary dump (sites without hookup)
(# sites x 10 gal./site) 274 gallons 1
Car Wash (CONTACT COB FOR DETERMINATION)
Catering (CONTACT COB FOR DETERMINATION)
Churches (for sanctuary, nave, chancel) 275 seats 1
(7 square feet/person - seating area)
(remainder use other criteria)
(sacristy, ambulatory - no charge)
Cocktail Lounge (no food service) 23 seats 1
Coffee Shop (no food service) 23 seats 1
Correction Facility (prison) 2.5 inmates 1
Court Rooms 1,650 square feet 1
Dorm Rooms: On/off campus students 5 students 1
(charge additional for classrooms)
Daycare (number of children licensed for) 14 children 1
Child/Adult Play Area (not licensed) 490 square feet 1
Dry Cleaners (retail) 3,000 square feet 1
Elderly Housing (100% of current SAC Rate)
(no washer/dryer each unit) 3 people 1
(washer/dryer each unit) 2.5 people 1
*Three bedroom unit with washer/dryer
(separate from formula below)
(# of one bedroom units x 1.5 people/unit)
+ of two bedroom units x 2.0 people/unit)
+ of three bedroom units x 3.0 people/unit)
(total # of people)
Exercise Area/Gym (juice bars - no charge)
(sauna, whirlpool included) 700 square feet 1
No showers 2,060 square feet 1
Rockford City Code
400-34
FACILITY PARAMETER WAC
Fire Station (charge for office, meeting rooms,
etc. at established rates)
Washing (hose tower, trunk) 274 gallons 1
Full time (overnight people)
(75 gal/person)/274 gallons 274 gallons 1
Volunteer (occasional overnight) 14 people 1
Funeral Home 770 square feet 1
(charge viewing areas only - chapel, viewing areas, etc.)
Apartment (1 apartment) 1
Game Room (billiards, video and pinball games)
With bar 590 square feet 1
Without bar 2,060 square feet 1
Golf Course (if showers - use locker room criteria)
18 hole 3
9 hole - par 3 2
Miniature 1
Country club (private)
Dining room (evenings and weekends) 15 seats 1
Bar and grill (bar and grill separate)
Bar 23 seats 1
Grill 15 seats 1
Golf Dome or Driving Range 6 driving stations 1
Greenhouse
Area not open to public 15,000 sq. feet 1
Area open to public 5,000 sq. feet 1
General retail area 3,000 sq. feet 1
Group Home
Secondary treatment (residents leaving during
the day) 5 beds 1
Primary treatment (residents stay all day) 3 beds 1
Guest Rooms (apartment or condominium) (charge SAC as apartment)
Washer/dryer 100% (of Current
No washer/dryer 80% SAC Rate)
No kitchen 50%
Handball and Racquetball Courts 1 court 2
Rockford City Code
400-35
FACILITY PARAMETER WAC
Hospitals (licensed beds or baby cribs) 1 bed 1
(does not include outpatient clinic)
Outpatient clinic (plumbing fixture units) 17 f.u. 1
Sterilizers (4 hours x gpm x 60 minutes) 274 gallons 1
X-ray film processors 274 gallons 1
(continuous operation 9 hours)
(intermittent operation 4 hours)
(operation time (hrs) x gpm x 60 minutes).
Vacuum device (Dental office) 274 gallons 1
(9 hours x gpm x 60 minutes)
Ice Arena
Showers (see LOCKER ROOMS)
Team Rooms (plumbing fixture units) 17 f.u. 1
Bleachers 110 seats 1
Zamboni (if discharge going to sanitary sewer 4
Laundromat (requires water volume for
cycle time, 8 cycles/day) 274 gallons 1
Library (subtract book storage areas, file
areas - charge common plumbing fixture units
in public areas) 17 f.u. 1
Meeting rooms, board rooms, reception,
book checkout offices 2,400 square feet 1
Loading Dock 7,000 square feet 1
Locker Rooms (if showers -20 gallons/person 14 lockers 1
Medical Clinic (See HOSPITALS, Outpatient Clinic)
Meeting Rooms (conference rooms) 1,650 square feet 1
Mini-storage (storage area - no charge)
Living area 1
Public restroom (plumbing fixtures) 17 f.u. 1
Mobile Home 1
Motels and Hotels (assume 2 persons/room) 2 rooms 1
(pools, saunas, Jacuzzis, game rooms, or exercise rooms
exclusively used by guests - no charge)
Breakfast only (complimentary) 45 seats 1
Cocktail hour (complimentary) 55 seats 1
Kitchenettes
(# kitchenettes x 10 gallons/day) 274 gallons 1
Museum 2,400 square feet 1
Rockford City Code
400-36
FACILITY PARAMETER WAC
Nursing Home 3 beds 1
Office
General office (deduct mechanical rooms,
elevator shafts 2,400 square feet 1
stairwells, restroom and storage areas)
Dental, Doctors see hospital
Police Station (charge as office)
Cells (overnight jail) 3 people
(no overnight people - holding area) 14 people 1
Recording/Filming Studios 7,000 square feet 1
Restaurant (drive-in) 9 parking spaces 1
Restaurant (fast food) 22 seats 1
(disposable paper plates, glasses, and silverware)
Restaurant (full service) 8 seats 1
(washable silverware, glasses, and dishes)
Retail Stores (deduct mechanical rooms,
elevator shafts 3,000 square feet 1
stairwells, restrooms and unfinished storage areas)
Rifle Ranges (handgun ranges - 6 feet/lane) 6 lanes 1
Roller Rink (skating area) 825 square feet 1
Rooming Houses (no food service) 7 beds 1
RV Dumping Station (not in association with camp grounds) 1
Schools (Sunday - 30 square feet/student) 55 students 1
Schools (elementary - 15 gallon/student
- 30 square feet/student 18 students 1
Schools (college, TV
[ 30 square feet/student) 18 students 1
Lecture halls (15 square feet/student) 18 students 1
Labs (50 square feet/student) 18 students 1
Dorm rooms (on/off campus students) 5 students 1
Schools (nursery
- number of children licensed for) 14 students 1
Church (nursery - during worship
service only - 30 sq. ft./child) 55 students 1
Nursery (health clubs, bowling alleys, etc.) 2,400 square feet 1
Rockford City Code
400-37
FACILITY PARAMETER WAC
Schools (secondary - 30 sq. ft./student
- 20 gallons/student) 14 students 1
Labs (50 square feet/student) 14 students 1
Service Station
Gas pumping 1
Convenience center 3,000 square feet 1
Service bays 2 bays 1
Car Wash (See CAR WASH)
Swimming Pools (public - pool area) 900 square feet 1
(private residential, townhouse, condominiums, hotels, motels
or apartments - no charge)
Tanning Rooms 3,000 square feet 1
Tennis Courts(public, shower facilities
available) 1 court 2
Theater 64 seats 1
Theater (drive-in - parking spaces) 55 spaces 1
Vehicle Garage
Employees stationed in garage 14 employees 1
Vehicle drivers (per day) 28 drivers 1
Vehicle washing
(# vehicles/day x gpm x minutes/vehicle) 274 gallons 1
Warehouses (assembly areas) 7,000 square feet 1
Office/Warehouse (speculative - must be reviewed on finishing permits)
Minimum 30% office 2,400 square feet 1
Maximum 70% warehouse 7,000 square feet 1
Whirlpool (doctors office/clinic,
therapy - # gal./fill x 8 fills/day) 274 gallons 1
Yard Storage Buildings
(example: lumber storage) 15,000 square feet 1
(customer pickup, no permanent employees)
Plumbing Waste Fixture Units* (17 f.u. = 1 SAC)
Rockford City Code
400-38
Type of fixture Fixture unit value (f. u.)
Drinking fountain 1
Floor drain 2 inch waste (only if hose bib included) 2
3 inch waste (only if hose bib included) 3
4 inch waste (only if hose bib included) 4
Trench drain: per 6 foot section 2
Sinks lab in exam room, bathroom 1
kitchen, and others 2
surgeon 3
janitor 4
Water closet 6
* If not included in list, use plumbing code
The number of standard volume units for a facility not included in the above list shall be
determined by the council. A request for determination should be made prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
A. All building permits issued by the city for alterations and/or additions to
existing buildings or structures will be subject to a water access
connection (WAC) charge if the addition or alteration will increase water
use. The number of equivalent residential units will be determined in the
same manner as above described.
B. All users shall incur a surcharge rate of $1.30 per connection in the
months of January, February, March and April in addition to the normal
rate. This fee is applied to the DNR connection permit that is due
annually.
C. The city has a Roundup program that residents may participate in if they
choose. The participant’s monthly bill will be rounded up to the nearest
dollar. The Roundup money collected each month is distributed to the
Park Fund 205 for the development of parks within the city.
402.13 Fire Hydrants. No person, except a person authorized by the city, shall
be allowed to open any fire hydrant in the city for any purpose whatsoever, without first securing
a permit from the utilities superintendent. Payment for such water used, except for fire fighting,
shall be made in accordance with the rate schedule above provided.
402.14 Service Outside of City Limits. Water service shall not be extended to
any users beyond the city limits.
402.15 Private Wells Prohibited. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise,
the following words and terms shall have the meaning set forth below:
Rockford City Code
400-39
Subd. 1. Definition. For purposes of this chapter, “private water supply system”
shall mean a system owned and operated by a person for collection and delivery of piped water
for human consumption into commercial, industrial, or residential buildings or structures.
Subd. 2. Private Systems Prohibited. No person shall build, establish, expand or
maintain a private water supply system within the city unless there shall be no municipal water
supply system within one hundred feet from the point on property of such person which is
nearest the public water supply system.
Subd. 3. Exception. Any private water supply system which is in place and
operational as of January 1, 1983, shall not be subject to this section.
Rockford City Code
500-1
500 General Regulations
501. Dogs
501.01. Definitions.
Subd. 1. At Large. A dog is at large when it is off the property of the person
owning, harboring or keeping said dog and it is not under restraint.
Subd. 2. Restraint. A dog is under restraint if it is at heel beside a person having
custody of it or obedient to that person's command; or is within a private motor vehicle of a
person owning, harboring or keeping the dog; or is controlled by a leash not exceeding six feet
in length.
Subd. 3. Commercial Kennel. A place where more than two dogs over six months
of age are kept for purposes of breeding, training, sale or boarding for a profit.
Subd. 4. Hobby Kennel. A place where more than two dogs over six months of
age are kept for the purposes of breeding, training, sale or boarding not for a profit.
Subd. 5. Altered. A dog is altered if it has been rendered incapable of producing
offspring. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted October 13, 1992)
501.02. Running at Large. No dog shall be permitted to run at large at any time
within the City. Any female dog in heat or season shall be confined indoors or in a kennel run or
pen so constructed to keep other dogs out. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted October 13, 1992)
501.03. Abandoning Dogs. No person shall abandon any dog or other animal
within the city. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted October 13, 1992)
501.04. Dogs Which Damage Property. No owner of a dog shall permit the dog to
damage any lawn, garden or other private or public property, or to urinate or defecate on public
property or private property, without the consent of the owner or possessor of the property. It
shall be the duty of each owner of a dog to remove any feces left by such dog and to dispose of
such feces in a sanitary manner. It shall also be the duty of each owner of a dog when such dog
is off the owner's premises to have in possession a device or equipment for the picking up and
removal of dog feces. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a guide dog
accompanying a blind person or to a dog when used in police or rescue activities by or with the
permission of the City. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted October 13, 1992)
501.05. License Required. No person shall own, harbor or keep a dog over six
months of age within the city unless a current dog license for such dog has been obtained.
Licenses shall be issued every two years and must be renewed by July 1st of every other
calendar year. (Amended by Ordinance No. 96-01, adopted May 20, 1996.)
501.06. Fee and Issuance. The license fee shall be established by council
resolution pursuant to Chapter 212. Each application for a dog license shall be accompanied by
a certificate of inoculation for rabies which is no more than six months old. Upon receipt of the
license fee and certificate of inoculation, the clerk/treasurer shall execute a receipt to the person
who pays the fee, with a copy retained in the records of the city. The receipt shall describe the
Rockford City Code
500-2
dog as to color, breed, age, sex, and weight. The owner shall produce the receipt for inspection
upon the request of the dog warden or any peace officer. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted
October 13, 1992)
501.07. Tags. The clerk/treasurer shall procure a sufficient number of metallic
tags, the shape of which shall be different for each year and he shall deliver one such tag to the
person paying the license fee. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the dog for which
such tag was obtained to permanently attach the tag to the collar of the dog in a manner so that
the tag may be readily seen. The tag is not transferable to any other dog or to a new owner of
the dog. If a tag is lost or stolen the owner may obtain a new tag by surrendering the receipt for
the first tag and by paying an additional fee established by council resolution pursuant to
Chapter 212. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted October 13, 1992)
501.08. Pound. The council shall designate a place as city dog pound for keeping
and maintaining any dogs which may be seized or impounded pursuant to this chapter. The
council may contract for dog pound services. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted October 13, 1992)
501.09. Dog Warden.
Subd. 1. Authorization. The dog warden or the peace officer of the city may seize
and impound any dogs found in the city without the tag provided for by this chapter, or dogs
running at large in violation of 501.02. To enforce this chapter, said dog warden or peace officer
may enter upon any private premises in pursuit of a dog running at large. During regular
working hours 7 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. a public works employee will impound a stray dog that is
restrained or in custody by a leash and not running loose. A public works employee will deliver
the dog to the humane society. After regular working hours, on weekends or holidays the public
works staff will not be required to come into the city to impound a stray dog. (Ordinance 2012-
05, adopted June 26, 2012)
Subd. 2. Notice. Upon the impounding of any dog, the clerk/treasurer, peace
officer, or dog warden shall without delay notify the owner personally or by mail if the owner is
known. If the owner is unknown, a written notice shall be posted at city hall. In either case, the
notice shall describe the dog, state where it is impounded, and state that it may be redeemed by
the owner within five regular business days after impounding by payment of the impounding fee
plus the cost of boarding the dog.
Subd. 3. Redemption. Any impounded dog may be redeemed by the owner within
five regular business days after impounding, upon payment of the impounding fee and boarding
costs; provided that no dog may be redeemed unless the current license fee has been paid. If
the license is obtained after a dog has been impounded then there shall be a penalty fee added
to the regular license fee equal to the regular license amount. This fee shall be paid in addition
to any dog licensing, impounding or boarding fees which shall be required prior to release of the
dog. Impounding fees and boarding charges shall be established by council resolution, pursuant
to Chapter 212. If the council has contracted for dog pound services, boarding charges shall be
actual charges pursuant to the contract.
Subd. 4. Disposal. If after five regular business days the dog has not been
redeemed by the owner, it may be sold for an amount sufficient to pay the impounding fee and
the cost of the boarding. Any person purchasing a dog under this subdivision shall procure a
license pursuant to 501.06 and 501.07 if the person intends to keep the dog within the city. Any
dog not redeemed or sold may be destroyed in a proper and humane manner, or may be
Rockford City Code
500-3
disposed of pursuant to the terms of Minnesota Statutes 35.71. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted
October 13, 1992)
501.10. Dangerous Animals. Any dog which is diseased, vicious, dangerous,
rabid, or exposed to rabies and which cannot be taken up and impounded without serious risk to
the person or persons attempting to take up the dog, may be killed by, or upon the written
direction of, the dog warden or a peace officer. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted October 13,
1992)
501.11. Rabid or Biting Dogs. Any dog suspected of rabies and any dog that has
bitten any person may, at the discretion of the dog warden or peace officer, be seized on the
premises of the owner or elsewhere, and confined in a veterinary hospital for ten days. The dog
may be released at the end of the ten day period if it is healthy and free from symptoms of
rabies, upon payment of costs by the owner. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted October 13, 1992)
501.12. Reporting Bites. Any person bitten by a dog, where the bite requires the
services of a physician, shall report the incident to the Wright County Sheriff. (Ordinance No.
92-19, adopted October 13, 1992)
501.13. Kennel.
Subd. 1. Kennel Licenses. No person shall own, harbor, keep, or have custody of
more than two dogs over the age of six months old on their property without having first secured
a private kennel license as required herein.
Subd. 2. Issuance. Kennel licenses may only be issued in conjunction with a
conditional use permit. Associated zoning administration fees shall be paid by the applicant prior
to Planning Commission consideration of the conditional use permit and license. The original
kennel application shall be required to pay the Conditional Use Permit fees as established by
council in Chapter 212 and the kennel permit fee as established shall not be required for the first
year of operation. The application shall contain information concerning the proximity of the
applicant's property to surrounding neighbors, the number and type of dogs to be kept on the
property, the proposed housing of the dogs, and such other information as the council may
require. The application shall first be referred to the Planning Commission for conditional use
permit proceedings. Upon recommendation from the Planning commission for issuance of a
conditional use permit, the clerk/treasurer shall refer the application to the council, which may
grant or deny the kennel permit. The permit shall state the number of dogs which may be kept
pursuant to the permit and any other conditions the Planning Commission may deem
necessary. If a permit holder wishes to increase the number of dogs he shall apply for a new
permit.
Subd. 3. Renewal. Each kennel permit shall be reviewed annually and an
application shall be submitted to the Clerk/Treasurer and the kennel permit fee as set up in
Chapter 212 shall be paid to the City. Upon review, consideration for renewal of the permit shall
be based on complaints, neighborhood changes which may have occurred, or changes within
the kennel itself.
Subd. 4. Regulations. Each kennel shall be kept in a clean and healthful condition
at all times, and shall be open for inspection by the city authorities at any reasonable time. A
Rockford City Code
500-4
kennel permit may be revoked by the council for violation of this chapter or any health,
nuisance, or other applicable ordinance, law, or regulation. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted
October 13, 1992)
501.14. Nuisance. The following shall be deemed to be a nuisance and may be
abated as provided by Chapter 901.
(1) The keeping of any dog which habitually barks, howls, or bays so as to annoy
other persons, upon written complaint of two or more neighbors.
(2) The keeping of more than two dogs over the age of six months, without a kennel
permit having been issued.
(3) The provisions of this section are in addition to any other remedy provided for
violation of this code. (Ordinance No. 92-19, adopted October 13, 1992)
Rockford City Code
500-5
502. Animals
502.01. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANIMAL. Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all fowl and poultry) or other
member commonly accepted as a part of the animal kingdom. ANIMALS shall be further
classified as follows:
(1) DOMESTIC. Those animals commonly accepted as domesticated household pets.
Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include dogs, cats, caged birds, gerbils,
hamsters, guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits, fish, non-poisonous, non-venomous and
non-constricting reptiles or amphibians, and other similar animals.
(2) NON-DOMESTIC. Those animals commonly considered to be naturally wild and not
naturally trained or domesticated, or which are commonly considered to be inherently
dangerous to the health, safety, and welfare of people. Unless otherwise defined, such
animals shall include:
(a) Any member of the large cat family (family felidae) including lions, tigers,
cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but excluding commonly accepted
domesticated house cats.
(b) Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family canidae) including wolves,
foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but excluding commonly accepted
domesticated dogs.
(c) Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog, unless the
crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet.
(d) Any member or relative of the rodent family including any skunk (whether or not
de-scented), raccoon, squirrel, but excluding those members otherwise defined
or commonly accepted as domesticated pets.
(e) Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or inherently dangerous member of the
reptile or amphibian families including rattlesnakes, boa constrictors, pit vipers,
crocodiles and alligators.
(f) Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above but which can be reasonably
defined by the terms of this subpart, including but not limited to bears, deer,
monkeys and game fish.
(3) FARM. Those animals commonly associated with a farm or performing work in an
agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include members of the
equestrian family (horses, mules), bovine family (cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens,
turkeys), fowl (ducks, geese, pheasants), swine (including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs),
goats, bees, and other animals associated with a farm, ranch, or stables or agricultural
purposes. This also includes Cervidae, Ratitae and Llama animal groups as defined by
Minnesota state statute. (These animals include, but are not limited to elks, ostriches,
Rockford City Code
500-6
emus, rheas and llamas and under state law all are considered to be livestock and
raised for agricultural pursuits).
OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping, or harboring
an animal.
VETERINARY CLINIC. Any establishment maintained and operated by a Minnesota licensed
veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals.
(Ordinance 13-03, adopted May 28, 2013)
502.02. Non-Domestic Animals. It shall be illegal for any person or business to
own, possess, harbor, or offer for sale, any non-domestic animal within the city limits. Any
owner of such an animal at the time of adoption of this code shall have 30 days in which to
remove the animal from the city after which time the city may impound the animal as provided
for in this chapter. An exception shall be made to this prohibition for animals specifically trained
for and actually providing assistance to the handicapped or disabled, and for those animals
brought into the city as part of a parade, operating zoo, veterinary clinic, or scientific research
lab. This exception includes any parade, licensed show or exhibition not to exceed a total of 14
days during any 12-month period. (Ordinance 13-03, adopted May 28, 2013)
502.03. Farm Animals. Farm animals shall only be kept in an agricultural district
established by the Zoning Ordinance and subject to any additional requirements or conditions.
Any owner of such an animal at the time of adoption of this code shall have 30 days in which to
remove the animal from the city after which time the city may impound the animal as provided
for in this chapter. An exception shall be made subject to approval by the City Administrator for
those animals brought into the city as part of a parade, operating zoo, veterinary clinic, or
scientific research laboratory. This exception includes any licensed show or exhibition not to
exceed a total of 14 days during any 12-month period. (Ordinance 13-03, adopted May 28,
2013)
502.04. Nuisances.
Subd. 1. Dangerous Animals. Adoption by reference. M.S. §§ 343.40, 346.57,
347.50, 347.51, 347.52, 347.53, 347.54, 347.55, 347.56 and 347.515, as they may be amended
from time to time, as they pertain to domestic animals, are adopted by reference and are as
much part of this code as if fully set forth herein. Any violation of the statutes herein adopted by
reference is a violation of this code. If an animal is diseased, vicious, dangerous, rabid or
exposed to rabies and the animal cannot be impounded after a reasonable effort or cannot be
impounded without serious risk to persons attempting to impound it, or if an animal has made
more than one attack on a person or persons, the animal may be immediately killed by or under
direction of an officer authorized to enforce the provisions of this Section.
Subd. 2. Diseased Animals.
(A) Running at large. No person shall keep or allow to be kept on his or her
premises, or on premises occupied by them, nor permit to run at large in the city,
any animal which is diseased so as to be a danger to the health and safety of
any person, even though the animal be properly licensed under this Chapter.
Rockford City Code
500-7
(B) Confinement. Any animal reasonably suspected of being diseased and
presenting a threat to the health and safety of the public, may be apprehended
and confined in the pound by any person or officer. The officer shall have a
licensed veterinarian examine the animal. If the animal is found to be diseased in
such a manner so as to be a danger to the health and safety of the city, the
officer shall cause such animal to be painlessly killed and shall properly dispose
of the remains. The owner or keeper of the animal killed under this section shall
be liable for a time to cover the cost of disposing of the animal, and a per day
maintenance charge and the costs of any veterinarian examinations. The amount
of the fine and charges shall be as set by City Council.
(C) Release. If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be diseased the animal
shall be released to the owner or keeper free of charge.
Subd. 3. Other. Any animals kept contrary to this chapter are hereby declared a
public nuisance and may be abated according to the law. (Ordinance 13-03, adopted May 28,
2013)
502.05. Basic Care. All animals shall receive from their owners or keepers a kind
treatment, clean and sanitary shelter from the elements and sufficient food and water for the
animal’s comfort. Any person not treating their pet in such a humane manner will be subject to
the penalties provided in this chapter. (Ordinance 13-03, adopted May 28, 2013)
Rockford City Code
500-8
503. Peddlers and Solicitors
503.01. Green River Ordinance. No solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant
or transient vendor of merchandise shall go in or upon private residences or residential
properties for the purpose of selling or soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares,
merchandise or services if such property has been posted with a sign forbidding solicitors,
peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise. Such signs shall
be posted in a conspicuous place on the property. A sign posted on the door or entrance to a
residence or residential property shall be deemed conspicuous for purposes of this ordinance.
(Ordinance No. 89-4, adopted March 13, 1989)
503.02. Registration.
Subd. 1. Any solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or transient vendor of
merchandise who intends to sell or solicit orders for the sale of wares, merchandise, or services
at the private residences or on residential properties shall register with the City Clerk. Such
registration shall include the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the solicitor, peddler, hawker,
itinerant merchant or transient vendor.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of his/her employer.
(3) A description of the goods, merchandise, wares or services being offered,
including brand names if any.
Subd. 2. If any nonprofit corporation intends to sell or solicit orders for goods,
wares, merchandise or services at residences or on residential properties, it shall provide the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the nonprofit corporation.
(2) A description of the goods, merchandise, wares or services being offered.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of a person who may be contacted for
information concerning the organization and the selling or soliciting.
Subd. 3. Any person who provides false information on any such registration or
who fails to register shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ordinance No. 89-4, adopted March 13,
1989)
503.03. Exceptions. The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to any
person who has been invited to the residence or residential property by the resident thereof.
(Ordinance No. 89-4, adopted March 13, 1989)
Rockford City Code
500-9
504 Curfew
(Ordinance No. 85-11, adopted November 26, 1985)
504.01. Curfew Imposed.
Subd. 1. Age and Time. No person under the age of 18 years except as provided
in Subd. 2, shall be on any public street or alley or in any park or other public grounds or
building, place of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment, vacant lot, or any other
unsupervised place between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M. of the following day.
Subd. 2. Exceptions. The restrictions of Subdivision 1 do not apply:
(1) On Friday and Saturday nights between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 12:00 P.M.
where the minor has attained the age of 16.
(2) If the minor is accompanied. by the minor's parent, guardian, or other adult if the
minor or adult has, in his or her possession, written consent of the parent or
guardian for the minor being in public places during such hours.
(3) If the minor is returning home by a direct route from, and within thirty (30)
minutes after, a school activity or an activity of a religious or other voluntary
association when prior notice of the activity and its place and probable time of
termination has been given to the designated law enforcement agency by an
adult person authorized by the school or the religious or voluntary association to
do so.
(4) If the minor is carrying a certified card of employment and is on his way to or
from his place of employment by a direct route.
(5) If the minor is upon an emergency errand or other legitimate business directed by
the minor's parent, guardian or other adult having the lawful custody of the minor.
(6) If there exists a reasonable necessity therefore. (Ordinance No. 85-11, adopted
November 26, 1985)
504.02. Responsibility of Parent. No parent, guardian, or other adult having
custody and control of a minor under 18 years of age shall knowingly permit the minor to violate
the provisions of 504.01 (Ordinance No. 85-11, adopted November 26, 1985)
504.03. Loitering. It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to loiter, loaf or
idle on or near any structure, vehicle, private grounds or public place without the consent of the
owner. (Ordinance No. 85-11, adopted November 26, 1985)
504.04. Enforcement. Any person under the age of 18 years of age on a street or
other place in violation of 504.01 shall be ordered to go home immediately. After investigation, if
responsible city authorities determine that court action should be initiated, the minor shall be
dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. Any such minor who is convicted
of a violation of this chapter after the case has been referred for prosecution in the trial court
under Minnesota Statutes §260.15, shall be punished in accordance with this code. (Ordinance
No. 85-11, adopted November 26, 1985)
Rockford City Code
500-10
505. Burning
505.01. Definition. “Open Burning” means the burning of any matter whereby the
resultant combustion products are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through
an adequate stack, duct, or chimney. (Ordinance No. 93-12, adopted November 23, 1993)
505.02. Regulations.
Subd. 1. Burning is permitted subject to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes No.
88.16 and 88.22 stating the open burning of brush between April 15th and May 15th and
October 1st and October 31st or for a two-week period after a major storm is permitted.
(Ordinance No. 95-17, adopted November 14, 1995)
505.03. Limits and Conditions.
Subd. 1. Such burning shall be limited to the area of the city zoned for residential
purposes only.
Subd. 2. No burning is permitted in the city streets.
Subd. 3. No burning will be allowed within 50 feet from a structure.
Subd. 4. No burning will be conducted before the hours of 10:00 a.m. or after
10:00 p.m.
Subd. 5. All such fires shall be attended at all times by a person of suitable age
discretion.
Subd. 6. No burning shall take place during an air pollution alert, warning or
emergency declared by the Pollution Control Agency or Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources. (Ordinance No. 93-12, adopted November 23, 1993)
505.04. Copy to State Agencies. A copy of this section or any amendment
thereof shall be submitted to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources. (Ordinance No. 93-12, adopted November 23, 1993)
505.05. Permits. It is unlawful to burn brush under this section without a permit
from the Fire Chief or his designee. No such permit shall be issued without a finding by the Fire
Chief or his designee that there is no danger of fire to adjacent structures of combustible
material. The permit may include such conditions as are reasonable under the circumstances.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 95-17, passed November 14, 1995)
Rockford City Code
500-11
506. Weapons
506.01. Dangerous Weapons. No person shall do any of the following:
(1) Recklessly handle or use a gun or other dangerous weapon or explosive so as to
endanger the safety of another.
(2) Intentionally point a gun of any kind, capable of injuring or killing a human being
and whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another.
(3) Manufacture, or sell for any unlawful purpose, any weapon known as a sling-shot
or sand club.
(4) Manufacture, transfer or possess metal knuckles or a switchblade knife opening
automatically.
(5) Possess any other dangerous article or substance for the purpose of being used
unlawfully as a weapon against another.
(6) Sell or have in his possession any device designated to silence or muffle the
discharge of a firearm.
506.02. Minors.
Subd. 1. Under 14. No person shall without the parent's or guardian's consent,
furnish a child under 14 years of age a firearm or air gun of any kind or any ammunition or
explosive. No parent or guardian shall permit a child under 14 years of age to handle or use,
outside of the parent's or guardian's presence, a firearm or air gun of any kind or any
ammunition or explosive.
Subd. 2. Under 18. No person shall furnish a minor under 18 years of age with a
firearm, air gun, ammunition, or explosive without the written consent of his parent or guardian
or of the chief of police.
506.03. Discharge of Firearms. No person shall shoot or discharge any firearm,
air rifle, pellet gun, or any other weapon within the city, nor shall any person cause any projectile
to be fired from outside the city into the city, except as follows:
(1) Persons duly authorized to act as law enforcement officers or members of the
military forces of the United States or the State of Minnesota in the discharge of
their duties.
(2) Persons engaged in target, trap or skeet shooting at a target, trap, or skeet range
for which a permit has been issued by the council. Prior to issuing a permit, the
council shall direct the designated law enforcement agency to investigate and
report to the council on the safety of the proposed range.
Rockford City Code
500-12
507. Abandoned Property
507.01. Procedure. Except as set forth in Chapter 804 of this code and except as
otherwise provided for by law, all abandoned, lost or unclaimed property lawfully coming into
possession of the city shall be disposed of as provided in this section. (Ordinance 89-9,
adopted July 10, 1989)
507.02. Storage. All property subject to this section shall be turned over to the
city police department which shall arrange for storage of such property. The police department
shall arrange for storage of such property on or within city facilities except that if city facilities for
storage are unavailable or inadequate, the police department may arrange for storage at
privately owned facilities. (Ordinance 89-9, adopted July 10, 1989)
507.03. Claim by_ Owner. The owner may claim the property by exhibiting
satisfactory proof of ownership and paying the city any storage or maintenance cost incurred by
it. A receipt for the property shall be obtained upon release to the owner. The city may charge
the owner reasonable storage charges for property stored on or in city facilities. (Ordinance 89-
9, adopted July 10, 1989)
507.04. Sale. If the property remains unclaimed in possession of the city for sixty
(60) days, the property shall be sold to the highest bidder at a public auction conducted by the
chief of police and the city after two weeks published notice setting for the time and place of the
sale of the property to be sold. (Ordinance 89-9, adopted July 10, 1989)
507.05. Disposition of Proceeds. The proceeds of the sale shall be placed in the
general fund of the city. If the former owner makes application and furnishes satisfactory proof
of ownership within six (6) months of the sale, he shall be paid the proceeds of the sale of his
property less the cost of storage and the proportionate part of the cost of published notice and
other costs of sale. (Ordinance 89-9, adopted July 10, 1989)
Rockford City Code
500-13
508. Prohibiting Unfair or Discriminatory Housing Practices
508.01. Declaration of Fair Housing Policy. Discrimination with regard to housing
on the basis of race, sex, creed, religion, marital status, and disability affects the health, welfare,
peace, and safety of the community. Persons subject to such discriminations suffer depressed
living conditions, and create conditions which endanger the public peace and order. The public
policy of the City is declared to be to foster equal opportunity for all to obtain decent, safe, and
sanitary housing without regard to their race, creed, color, national origin, marital status,
disability status, sex, and strictly in accord with their individual merits as human beings. It is
also the policy of the City to protect all persons from all founded charges of discrimination.
(Ordinance 02-16, adopted November 12, 2002)
508.02. Definitions. For the purposes of this Section, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations, shall have the meaning given herein unless the context
otherwise indicates:
(1) “Discriminate or Discrimination” – includes segregate or separate.
(2) “Disability” – A mental or physical condition which constitutes a handicap.
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit any program, service, facility
or privilege afforded to a person with a disability which is intended to habilitate,
rehabilitate standing, state or condition of one as single or married person.
(Ordinance 02-16, adopted November 12, 2002)
508.03. Prohibited Acts in Regard to Housing. It is an unlawful discriminatory
practice:
(1) For any person to discriminate on grounds of race, creed, religion, color, sex,
marital status, status with regard to public assistance, national origin, age or
disability, in the sale, lease, or rental of any housing unit or units.
(2) For any broker, salesman or other person acting on behalf of another to so
discriminate in the sale, lease, or rental of any housing unit or units belonging to
such other person.
(3) For any person engaged in the business of financing the purchase, rehabilitation,
remodeling or repair of housing units or in the business of selling insurance with
respect to housing units to refuse to provide such financing or insurance or to
discriminate with regard to the terms or conditions thereof by reason of the race,
color, sex, religion, creed, national origin, marital status, status with regard to
public assistance, age or disability of the applicant or because of the location of
the unit or units in areas of the City occupied by persons of a particular race,
color, sex, religion, creed, national origin, marital status, status with regard to
public assistance, age or disability, or to discriminate by treating differently any
person or group of person who desire to purchase, lease, acquire, construct,
rehabilitate, repair or maintain real property in a specific urban area in the
granting, withholding, extending, modifying or renewing, or in the rates, terms,
conditions, or privileges of any such financial assistance or in the extension of
services in connection therewith. The bona fide programs of Federal, State or
Rockford City Code
500-14
local governmental units or agencies, however structured or authorized to
upgrade or improve in any manner a specific urban area shall not be deemed to
be a violation of this Section.
(4) For any person, having sold, leased, or rented a housing unit or units to any
person, to discriminate with respect to facilities, services, or privileges of
occupancy by reason of race, color, sex, creed, religion, national origin, age or
disability, marital status or status with regard to public assistance.
(5) For any person to make or publish any statement evidencing an intent to
discriminate, on grounds of race, creed, religion, color, sex, national origin or
ancestry, marital status, status with regard to public assistance, age or disability,
in the sale, lease, or rental of a housing unit or units.
(6) For any person to make any inquiry regarding race, color, sex, creed, religion,
national origin, marital status, status with regard to public assistance, age or
disability to keep any record or use any form of application, designed to elicit
such information, in connection with the sale, lease, rental, or financing of a
housing unit or units, unless such information is used only for statistical purposes
to affirmatively further fair housing.
(7) For any person, for the purpose of inducing a real estate transaction from which
he may benefit financially:
A. To represent that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the
composition of the block, neighborhood, or area in which the property is
located, in respect of the race, color, sex, creed, religion, national origin,
marital status, with regard to public assistance, age or disability of those
living there; or,
B. To represent that a change will or may result in the lowering of property
values, an increase in crime, or anti-social behavior, or a decline in the
quality of schools in the block, neighborhood, or area concerned.
(8) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require any person or group of
persons selling, renting or leasing property to modify the property in any way, or
exercise a higher degree of care for a person having a disability than for a person
who does not have a disability; nor shall this Section be construed to relieve any
person or person regardless of any disability; nor shall this Section be construed
to relieve any person or persons regardless of any disability in a written lease,
rental agreement, or contract or purchase or sale, or to forbid distinctions based
on the inability to fulfill the terms and conditions, including financial obligations of
such lease, agreement or contract.
(9) The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
A. The rental of a portion of a dwelling containing accommodations for two
(2) families, one of which is occupied by the owner; or
B. The rental by an owner or occupier of a one-family accommodation in
which he resides in a room or rooms in such accommodations to another
Rockford City Code
500-15
person or persons if the discrimination is by sex, marital status, status
with regard to public assistance or disability. Nothing in this Section shall
be construed to require any person or group of persons selling, renting, or
leasing property to modify the property in any way, or exercise a higher
degree of care for a person having a disability than for a person who does
not have a disability, nor shall this Section be construed to relieve any
person or persons of any obligations generally imposed on all persons
regardless of any disability in a written lease, rental agreement, or
contract of purchase or sale, or to forbid distinctions based on the inability
to fulfill the terms and conditions, including financial obligations, of such
lease, agreement or contract. (Ordinance 02-16, adopted November 12,
2002)
508.04. Enforcement Procedures. The City is designated as the enforcement
agency for this Section and shall have the power to receive, hear and determine complaints as
provided herein. The City shall promptly investigate, upon complaint or upon its own motion,
any violations of this ordinance. If after investigation, it shall have reason to believe a violation
has occurred, it may refer the matter to the City Attorney for criminal prosecution, initiate civil
enforcement procedures as herein provided, or enter into a settlement agreement which, when
approved by the City, shall have the same force as a City order. (Ordinance 02-16, adopted
November 12, 2002)
508.05. Statute of Limitations. No action may be brought for civil enforcement or
criminal prosecution unless the change of alleged discriminatory practice was filed with the City
within one hundred eighty (180) days from the occurrence of the practice. (Ordinance 02-16,
adopted November 12, 2002)
508.06. Civil Enforcement Procedure. Civil enforcement procedures shall be
prosecuted by the City before the Council in the following manner:
(1) The City shall serve upon respondent by certified mail, a complaint, signed by it,
which shall set forth a clear and concise statement of the facts constituting the
violation, set a time and place for hearing, and advise the respondent of his right
to file an answer or appear in person or by any attorney and to examine and
cross-examine witnesses.
(2) The hearing shall not be less than twenty (20) days after service of the complaint.
At any time prior to the hearing, the respondent may file an answer. Facts not
denied by answer shall be deemed admitted. If the answer sets out new matter,
it shall be deemed denied by the City.
(3) The complaint or answer may be amended at any given time prior to the hearing
with the consent of the opposing party.
(4) Hearings shall be before the City Council.
(5) The City may obtain subpoenas from the District Court to compel the attendance
of witnesses and the production of documents at any hearing.
(6) If, after the hearing, the Council shall conclude that a violation has occurred, it
shall prepare an order which may contain any provision deemed desirable to do
Rockford City Code
500-16
justice to the complainant or to prevent further violations. It may include
provisions which require the respondent to rent, sell, or lease particular housing
to the complainant or to do any other thing as may be just. The Council’s
findings of fact and order shall be served on the respondent by mail, and shall
become the findings and order of the City unless, within ten (10) days after
mailing of the findings of order. Any order of the City may be modified by the City
at any time. (Ordinance 02-16, adopted November 12, 2002)
508.07. Force and Effect. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from
and after its passage and publication. (Ordinance 02-16, adopted November 12, 2002)
Rockford City Code
500-17
509. Address Display Required
509.01. Display. All principal buildings in the City of shall display those address
numbers assigned to them by the City. (Ordinance 07-02, adopted April 10, 2007)
509.02. Location and Size.
Subd. 1. Numbers shall be displayed on the principal building in numerals not less
than four (4) inches high and of contrasting color to the background.
Subd. 2. The area of the address sign shall comply with the provisions of Section
1001.08 of the Rockford Zoning Ordinance. (Ordinance 07-02, adopted April 10, 2007)
509.03. Clearly Visible. Numbers shall be affixed to the principal building so as
to be clearly visible from the nearest public street.
Subd. 1 Mail Boxes. In those cases where the principal building is obscured
from the view from the public street of address by accessory buildings, trees, shrubbery or other
visual obstruction, the numbers shall also be displayed on the mail box in numerals not less
than two (2) inches high, of a light reflective material, and of contrasting color to the
background.
Subd. 2. Posted Signs. In those cases where the principal building is obscured
from the view from the street address by accessory buildings, trees, shrubbery or other visual
obstruction, and the residence does not have a mail box adjacent to the public street, the
numbers shall be displayed from a permanent mounting on the property, clearly visible from the
street, displayed prominently in numerals not less than four (2) inches high of light reflective
material of contrasting color to the background at a height not less than three (3) feet above
grade. (Ordinance 07-02, adopted April 10, 2007)
509.04. Penalties. Violation of this section shall a misdemeanor subject to the
provisions of Section 101.06 of the City Code. (Ordinance 07-02, adopted April 10, 2007)
Rockford City Code
500-18
510. Alcohol Consumption
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the city’s liability when people choose to bring
alcohol into city buildings by establishing additional regulations that adhere to the Minnesota
State Statutes.
510.01. Prohibited Areas. The consumption of alcohol is prohibited at the fire hall,
the public works facility, the wastewater treatment plant and on any of the property on which
those facilities are located unless the city has issued a permit for such consumption pursuant to
section 510.02. (Ordinance 10-07, adopted October 12, 2010)
510.02. Permit To Consume. The city, in its discretion, may issue a permit to
consume alcohol on city property to a club or charitable, religious, or other non-profit
organization which has been in existence for at least three (3) years. (Ordinance 10-07,
adopted October 12, 2010)
510.03. Insurance Required. Any permit to consumer alcohol on city property
issued pursuant to section 510.02 of this section shall be conditioned upon the applicant
providing proof of liability insurance coverage acceptable to the city which includes the city as a
named insured and meeting any other reasonable conditions required by the city. (Ordinance
10-07, adopted October 12, 2010)
510.04. Consumption Of Alcohol At The Chuck Francis Memorial Center and
Gazebo in Riverside Park a Rented Facility.
Subd. 1. Consumption of alcohol at the Chuck Francis Memorial Center and
Gazebo rented by a person or organization shall be permitted if such alcohol is provided
by an organization meeting the requirements of section 510.02 and such alcohol is not
sold on the premises.
Subd. 2. Consumption of alcohol at the Chuck Francis Memorial Center and
Gazebo rented by a person or organization shall be permitted if such alcohol is not sold
on the premises, and the person or organization renting the facilities names the city as
an additional insured on a general liability insurance policy (such as a homeowners’
policy) in the minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) acceptable
to the city by endorsement of host liquor liability to the rented premises.
Subd. 3. The sale and consumption of alcohol at the Chuck Francis Memorial
Center and Gazebo rented by a person or organization shall be permitted only if such
alcohol is provided by a caterer licensed under Minnesota Statutes 340A.404,
subdivision 12, to sell alcohol in the State of Minnesota and who carries dram shop
insurance in the minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000) under which the
city is named as an additional insured party. (Ordinance 10-07, adopted October 12,
2010)
Rockford City Code
500-19
510.05. Hold Harmless and Indemnification Agreement. Any party leasing any
portion of the Chuck Francis Memorial Center or Gazebo where alcohol will be sold or
served pursuant to Section 510.04 must first agree to and sign an agreement to hold the
city harmless from claims arising from such rental and to defend and indemnify the city
from all costs incurred as a result of such claims. The hold harmless and indemnification
agreement must meet the approval of the city attorney. (Ordinance 10-07, adopted
October 12, 2010)
Rockford City Code
600-1
600 Licensing
601. Public Dancing
601.01. Permits. No person shall conduct a public dance in the City unless a
permit shall have been procured therefore from the council. Fees for such permits shall be
established pursuant to Chapter 212.
601.02. Application. Any person or persons desiring a permit to hold or conduct a
public dance in the City shall make application therefore on blanks furnished by the clerktreasurer.
The application shall set forth the name and address of the person, persons,
committee, or organization which is to conduct the dance; time and place where such dance is
to be held; and any other information requested by the council. The application shall also show
affirmatively that each of the applicants is a person of good moral character and reputation in
the community in which he lives; and that none of the applicants has within five years prior to
the making of such application been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor or of violating
any of the provisions of Minnesota Statutes 624.42 to 624.54, inclusive; or alternately shall
include competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness pursuant to
Minnesota Statues 364.03.
601.03. Granting of a Permit; Permit to be Posted. The clerk-treasurer shall refer
such application and the accompanying affidavits to the council, which in its discretion may
grant or refuse to grant the permit applied for. In case the permit be issued, the same shall be
posted in a public place in the dance hall described therein during the time the dance is being
given, and the persons named in the permit shall be responsible under the law for the manner in
which such dance is to be held and conducted.
601.04. Immodest Dances Prohibited. No person shall dance, nor shall any
person to whom such permit is issued permit or suffer any person to dance in any public dance
hall any indecent or immoral dances or any dance which is characterized by immodest motion of
the body. No person shall in any public dance hall act or speak in rude, boisterous, obscene or
indecent manner, nor shall any person to whom a permit has been issued suffer or permit any
person to so act or speak therein.
601.05. Conduct. No person shall engage himself in brawling, fighting, or use
offensive, obscene or abusive language or engage in noisy conduct, any of which tend to
disturb the peace, comfort and repose of persons in said dance hall or of persons
beyond the immediate environs of the place in which the dance is being conducted. (Amended
by Ordinance No. 91-05, passed July 9, 1991)
Rockford City Code
600-2
602. Amusement Centers and Amusement Devices
602.01. Definitions.
Subd. 1. Machine. “Machine” means a mechanical amusement device of any of
the following types:
(1) A machine or contrivance, including electric games, "pinball" machines,
mechanical pool tables, foosball, bowling machines, shuffle boards, electric rifle
or gun ranges, miniature mechanical devices and games or amusements
patterned after baseball, basketball, hockey, and similar games and like devices,
machines, or games which may be played solely for amusement and not as a
gambling device and which devices or games are played by the insertion of a
coin or coins or at a fee fixed and charged by the establishment in which such
devices or machines are located, and which contain no automatic payoff devices
for the return of coins, merchandise, checks, tokens or any other thing or item of
value; provided, however, that such machine may be equipped to permit a free
play or game.
(2) Amusement devices designed for and used exclusively as rides by children, such
as; but not limited to, kiddie cars, miniature airplane rides, mechanical horses,
and other miniature mechanical devices not operated as a part of or in
connection with any carnival, circus, show, or other entertainment or exhibition.
Subd. 2. Amusement Center. “Amusement Center” means any place wherein any
person operates thirteen or more machines for public use upon premises solely within one
enclosure. Video games of chance (as defined in Minn. Stat. §349.50, Subd. 8, or any similar
statute enacted hereafter), located and operated in accordance with applicable Minn. Statutes
(including but not limited to Minn. Stat. §349.50 et. seq.) shall not be considered in determining
if any premises is an amusement center. (Amended by Ordinance No. 86-10, passed
September 23, 1986, and Ordinance No. 91-05, passed July 7, 1991)
602.02. Licenses Required.
Subd. 1. Amusement Center and Machine License. No person shall own, operate
or permit operation of a machine and/or an amusement center on premises owned, leased or
operated by him, or engage in the business of operating an amusement center, in the City
unless an amusement center or machine license has been obtained.
Subd. 2. Exceptions. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require
licensing of coin-operated music boxes, more commonly known as "juke-boxes". Nothing in this
chapter shall be held to apply to any machine held or kept for sale or storage and which is not
actually in use or displayed for use.
602.03. Application. The application for such licenses shall contain the following
information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth.
(2) Prior convictions for violation of law of applicant, if any.
Rockford City Code
600-3
(3) Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the business
conducted at that place.
(4) If the interest of the applicant be that of a corporation or other business entity, the
names of any persons having a five percent (5%) or more interest in said
business entity shall be listed.
(5) For all amusement centers, the applicant shall provide proof of general liability
insurance in a form acceptable to the City. Said insurance shall provide minimum
coverage of $300,000 per occurrence and $100,000 per individual and $50,000
property damage.
602.04. Issuance. A copy of each application for license shall be referred to the
designated law enforcement agency. The designated law enforcement agency or its designee
shall investigate the location wherein it is proposed to operate the amusement center and shall
ascertain if the applicant is of good moral character. On the basis of his investigation, the police
chief shall recommend either approval or denial of the license. The completed application,
together with the police chief's report and recommendation, shall be presented to the council
which shall in its discretion grant or refuse the license.
602.05. Term and Fee. Licenses for amusement centers and machines shall
cover an annual period from July 1 to June 30. The license fee shall be established pursuant to
Chapter 212. The initial license fee for each applicant shall be prorated as of the date of the
application.
602.06. Display of License. The license shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the device is to be
operated or maintained to be operated.
602.07. Location of Machine. No machine shall be located, placed, maintained or
operated on any public street, avenue, boulevard, lane, alley or other public ground within the
City. No machine shall be so located that its operation will create a nuisance.
602.08. Gambling Restrictions.
Subd. 1. Multiple Machines. No such machine shall be so constructed, maintained
or operated as to be capable of taking more than one coin, token or slug per player for any one
game.
Subd. 2. Use for Gambling. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any such machine,
or for the owner or operator of any establishment where it is located, to permit the same to be
used for gambling or for the making of bets or wagers.
Subd. 3. Pay-offs. It shall be unlawful for the licensee or for the owner or operator
of the establishment where such machine is located to give any money, token, merchandise or
any other thing of value or any reward or prize in lieu of free games registered on such machine,
and all free games so registered shall be played on the machine registering such free games,
and there shall be no device on the machine whereby the operator can cancel registered free
games.
Rockford City Code
600-4
Subd. 4. Automatic Pay-offs. No person shall keep, maintain, sell or permit to be
operated in his place of business any machine which has been converted into an automatic payoff
device which shall automatically award money, prizes, tokens, merchandise, gifts or anything
of value, other than free games to the operator or player of such machine. No person shall
convert any machine into an automatic pay-off device.
Subd. 5. Destruction of Illegally Operated Machines. Any machine which shall
have been made use of in violation of Section 602.08, Subd. 2, Subd. 3 or Subd. 4 of this
chapter may be seized and destroyed in compliance with the provisions of the Statutes of the
State of Minnesota relating to gambling devices.
602.09. Amusement Centers Restrictions.
Subd. 1. Hours. Amusement centers shall be closed at 10:00 P.M. each day and
shall not open until 9:00 A.M. on weekdays or until 12:00 noon on Sundays.
Subd. 2. Nuisance. No amusement center nor any coin-operated amusement
device or coin-operated musical device therein shall be operated so as to constitute a public
nuisance.
Subd. 3. Order. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to maintain order on
the licensed premises at all times.
Subd. 4. Fire Regulations. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to see that
the licensed premises do not become overcrowded so as to constitute a hazard to the health or
safety of persons therein. The City fire chief may designate the maximum number of persons to
be permitted on the licensed premises.
Subd. 5. Attendant. The licensee shall provide reasonable adult supervision, with
a minimum of one, taking into consideration the number of machines and patrons, and the
number, nature, type and proximity of other businesses in the premises or in the vicinity.
Subd. 6. Alcohol and Drugs. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the
business of operating an amusement center to sell, offer for sale, or knowingly permit to be sold
or offered for sale or to be dispensed or consumed or knowingly brought on the licensed
premises any alcoholic beverages, controlled substances, or to knowingly allow any illegal
activity upon the licensed premises.
Subd. 7. Food. (Subd. 7, Food, repealed in its entirety by Ordinance 88--13,
passed December 14, 1988.)
Subd. 8. Intoxicated Persons. The licensee of an amusement center shall not
permit intoxicated persons to remain on the premises.
Subd. 9. Building Codes. The amusement center and the premises in which
amusement devices are located shall conform to all building and fire prevention codes of the
City. The building inspector or fire inspector may enter said premises at any time during normal
business hours, for the purpose of inspecting said premises for fire hazards. All law
enforcement personnel of the City shall have the right to enter said premises at any time during
normal business hours, for the purpose of enforcement of the terms of this chapter.
Rockford City Code
600-5
Subd. 10. Curfew. The licensee and his employees and agents shall adhere to the
provisions of this code relating to minors. No licensee, nor his employees, or agents, shall
knowingly permit a minor to be present on the premises in violation of curfew laws, nor
knowingly permit a person under the age of seventeen (17) years to be present on the premises
when school is in session unless on a valid excused absence.
Subd. 11. Smoking Material. No smoking material of any type is to be sold upon
licensed premises.
Subd. 12. Lighting. The interior of an amusement center shall be illuminated as to
insure proper and complete observation of patrons at all times. The building inspector may
require conformance with his recommended standards for lighting levels to carry out the intent
of this subdivision.
Subd. 13. Owner Responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
partnership, or corporation engaged in the business of operating an amusement center to
knowingly allow any illegal activity upon the licensed premises.
602.10. Transfer. An amusement center license is purely a personal privilege arid
shall not constitute property. It is not transferable in any manner.
602.11. Suspension and Revocation. The council may suspend for a period not
to exceed sixty days or revoke any license for violation of any provision of this chapter or state
law. No license shall be suspended or revoked unless the licensee has been given written
notice and a public hearing. The notice shall give at least ten days notice of the time and place
of the hearing, and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee. The council may,
without any advance notice or hearing, suspend any license pending a hearing on revocation for
a period of not exceeding fifteen days, for violations of this chapter or state law.
Rockford City Code
600-6
603. Large Assemblies
603.01. Purpose. It is the purpose of the council of the City to regulate the
assemblage of large numbers of people, in excess of those normally needing the health,
sanitary, fire, police, transportation and utility services regularly provided in the City, in order
that the health, safety, and welfare of all persons in the City, residents and visitors alike, may be
protected.
603.02. Definition. “Assembly” means a company of persons gathered together at
any location at any single time for any purpose.
603.03. License Required.
Subd. 1. Generally. No person shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct, advertise,
act as entrepreneur, undertake, organize, manage, or sell or give tickets to an actual or
reasonably anticipated assembly of 250 or more people which continues or can reasonably be
expected to continue for four or more consecutive hours, whether on public or private property,
unless a license to hold the assembly has first been issued by the council. A license to hold an
assembly issued to one person shall permit any person to engage in any lawful activity in
connection with the holding of the licensed assembly.
Subd. 2. Daily License. A separate license shall be required for each day and
each location in which 250 people assemble or can reasonably be anticipated to assemble.
Subd. 3. Fee. The fee for each license shall be established pursuant to Chapter
212.
Subd. 4. Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to any regularly established
permanent place of worship, stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium, coliseum, or other similar
permanently established place of assembly for assemblies which do not exceed by more than
50% the maximum seating capaCity of the structure where the show or exhibition is held.
Subd. 5. Public Property. This chapter shall not apply to activities conducted upon
City ground or public property with the prior approval of the council, provided, however, that the
City shall make appropriate conditions on the use of the park and public property to assure
compliance with the intent of this chapter.
603.04. Conditions of Issuance. No license shall be issued unless the applicant
shall make provision for the following:
(1) A fence or barrier (sufficient to prevent ingress/exit except at established gates)
completely enclosing the proposed location of sufficient height and strength to
prevent people in excess of the maximum permissible number from gaining
access to the assembly grounds, which shall have sufficient entrances and exits
to allow easy movement into and out of the assembly grounds and provide traffic
control onto established public road systems;
(2) Potable water, meeting all Federal and state requirements for sanitary quality,
sufficient to provide drinking water for the maximum number of people to be
assembled at the rate of at least one gallon per person per day and where the
Rockford City Code
600-7
assembly is to continue for more than 12 hours, water for bathing at the rate of at
least 10 gallons per person per day, or portion of a day;
(3) Separate enclosed toilets for males and females, meeting all state and local
specifications, conveniently located throughout the grounds, sufficient to provide
facilities for the maximum number of people to be assembled, in accordance with
the Minnesota State Board of Health Regulations and Standards;
(4) A sanitary method of disposing of solid waste, in compliance with state and local
laws and regulations, sufficient to dispose of the solid waste production of the
maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least 2.5 lbs. of
solid waste per person per day, together with a plan for holding and collecting all
such waste at least once each day of the assembly, and sufficient trash
containers and personnel to perform tasks;
(5) Physicians and nurses licensed to practice in Minnesota sufficient to provide the
average medical care enjoyed by residents of Minnesota for the maximum
number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one physician and nurse
for every 1,000 people, together with an enclosed covered structure where
treatment may be rendered, containing separately enclosed treatment rooms for
each physician, and at least two emergency ambulances with attendants for each
1,000 people;
(6) If the assembly is to continue during hours of darkness, illumination sufficient to
light the entire area of the assembly at the rate of at least five foot candles, but
not to shine unreasonably beyond the boundaries of the enclosed location of the
assembly;
(7) A free parking area inside of the assembly grounds sufficient to provide parking
space for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least
one parking space for every four persons;
(8) Telephones connected to outside lines sufficient to provide service to the
maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one separate
line and receiver for each 500 persons;
(9) If the assembly is to continue overnight, camping facilities in compliance with all
state and local requirements as set forth in Minnesota Statutes and regulations
and ordinances of the City, sufficient to provide camping accommodations for the
maximum number of people to be assembled;
(10) Security and traffic, and narcotics control plan which will meet the requirements
of local authorities and the Minnesota Department: of Public Safety; regularly
employed off-duty Minnesota law enforcement officers or protective agents
licensed in Minnesota sufficient to provide adequate security for the maximum
number of people to be assembled; at least one security guard for every 100
people will be provided for the first 1,000 people to assemble; for assemblies of
more than 1,000 people, additional security guards will be provided at the rate of
one for each 250 people or major fraction thereof;
Rockford City Code
600-8
(11) Fire protection shall be provided by the sponsor which may include, but not be
limited to, fire alarms, extinguishing devices, and fire lanes, and which shall be
sufficient to meet all applicable state laws and local regulations which are in
effect, or may be set forth by the political subdivision concerned; and sufficient
emergency personnel to efficiently operate the required equipment will be
provided by the sponsor;
(12) All reasonably necessary precautions to insure that the sound of the assembly
will not carry unreasonably beyond the enclosed boundaries of the location of the
assembly;
(13) Administrative control center with telephones where local authority can contact
the sponsors and law enforcement personnel inside the assembly area;
(14) Direction of pedestrians and vehicle traffic to prevent trespass on private abutting
property;
(15) Prevention on littering and deposit of waste materials on private and public
property, and clean-up of private and public property; and
(16) A bond, filed with the clerk-treasurer of the City, either in cash or underwritten by
a surety company licensed to do business in Minnesota in the minimum amount
of $300,000.00, which shall indemnify and hold harmless this political subdivision
or any of its agents, officers, servants, and employees from any liability or causes
of action which might arise by reason of granting this license, payment of
employees, or services rendered by the granting authority, and from any cost
incurred in cleaning up any waste material produced or left by the assembly.
603.05. Application.
Subd. 1. Generally. Application for a license must be made at least 30 days in
advance of the assembly. Each application shall be in writing and shall contain a statement
made under oath or affirmation that the statements contained therein are true and correct to the
best knowledge of the applicant and shall be signed and sworn to or affirmed by the individual
making application in the case of a corporation, by all partners in the case of a partnership or by
all officers of an unincorporated association, society or group, or, if there are no officers, by all
members of such association, society, or group.
Subd. 2. Contents. Each application shall contain the following:
(1) The name, date of birth, fingerprints, residence, and mailing address of all
persons required to sign the application by Subdivision 1, and. in the case of a
corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation together with the
name, date of birth, residence, and mailing address of each person holding 10%
or more of the stock of said corporation;
(2) The address and legal description of all property upon which the assembly is to
be held, together with the name, residence, and mailing address of the record
owner(s) of all such property;
Rockford City Code
600-9
(3) Proof of ownership of all property upon which the assembly is to be held or a
statement made upon oath or affirmation by the record owner(s) of all such
property that the applicant has permission to use such property;
(4) The nature or purpose of the assembly;
(5) The total number of days and/or hours during which the assembly is to last;
(6) The maximum number of persons which the applicant shall permit to assemble at
any dine, not to exceed the maximum number which can reasonably assemble at
the location of the assembly, in consideration of the nature of the assembly, or
the maximum number of persons allowed to sleep within the boundaries of the
location of the assembly by the zoning regulations of the City if the assembly is to
continue overnight;
(7) The maximum number of tickets to be sold, if any;
(8) The plans of the applicant to limit the maximum number of people permitted to
assemble.
Subd. 3. Plans. Attached to each application shall be complete plans for
complying with the requirements of 603.04, specifically including the following:
(1) The plans for fencing the location of the assembly and the gates contained in
such fence;
(2) The plans for supplying potable water including the source, amount available,
and location of outlets;
(3) The plans for providing toilet and lavatory facilities including the source, number,
and location, type, and means of disposing of waste deposited;
(4) The plans for holding, collection, and disposing of solid waste material;
(5) The plans to provide for medical facilities including the location and construction
of a medical structure, the names and addresses and hours of availability of
physicians and nurses, and provisions for emergency ambulance service;
(6) The plans, if any, to illuminate the location of the assembly including the source
and amount: of power and the location of lights;
(7) The plans for parking vehicles including size and location of lots, points of
highway access and interior roads including routes between highway access and
parking lots;
(8) The plans for telephone service including the source, number and location of
telephones;
(9) The plans for camping facilities, if any, including facilities available and their
location;
Rockford City Code
600-10
(10) The plans for security including the number of guards, their deployment, and their
names, credentials and hours of availability;
(11) The plans for fire protection as may be required by 603.04 (11);
(12) The plans for sound control and sound amplification, if any, including number,
location, and power of amplifiers and speakers;
(13) The plans for food concessions and concessionaires who will be allowed to
operate on the grounds including the names and addresses of all
concessionaires and their license or permit numbers;
(14) The plans for the direction and control of pedestrians and vehicle traffic for safety
and to prevent trespass;
(15) The plans for area traffic control for egress from and exit onto public roads or
highways; and
(16) The plans for the prevention and clean up of litter and waste.
Subd. 4. Fee and Bond. Each application shall be accompanied by payment in full
of the license fee. The bond or insurance policy required under 603.04 (16) shall be attached to
the application.
Subd. 5. Other Licenses. Also attached to each application shall be certified
copies of any other, necessary Minnesota state license or permit.
603.06. Issuance. The application for a license shall be processed within 20 days
of receipt and shall be issued if all conditions are complied with. Ten days prior to the assembly,
the council shall cause the premises to be inspected to determine whether the requirements of
this chapter are met.
603.07. Revocation. The license may be revoked by the council at any time, if
any of the conditions necessary for the issuing of or contained in the license are not complied
with, or if any condition previously met ceases to be complied with.
603.08. Variance. In cases deemed appropriate, the council may, by unanimous
resolution, grant a variance from any section of this chapter, where the variance will not deter
from the basic intent and purpose of this chapter.
603.09. Conduct of Assembly. Each assembly licensed under this chapter shall
be conducted in accordance with the following:
(1) The license shall permit assembly of only the maximum number of persons
stated in the license application. The license shall not sell tickets to or permit to
assemble at the licensed location more than that number of persons.
(2) The license shall not permit the sound of the assembly to carry unreasonably
beyond the enclosed boundaries of the location of the assembly. The City hereby
adopts by reference the regulations of Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Noise
Pollution Control Section. Sound from the licensed activity shall not exceed the
standard set for the protection of household or residential units.
Rockford City Code
600-11
(3) In the event that any boundary of the licensed premises is within 500 feet of any
residential dwelling, the licensed activity shall not be carried on between the
hours of 8:00 P.M. and. 8:00 A.M.
(4) All persons sleeping during the night hours shall sleep only in a tent, camper,
enclosed trailer, mobile home, building, or similar enclosed item.
603.10. Enforcement. In addition to all other penalties provided for violation of
this code, the provisions of this chapter may be enforced as follows:
(1) The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by injunction in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
(2) The holding of an assembly in violation of any provision or condition of this
chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as such.
(3) Any person who violates any provision or condition of this chapter shall forfeit an
appropriate amount from the bond required under 603.04 (16). No portion of the
bond shall be released to the sponsors until all provisions of the license
agreement and this chapter have been met.
Rockford City Code
600-12
604. Bingo and Gambling
604.01. Statutes Incorporated by Reference. Minnesota Statutes §349.11 to
§349.60 are hereby incorporated by reference.
(Chapter. 604 Amended by Ordinance No. 86-2, passed February 25, 198.)
604.06. Raffles.
Subd. 1. Where Located. A raffle shall be deemed to occur within the City only if
the winners are determined within the City. Raffles shall be deemed to occur only on the
premises on which the winners are determined.
Subd. 2. When Occurring. A raffle shall be deemed to occur on the day the
winners are determined.
604.07. Inspection and Investigation. The City administrator, the City attorney,
the City’s auditors, any police officer and any City official or employee having a duty to perform
with reference to this chapter may inspect and examine the records concerning lawful gambling
of any licensed organization upon 24 hours notice.
604.08. Reports. All licensed organizations shall submit to the City clerk a copy of
any reports it is required to make to the state of Minnesota. Any applicant for a license shall
submit a copy of its application to the City.
604.09. Disapproval of Licenses.
Subd. 1. Receipt of Notice. Notice that an application for a license is pending
before the Charitable Gambling Control Board shall be effective only when the City receives
notice from the Board, even though the applicant or other person notifies the City prior to that
time.
Subd. 2. Notice Submitted to Council. The City clerk shall submit any application
for a gambling license he or she receives to the City council at the first regular council meeting
after his or her receipt of the notice.
Subd. 3. Causes for Disapproval. The City council may disapprove an application,
by resolution adopted by a majority vote, for a gambling license for the following reasons:
(1) Failure to provide a copy of the license application to the City.
(2) Failure of the application to specify the 72 hour period for which the license is
sought.
(3) Ten licenses have already been issued in the City during the current calendar
year.
Rockford City Code
600-13
(4) The applicant has already been granted three licenses for the current calendar
year.
(5) The applicant is in possession of a gambling license for which the 72 hour period
referred to in section 604.04, Subd. 2, has not yet expired.
(6) Any reason which would justify the Minnesota Charitable Gambling Control
Board in denying a license.
(7) Other good cause shown, upon a four-fifths vote of the council.
Subd. 4. Reasons to be Stated. A resolution disapproving an application for a
gambling license shall state the reason or reasons for the disapproval.
(Chapter 604 amended by Ordinance 85-3, Passed May 13, 1985. Former Chapter 604. Bingo,
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance 85-3, Passed May 13, 1985.)
Rockford City Code
600-14
605. Proceeds for Lawful Gambling
(Chapter 605 added by Ordinance No. 87-20, passed December 22, 1987)
605.01. Definitions.
Subd. 1. The terms contained in this section shall have the meaning described to
them by the Minnesota Statutes §349.11 et. seq. and any successor statutes dealing with
regulation of gambling.
Subd. 2. Net Profit. Net profits are profits less allowable expenses under the laws
and regulations of the State of Minnesota relating to lawful gambling.
Subd. 3. Rockford Trade Area. For purposes of this code the Rockford Trade area
shall mean the City of Rockford, the City of Greenfield, and that portion of the Rockford
Township protected by the Rockford Fire Department pursuant to fire protection agreements
between the City of Rockford and the Township of Rockford. (Added by Ordinance No. 90-13
passed November 13, 1990)
605.02. Donation Required.
Subd. 1. Any organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling within the City shall
donate ten-percent (10%) of its net profits derived from lawful gambling in the City to a fund
administered and regulated by the city without cost to the fund. The City shall then disburse the
funds for charitable contributions as defined by Minnesota Statue 349.12, Subd. 7a, as it may
be amended from time to time. Such donations shall be made by the end of the month following
the end of each calendar quarter. For purposes of this section a calendar quarter shall be
deemed to end at 11:59 p.m. on the last day of March, June September and December.
Subd. 2. Reserved. (Ordinance 17-02, adopted February 14, 2017)
Subd. 3. For purposes of this section, a raffle shall be deemed to have occurred
within the City if the drawing for any of the prizes awarded pursuant to the raffle is held within
the City.
Subd. 4. In addition to the donation required by Subdivisions 1 and 2 of this
section, all organizations conducting lawful gambling within the City, with or without a license,
shall spend 25% of its net proceeds on lawful purposes, as defined by applicable Minnesota
laws and regulations, within the Rockford Trade Area within the same calendar year that such
proceeds are received by the organization conducting the charitable gambling. Any
expenditures made during January of any year may, at the option of the charitable organization,
be deemed to have been made in the prior calendar year to the extent necessary to meet the
requirements of the subdivision. (Added by Ordinance No. 90-13 passed November 13, 1990)
605.03. Reports. All organizations conducting lawful gambling within the City
shall provide the City clerk with copies of all reports it provides to the Charitable Gambling
Control Board. The City clerk may require such additional documentation as the clerk may deem
reasonably necessary to prove that organizations have met the requirements of Section 605.02,
subdivisions 1, 2, and 4. (Amended by Ordinance No. 90-13 passed November 13, 1990)
Rockford City Code
600-15
605.04. Suspension, Revocation, Non-renewal of Licenses. If any organization
shall fail to make the payments required by this chapter or fail to provide the City clerk with
reports as required by this section, such failure shall be grounds for the City to recommend to
the Charitable Gambling Control Board that the gambling license for such organization be
suspended, revoked, or not renewed.
605.05. Effective Date. This section shall apply to all lawful gambling conducted
in the City on and after January 1, 1988. The provisions of Section 605.02, Subd. 4, shall apply,
to all lawful gambling conducted in the City on and after January 1, 1991. (Amended by
Ordinance No. 90-13, passed November 13, 1990)
Rockford City Code
600-16
606 Tobacco
(Chapter 606 added by Ordinance No. 90-08, passed June 26, 1990)
(Amended Section 606 by Ordinance No. 02-04, passed May 28, 2002)
606.01. Definition. As used in this chapter, the term "tobacco" means and
includes tobacco in any form, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, bagged, canned or
package product, smokeless tobacco or tobacco in any other form.
606.02. License Required. The sale, possession, and use of tobacco, tobacco
products, and tobacco related devices in the City of Rockford, County of Hennepin and County
of Wright, shall be regulated and administered by the respective county in which the licensee is
located as set forth in M.S. Section 461.12, pertaining to municipal tobacco licenses.
606.03 (reserved)
606.04 (reserved)
606.05 (reserved)
Rockford City Code
600-17
607 Taxicabs
(Chapter 607 added by Ordinance No. 92-04, passed March 24, 1992)
607.01. Definition. “Taxicab” means a motor vehicle engaged in the business of
carrying persons for hire, having a seating capaCity of less than ten persons and not operated
on a fixed route.
607.02. License Required. No person shall engage in the taxicab business in the
City without first having applied for and been granted a license to do so by the Council, except
that any taxicab licensed to operate in any other municipality may carry passengers from said
municipality to any place or point within the City and may receive passengers in the City for
carriage to such municipality where so licensed. However, no operator or driver of such taxicab
may solicit business in the City without being licensed under the provisions of this ordinance.
607.03. Application. In addition to such information as the City Clerk may require,
the application shall include the following:
(1) A statement covering each vehicle to be licensed, giving the full name and
address of the owner, the make of the car, State license number and holder of
legal title.
(2) The name and address of the applicant.
(3) The location from which such taxicab business shall be operated.
(4) The employment history of the applicant.
(5) Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony.
607.04. Police Investigation. Prior to submitting an application for a taxicab
license to the Council, the City Clerk shall request an investigation and report from the Sheriff's
Department as to the facts stated in the application and as to the applicant's traffic and police
record.
607.05. Council Procedure. The City Clerk shall submit to the Council at a regular
meeting thereof the application together with a copy of the police report, and the applicant and
any member of the public shall have an opportunity to be heard on the granting or refusal to
grant a license.
607.06. License Fee. The annual fees for a licensee to operate a taxicab
business shall be as set forth in Chapter 212. The license shall be issued for a period of one
year and will expire on the last day of December.
607.07. Inspection of Vehicles and Equipment. Prior to the use and operation of
any vehicle under the provisions of this chapter said vehicles shall be thoroughly examined and
inspected per Council direction.
Rockford City Code
600-18
607.08. Designation of Taxicabs. Each taxicab shall bear on the exterior surface
of the body in letters not less than two inches nor more than four inches in height the name of
the owner or the company name under which he operates, and in addition may bear an
identifying design approved by Council.
607.09. Taxi Meter Required. All taxicabs operated under the authority of this
chapter shall be equipped with taxi meters fastened in front of the passenger, visible to the
passenger at all times, day and night, and after sundown the faces of taxi meters shall be
illuminated. Such taxi meters shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard
design and construction, driven either from the transmission or from one of the front wheels by a
flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. They shall be sealed at all points and
connections which, if manipulated, would affect their correct reading and recording. Each taxi
meter shall have thereon a flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not
employed, and it shall be the duty of the driver to throw the flag of such taxi meter into a nonrecording
position at the termination of each trip. The said taxi meters shall be subject to
inspection from time to time by the Sheriff’s Department. Any inspector or other officer of said
department is hereby authorized either on complaint of any person or without such complaint, to
inspect any taxi meter and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy therein, to notify the person
operating said taxicab to cease operation. Thereupon said taxicab shall be kept off the
highways until the taxi meter is repaired and in the required working condition.
607.10. Rates. Every taxicab operated under this Chapter shall have a rate card
setting forth the authorized rates of fare displayed in such a place as to be in view of all
passengers.
607.11. Failure to Pay Fare. No person shall refuse or neglect to pay for the
services, rent, or hire of any licensed taxicab upon discharging or renting the same with the
intention to defraud the owner or licensee of the taxicab, or obtain the services, hire,
possession, or use of any taxicab by color or aid of any false representation, pretense, token or
writing, or obtain credit for such services, hire possession or use by color or aid of any false
fraudulent representation, pretense, token or writing, or having hired any taxicab, shall willfully,
recklessly, wantonly, or by gross negligence, injure or destroy, or allow or permit the same or
any part thereof to be injured or destroyed, unless the owner or licensee of the taxicab has
voluntarily extended credit to the person hiring, renting, or using such vehicle.
607.12. Deceiving Passengers. No person owning or driving a taxicab shall
deceive any passenger who may ride in such vehicle, or who may desire to ride in such vehicle,
as to his destination or the price authorized to be charged for such person, or shall convey such
passenger or cause him to be conveyed to a place other than that directed by him.
607.13. Solicitation of Passengers. No person shall solicit passengers for a
taxicab upon the streets of this City, except the driver of a taxicab when sitting upon the driver's
seat of his vehicle. The driver of any taxicab shall remain on the driver's seat or inside his
vehicle at all times when such vehicle is standing upon the taxicab stands or when actually
engaged in carrying passengers; provided that nothing in this section shall be held to prohibit
such driver from alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers into
or out of such vehicle or for any other reasonable purpose.
607.14. Trip Sheets. Every driver shall keep a trip sheet upon which he shall note
the starting point and time: and the termination point and time of each trip of such taxicab, and
the place of discharge of each passenger from such taxicab, the amount of the fare charged,
Rockford City Code
600-19
whether upon the meter, hours, or trip basis, and the driver's name and number. Such sheet
shall be filed with and kept as part of the records of the licensee. Trip sheets shall be filed not
later than 24 hours after the termination of any single day's work by the driver, and the trip
sheets shall be open to investigation by the Sheriff's Department at all times. Each licensee
shall preserve for a period of one year and submit upon request of the City Council or Sheriff's
Department any information contained in the drivers' trip sheets, together with the: true and
correct information as to the orders or calls for taxis and the disposition of same.
607.15. Articles Left in Taxicabs. If an article is left by a passenger in a taxicab, it
shall be delivered if possible to the claimant. If such article is not claimed within 24 hours of
such discovery, it shall be delivered to the principal office: or place of business of the licensee;
otherwise to the Sheriff's Department.
607.16. Drivers of Taxicabs. No person shall drive a taxicab licensed under this
chapter upon the streets of the City without having a valid Minnesota Driver's License of the
proper class or kind issued to him and in his possession. Each driver shall display an
identification card, including a photograph of the driver, visible to all passengers at all times that
he is driving a taxicab.
607.17. Liability Insurance Required. No license to operate a taxicab shall be
issued by the City until a certificate of insurance has been filed with the City Clerk establishing
that there is in full force and effect a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance
company authorized to do business in the State of Minnesota for each vehicle authorized
to be operated by the applicant in the amount of $50,000.00 for bodily injury to any one
person, and the amount of $100,000.00 for injuries to more than one person which are
sustained in the same accident, and $10,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one
accident. Each such policy will provide that the City shall receive ten (10) days written notice
prior to cancellation of such policy.
607.18. Drivers’ Hours. No employer of a taxicab driver shall require or permit
such driver to be or remain on duty for a longer period than 12 consecutive hours. Whenever
any such driver shall have been continuously on duty for 12 hours, he shall be relieved and not
be required or permitted to go on duty until he has had at least ten (10) consecutive hours off
duty. No driver who has been on duty 12 hours in the aggregate in any 24-hour period shall be
required or permitted to go on duty without having at least ten (10) consecutive hours off duty.
The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply in cases of emergency in which the safety,
health, morals, or welfare of the public may be affected.
607.19. Unlawful Acts. No taxicab driver shall: smoke while a passenger is in the
cab; sell or offer to sell alcohol or drugs; or solicit business for houses of ill repute.
607.20. Central Office and Hours of Service. Holders of certificates of public
convenience and necessity shall maintain a central place of business and keep the same open
for such hours of each day as the City Council may direct for the purpose of receiving calls and
dispatching cabs. They shall answer all calls received by them for services inside the corporate
limits of the City as soon as they can do so and if said services cannot be rendered within a
reasonable time they shall notify the prospective passengers how long it will be before the call
can be answered and give the reason therefore. Any holder who shall refuse to accept a call
anywhere in the corporate limits of the City at any time when such holder has available cabs,
shall be deemed a violator of this Chapter.
Rockford City Code
600-20
608 Pawn Shops, Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Goods Dealer
608.01. Definitions. The following terms, as used in this ordinance, have the
meanings stated:
Subd. 1. Pawnbroker means a person who loans money on deposit or pledge of
personal property, or other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property
or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price, or who
loans money secured by chattel mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the
property or any part thereof so mortgaged.
Subd. 2. Secondhand Goods Dealer means a person whose regular business
includes selling or receiving tangible personal property (excluding motor vehicles) previously
used, rented, owned or leased.
608.02. Exemptions. This ordinance does not apply to or include the following:
Subd. 1. The sale of secondhand goods where all of the following conditions are
present:
(1) The sale is held on property occupied as a. dwelling by the seller, or owner,
rented or leased by a charitable or political organization;
(2) The items offered for sale are owned by the occupant;
(3) The sale does not exceed a period of 72 consecutive hours;
(4) Not more than three sales are held either by the same person or on the same
property, as defined in (A) above, in any twelve month period; and, (Ord. 08-10,
December 9, 2008)
(5) None of the items offered for sale have been purchased for resale or received on
consignment for purpose of resale. (Ord. #11-07, adopted July 11, 2011)
Subd. 2. Sales by a person licensed as a motor vehicle dealer.
Subd. 3. The sale of secondhand books, magazines, sound or video recordings or
films.
Subd. 4. The sale of goods at an auction held by a licensed auctioneer.
Subd. 5. The business of buying or selling only those secondhand goods taken as
part or full payment for new goods, and where such business is incidental to and not the primary
business of a person.
Subd. 6. A bulk sale of property from a merchant, manufacturer, or wholesaler
having an established place of business or of goods sold at open sale from bankrupt stock.
Subd. 7. Goods sold at a public market.
Subd. 8. Goods sold at an exhibition. (Ord. 08-10, December 9, 2008)
Rockford City Code
600-21
Subd. 9. Goods sold that have been hand made by local artisans. (Ord. #11-07,
adopted July 26, 2011)
608.03. License Required.
Subd. 1. Secondhand Goods Dealer. Except as herein otherwise provided, it is
unlawful for any person to engage in the business of secondhand goods dealer without first
obtaining a secondhand goods dealer license therefore from the City.
Subd. 2. Pawnbroker. It is unlawful for any person to conduct, operate, or engage
in the business of pawnbroker without first having obtained a license therefore from the City.
Subd. 3. Separate Licenses Required. A pawnbroker may not conduct, operate or
engage in the business of secondhand goods dealer without having obtained a secondhand
goods dealer license in addition to a pawnbroker license. A secondhand goods dealer may not
conduct, operate or engage in the business of pawnbroker without having obtained a
pawnbroker license in addition to a secondhand goods dealer license.
608.04. Multiple Dealers.
Subd. 1. Multiple Licenses. The owner of a business at which two or more
secondhand goods dealers are engaged in business by maintaining separate sales space and
identifying themselves to the public as individual dealers may obtain a multiple secondhand
goods dealer license for the location. A multiple license may not be issued unless the following
requirements are met:
(1) The businesses must have a single name and address;
(2) The businesses must operate in a compact and contiguous space;
(3) The businesses must be under the unified control and supervision of the one
person who holds the license; and
(4) Sale must be consummated at a central point or register operated by the owner
of the business, and the owner must maintain a comprehensive account of all
sales.
Subd. 2. Compliance. The holder of a secondhand goods dealer license under this
ordinance for a business with more than one dealer at the same location must comply with all of
the requirements of this ordinance, including the responsibility for reporting to the Wright County
Sheriff and record-keeping in the same manner as any other dealer licensed under this
ordinance.
608.05. License Fee. The annual fee for Secondhand Goods, Multiple Sales and
Pawnbroker shall be as set forth in Chapter 212.
608.06. Application.
Rockford City Code
600-22
Subd. 1. Contents. A license applicant must complete an application form
provided by the City Clerk.
Subd. 2. Execution. If the applicant is a natural person, the application must be
signed and sworn to by the person; if a corporation, by an agent authorized to sign; if a
partnership, by a partner.
Subd. 3. Fees. The application must be accompanied by the required license fee,
bond and investigation fee. Seventy-five percent (75%) of the license fee will be returned to the
applicant if the application is rejected. The investigation fee is not refundable. (Ord. 08-10,
December 9, 2008)
Subd. 4. False Statements. It is unlawful to knowingly make a false statement in
the license application. In addition to all other penalties, the license may be subsequently
revoked by the Council for a violation of this Section.
608.07. (Ord. 08-10, December 9, 2008)
608.08. Site Plan. The application for a pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer
license must be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale. The site plan must contain:
(1) A legal description, including PID#, of the property upon which the proposed
licensed premises is situated;
(2) A plot plan;
(3) The exact location of the licensed premises on the property, customer and
employee parking areas; accesses onto the property, and entrance into the
premises; and
(4) A floor plan of the licensed premises.
608.09. Investigations.
Subd. 1. Conduct. The City, prior to the. granting of an initial pawnbroker or
secondhand goods dealer license, must conduct a preliminary background and financial
investigation of the applicant. Any person having a beneficial interest in the license must be
investigated. The applicants (individual, each member of partnership and each officer of a
corporation] must sign a release that contains the full name, date of birth and current address.
The investigation shall be conducted by the Wright County Sheriff or designated agent to the
Council and the results reported to the Council. The Wright County Sheriff must verify the facts
stated in the application, and must report all convicted violations of State law, Federal law, or
City code provisions involving the applicant, interested persons, or the licensed premises while
under that applicant's proprietorship.
Subd. 2. Fee. The fee charged by the City to an applicant for the costs of
investigation shall be established pursuant to Chapter 212. (Ord. 08-10, December 9, 2008)
608.10. Public Hearing. A pawnbroker license will not be issued or renewed
without a public hearing. Any person having an interest in or who will be affected by the
proposed license will be permitted to testify at the hearing. The public hearing must be preceded
Rockford City Code
600-23
by at least ten days published notice specifying the location of the proposed licensed business
premises. (Ord. #11-07, adopted July 26, 2011)
608.11. Granting of License. After review of the license application, investigation
report and public hearing, the Council may grant or refuse the application for a new or renewed
pawnbroker. The secondhand goods dealer license shall be exempt from the public hearing
requirement. A license will not be effective unless the investigation fee, and application fee
have been filed with the City Clerk's office. (Ord. #11-07, adopted July 26, 2011)
608.12. Persons Ineligible For License. A pawnbroker or secondhand goods
dealer license will not be issued to:
(1) A person not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;
(2) A person under 18 years of age;
(3) Subject to the provision of law, a person who within five years of the license
application date has been convicted of receiving stolen property, sale of stolen
property or controlled substance, burglary, robbery, damage or trespass to
property, or any law of City Code provision regulating the business of
pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer;
(4) A person who within five years of the license application date had a pawnbroker
or secondhand goods dealer license revoked;
(5) When the Council determines after investigation and public hearing, that
issuance or renewal of the license would adversely affect the public health,
safety or welfare.
608.13. Partnerships or Corporations Ineligible for License. Partnerships, whose
partners include any of the above ineligible persons, or corporations whose officers or board
members include any of the above ineligible persons shall not be eligible for a pawnbroker or
secondhand goods dealer’s license.
608.14. Places Ineligible for License. A license will not be issued or renewed
under this Section for any place or for any business:
(1) If taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the City or the State of
Minnesota on the licensee's business premises are delinquent and unpaid;
(2) Where operation of a licensed premises would violate the zoning provisions of
the City Code; or,
(3) Where the applicant's present license was issued conditioned upon the applicant
making specified improvements to the licensed premises or the property of the
licensed premises which improvements have not been completed.
608.15. Conditional Licenses. The Council may grant an application for a new or
renewed pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer license conditioned upon the applicant
making reasonable improvements to the proposed business premises or the property upon
which the business premises is situated. Such improvements shall be required by City Zoning
Rockford City Code
600-24
or Building Code requirements, or other improvements related to the health, safety, welfare, or
Wright County Sheriff power functions. The Council, in granting a conditional license, will
specify when the modifications must be completed. Failure to comply with the conditions of the
license are grounds for the Council to revoke or refuse to renew the license.
608.16. License Limitations. A license will be issued to the applicant only, and
only for the business premises as described in the application. The license is effective only for
the premises specified in the approved license application, and may not be transferred to any
other person, partnership, corporation, or premises.
608.17. Term; Expiration;, Pro Rata Fee. The license is issued for a period of one
year beginning on June 1 except that if the application is made during the license year a license
may be issued for the remainder of the license year for a monthly pro rata license fee. An
unexpired fraction of a month will be counted as a complete month. The full investigation fee will
be required. The license expires on June 30.
608.18. Refunds. The City Clerk will refund a pro rata share of the license fee for
a license, upon written request, to the licensee or the licensees estate if:
(1) The business ceases to operate because of destruction or damage;
(2) The licensee dies;
(3) The business ceases to be lawful for a reason other than a license revocation; or,
(4) The licensee ceases to carry on the licensed business under the license.
608.19. Death of the Licensee. In the case of death of a licensee, the personal
representative of the licensee may continue operation of the business for not more than 90 days
after the licensee’s death.
608.20. Records. A licensed secondhand goods dealer and pawnbroker, at the
time of receipt of an item, must immediately record, in ink or other indelible medium in a book or
word processing unit, the following information:
(1) An accurate description of the item including, but not limited to, any trademark,
identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other
identifying mark on such item;
(2) The purchase price;
(3) Date, time and place of receipt;
(4) Name, address, telephone number and date of birth of the person from whom the
item was received;
(5) An imprint of either of the forms of identification of the seller:
A. Valid picture driver's licenses;
B. Picture identification; (Ordinance 97-13, passed July 28, 1997)
Rockford City Code
600-25
(6) The books as well as the goods received must be open for inspection by the
appropriate law enforcement agency at reasonable times. Records required by
this Section 806.20 must be stored and maintained by the licensee for a period of
at least three years.
608.21. Daily Reports. For the following items, regardless of resale price, a
secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker shall make out, on forms approved by the Wright
County Sheriff, and submitted daily by mail to the Wright County Sheriff, a legible
description of the goods received during the preceding day, together with the time received and
a description of the person from whom the goods were received:
(1) Items with a serial number identification, or “operation identification” symbol;
(2) Cameras;
(3) Electronic audio or video equipment;
(4) Precious jewelry or gems, and precious metals;
(5) Artist signed or artist attributed works of art;
(6) Guns and firearms.
608.22. Other Daily Reports. A similar daily report shall be filed for any other item
which the dealer intends to sell for more than $200.00, except for furniture and kitchen or
laundry appliances which shall not require a daily report regardless of resale price.
608.23. Stolen Goods. A licensed pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer must
report immediately to the Wright County Sheriff any article pledged or received, or sought to be
pledged or received, if the licensee has reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost.
608.24. Holding. An item received by a secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker,
for which a report to the Wright County Sheriff is required, may not be sold or otherwise
transferred for a period of 30 days after the date of such report to the Wright County Sheriff, in
addition to the 30 days redemption period. The Wright County Sheriff may waive, in writing, any
part of the 30 day holding period at its discretion, but the redemption period may not be so
waived. However, an individual may redeem an item pawned 72 hours after the item was
received on deposit, excluding Sundays and legal holidays.
608.25. Receipt. A licensed secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker must
provide a receipt to the seller or consignor of any items which includes:
(1) The address and phone number of the business;
(2) The date;
(3) A description of the item purchased; and
(4) The purchaser’s signature.
Rockford City Code
600-26
608.26. Police Orders. If an authorized law enforcement agency notifies a
dealer not to sell an item, the item may not be sold or removed from the licensed
premises until authorized to be released by the appropriate law enforcement agency. Such
release shall be requested by the licensee, and must be approved or denied by the law
enforcement agency.
608.27. Weapons. A licensed pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer may not
receive as a pledge or otherwise accept for consignment or sale any revolver, pistol, sawed-off
shotgun, automatic rifle, blackjack, switchblade, knife, or other similar weapons or firearms,
unless the licensee is in possession of a current valid Federal Firearms License or Federal
Firearms Pawnbrokers License. Section 608.27 is not intended to restrict the legitimate retailing
of firearms under a Federal Firearms License.
608.28. Prohibited Acts. It is unlawful for any:
(1) Minor to sell or consign, or attempt to sell or consign, goods with a secondhand
goods dealer or pawnbroker. It is also unlawful for any secondhand goods dealer
or pawnbroker to receive goods from a minor.
(2) Secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker to receive any goods from a person of
unsound mind or an intoxicated person.
(3) Secondhand goods dealer or pawnbroker to receive goods unless the seller
presents identification in the form of a driver's license or other pictured
identification.
608.29. License Denial, Suspension or Revocation. A license under this
Ordinance may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the Council after a public hearing where
the licensee is granted the opportunity to be heard, for one or more of the following reasons:
(1) The operation of the business is in conflict with any provision of the City
Ordinance/Code;
(2) The operation of the business is in conflict with any health, building, building
maintenance, zoning, or any other provision of the City Ordinance or other law;
(3) The licensee or the business premises fails to conform with the standards for
license application contained in Ordinance 608;
(4) The licensee has failed to comply with one or more provision of Ordinance 608 or
any statute, rule or City Ordinance provision pertaining to the businesses of
pawnbroker or secondhand goods dealer;
(5) Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing a license;
(6) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of the
applicant's business; and,
(7) Subject to the provisions of law, violation within the preceding five years of any
State or Federal law relating to theft, damage, or trespass to property, sale of a
controlled substance or stolen goods, or operation of a business.
Rockford City Code
600-27
608.30. Redemption Period. A person who pawns an item shall have at least
thirty days to redeem the item before it may be sold, subject to the additional holding
requirement provided for herein.
608.31. Payments by Check. When a secondhand goods dealer buys or
otherwise receives an item at the licensed place of business, payment must be made by check
made payable to the named payee who is the actual intended seller. This section does not
apply to pawnbrokers.
608.32. Inspections. A peace officer or any properly designated employee of the
City, the County or the State of Minnesota may enter, inspect and search business premises
licensed under Ordinance 608 during business hours, without a warrant.
608.33. County License. Secondhand goods dealers and pawnbrokers dealing in
precious metals and gems must also be licensed in Wright or Hennepin County, as required by
Minnesota Statutes 325F.73. (Amended by Ordinance No. 95-05, passed April 11, 1995)
Rockford City Code
600-28
609 Temporary Special Event License
609.01. Purpose. This ordinance regulates those temporary events which are not
otherwise licensed; events which by their nature could be expected to significantly affect the
public health, safety or welfare in any of the following ways: increased traffic volume or
congestion, a need for additional sanitary waste facilities, a need for additional police or fire
protection, or disruption to the character of any business or residential neighborhood. These
events include, but are not limited to: parade, race, procession, carnival, festival, residential
block event, street dance or fundraiser.
609.02. License Required. No person shall engage in an event as listed in 609.01
unless a license shall have been obtained from the City as herein provided.
609.03. Application Requirements. A person seeking issuance of a license shall
file an application with the City clerk on forms provided by the City. Application shall be made by
the organizers or sponsors and include the signature of the land owner(s) of the property on
which the event is to occur, and if it be on public property, then only the signatures of the
organizers or sponsors shall be required.
(1) Application for an event other than a residential block event shall include the
following:
A. A description of the proposed event;
B. A legal description of the property or property address;
C. The name, address and phone number of the applicant;
D. Date and time of the proposed event.
(2) Application for a residential block event must be submitted by a resident that has
property that abuts a portion of the street wherein the event is to be held and who
has made a good faith attempt to deliver to each residence or building
management abutting such portion of the street a notice containing the following
information:
A. A description of the event;
B. The date and hours of the event;
C. The name, address and phone number of the sponsor;
D. That anyone objecting to the block event may petition the City council for
a hearing to protest the issuance of a license for such event.
Application for a residential block event must be accompanied by a petition containing
signatures representing seventy-five (75) percent of the households on the block or
blocks abutting the street approving the event. Location of barricades, if any, must be
submitted with the application. Application for all licenses shall be made not less than
thirty (30) days before the special event.
Rockford City Code
600-29
609.04. Application Conditions. The applicant (s) will sign documentation on
forms provided by the City that contain the following:
(1) Applicant agrees to defend and hold the City harmless from all claims, demand,
actions or causes of action, of whatsoever nature or character, arising out of or
by reason of conduct of the event for which the license is granted.
(2) Applicant will indemnify the City for all damages that may result to City property,
including any portion of such street as a result of the event.
(3) Applicant will, without expense to the City, immediately clean up, remove and
dispose of all litter or material of any kind which is placed or left on City streets or
City property because of the event and that if the applicant neglects or fails to
proceed with the cleanup within the two-hour period immediately following the
end of the event, or if cleanup is done in an inadequate manner, the City public
works department is authorized to do the cleanup and the applicant shall be
charged for said cost.
(4) The applicant will be responsible for the placement, maintenance and removal of
barricades which may be required.
609.05. Application Review. All applications will be reviewed for approval and
signature by the following: the City Administrator, the City Public Works Director and the City
Fire Chief.
609.06. Insurance. All applicants, with the exception of residential block parties,
must furnish proof of liability insurance coverage for the event.
609.07. Restrictions. A for profit business that sponsors an event where 100% of
the profits are not donated to a non-profit business or charity are limited to one event in any
twelve month period.
609.08. Exception. The Annual Memorial Day Parade and Annual River Days
Festival are considered City ordained events and all of the conditions listed above may not be
required. The set up, installation of no parking signs and/or street barricades, traffic control and
clean up may be furnished by the City.
609.09. Violation. Violation of this ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor,
punishable as prescribed by State law. (Added by Ordinance No. 95-09, passed May 23, 1995)
Rockford City Code
600-30
610 Telecommunications Permit Ordinance
610.01. Definitions. The terms defined in this section have the meanings given
them.
Subd. 1. Company. A natural or corporate person, business association, political
subdivision, public or, private agency of any kind, its successors and assigns, who or which
seeks or is required to construct, install, operate, repair, maintain, remove or relocate facilities in
the City.
Subd. 2. Director. The supervisor of the public works department or City engineer.
Subd. 3. Facilities. Telecommunications equipment of any kind, including but not
limited to audio, video, paging, facsimile or similar service, not governed by Minnesota Statutes,
Chapter 238, including all trunks, lines, circuits, physical connections, switching equipment,
wireless communication equipment of all kinds, and any necessary appurtenance owned,
leased or operated by a company on, over, in, under, across or along public ground.
Subd. 4. Public Ground. Highways, roads, streets, alleys, public ways, utility
easements and public grounds in the City.
610.02. Permit Procedure.
Subd. 1. Permit Required. A company may not construct, install, repair, remove or
relocate facilities, or any part thereof, in, on, over, under or along public ground without first
obtaining a permit from the City.
Subd. 2. Application. Application for a permit is made to the director.
Subd. 3. Issuance of Permit. If the director determines that the applicant has
satisfied the requirements of this ordinance the director may issue a permit to the company. An
applicant may contest a permit denial or the conditions of approval by written notice to the clerk
requesting a City council review within fourteen (14) days of the director's action. The council
shall hear any contest of the director's action under this ordinance within forty-five (45) days of
the City clerk's receipt: of the contest notice. Nothing in this ordinance precludes the City from
requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to the
issuance of a permit set forth herein.
Subd. 4. Permit Fee. The application must be accompanied by the permit fee set
forth in section 212 of the ordinance.
Subd. 5. Security for Completion of Work. Prior to commencement of work, the
company must deposit with the City security in the form of certified check, letter of credit or
construction bond, in a sufficient amount as determined by the director for the completion of the
work. The securities will be held until the work is completed plus a period of six months
thereafter to guarantee that restoration work has been satisfactorily completed. Upon
application of the company, providing such information as the director may require, if two or
more work projects are to be constructed during a calendar year, the director may accept, in lieu
of separate security for each project, a single security for multiple projects in such form and
amount as determined, in the discretion of the director, to be sufficient to assure completion of
Rockford City Code
600-31
all projects which may be in progress at any one time during that calendar year and to guaranty
that restoration work will be satisfactorily completed. The security will then be returned to the
company with interest as required by law and then interest at the applicable statutory rate.
Subd. 6. Inspection of Work. When the work is completed the company must
request an inspection by the director. The director will determine if the work has been
satisfactorily completed and provide the company with a written report of the inspection and
approval.
610.03. Restoration and Relocation.
Subd. 1. Restoration. Upon completion of the work, the company must restore the
general area of the work, including paving and its foundations, to the same condition that
existed prior to commencement of the work and must exercise reasonable care to maintain the
same condition for two years thereafter. The work must be completed as promptly as weather
permits. If the company does not promptly perform and complete the work, remove all dirt,
rubbish, equipment and material, and restore the public ground to the same condition, the City
may put it in the same condition at the expense of the company. The company must, upon
demand, pay to the City the direct and indirect cost of the work done for or performed by the
City, including but not limited to the City's administrative costs. To recover its costs, the City will
first draw on the security posted by the company and then recover the balance of the costs
incurred from the company directly by written demand. This remedy is in addition to any other
remedies available to the City.
Subd. 2. Company Initiated Relocation. The company must give the City written
notice prior to a company initiated relocation of facilities. A company initiated relocation must be
at the company's expense and must be approved by the City, such approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
Subd. 3. City Required Relocation. The company must promptly and at its own
expense, with due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently relocate its facilities
whenever the City requires such relocation.
Subd. 4. Relocation Where Public Ground Vacated. The vacation of public
ground does not deprive the company of the right to operate and maintain its facilities in the
City. If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the company, the company must pay the
relocation costs. If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the City or other persons, the
company must pay the relocation costs unless otherwise agreed to by the City, company and
other persons.
610.04. Company Default.
Subd. 1. Notice. If the company is in default in the performance of the work
authorized by the permit, including but not limited to restoration requirements, for more than 30
days after receiving written notice from the City of the default, the City may terminate the rights
of the company under the permit. The notice of default must be in writing and specify the
provisions of the permit under which the default is claimed and state the grounds of the claim.
The notice must be served on the company by personally delivering it to an officer thereof at its
principal place of business in Minnesota or by certified mail to that address.
Rockford City Code
600-32
Subd. 2. City Action On Default. If the company is in default in the performance of
the work authorized by the permit, the City may, after the above notice to the company and
failure of the company to cure the default, take such action as may be reasonably necessary to
abate the condition caused by the default. The company must reimburse the City for the City's
reasonable costs, including costs of collection and attorney fees incurred as a result of the
company default. The security posted under. section 610.02, subdivision 5 will be applied by the
City first toward payment for such reimbursement.
610.05. Indemnification.
Subd. 1. Scope. The company will indemnify, keep and hold the City, its elected
officials, officers, employees, and agents free and harmless from any and all claims and actions
on account of injury or death of persons or damage to property occasioned by the construction,
installation, maintenance, repair, removal, relocation or operation of the facilities affecting public
ground, unless such injury or damage is the result of the negligence of the City, its elected
officials, employees, officers, or agents. The City will notify the company of claims or actions
and provide a reasonable opportunity for the company to accept and undertake the defense.
Subd. 2. Claim Defense. If a claim or action is brought against the City under
circumstances where indemnification applies, the company, at its sole expense, shall defend the
City if written notice of the claim or action is given to the company within a period wherein the
company is not prejudiced in the defense of such claim or action by lack of such notice. If the
company undertakes the defense, the company shall have complete control of such claim or
action, but it may not settle without the consent of the City, which shall not be
unreasonably withheld. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense
or immunity otherwise available to the City. In defending any action on behalf of the City,
the company is entitled to assert every defense or immunity that the City could assert in its own
behalf .
610.06. Other Conditions of Use.
Subd. 1. Use of Public Ground. Facilities must be located, constructed, installed,
maintained or relocated so as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with the usual and
customary traffic, travel, and use of public ground. The facilities are subject to additional
conditions of the permit as established by the director including but not limited to (i) the right of
inspection by the City at reasonable times and places; (ii) the obligation to relocate the facilities
pursuant to section 610.03, subdivisions 3 and 4; and (iii) compliance with all applicable
regulations imposed by the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission and other state and federal
law, including prompt compliance with the requirements of the Gopher State One Call program,
Minnesota Statutes Chapter 216D.
Subd. 2. Location. The facilities must be placed in a location agreed to by the City.
The company shall give the City forty-five (45) days advanced written notice of the company's
proposed location of facilities within public ground. No later than 45 days after the City's receipt
of the company's written notice the City will notify the company in writing of the City's
acceptance or rejection of the proposed location. If the City rejects the company's proposed
location, the City shall propose alternative locations. The City does not waive or forfeit its right to
reject the location of facilities by failure to respond within the 45 days.
Subd. 3. Emergency Work. A company may open and disturb the surface of public
ground without a permit where an emergency exists requiring the immediate repair of its
Rockford City Code
600-33
facilities. In such event the company must request a permit not later than the second working
day thereafter and comply with the applicable conditions of the permit. In no event, may the
company undertake such an activity which will result in the closing of a street or alley without
prior notification to the City.
Subd. 4 Street Improvements, Paving or Resurfacing. The City will give the
company written notice of plans for street improvements where permanent paving or resurfacing
is involved. The notice must contain (i) the nature and character of the improvements; (ii) the
streets upon which the improvements are to be made; (iii) the extent of the improvements, the
time when the City will start the work; and, (iv) if more than one street is involved, the sequence
in which the work is to proceed.
Subd. 5. Company Protection of Facilities. The company must take reasonable
measures to prevent the facilities from causing damage to persons or property. The company
must take reasonable measures to protect its facilities from damage that could be inflicted
on the facilities by persons, property, or the elements. The company must take specific
protective measures when the City performs work near the facilities.
Subd. 6. Prior Service Connections. In cases where the City is undertaking the
paving or resurfacing of streets and the facilities are located under such street, the company
may be required to install service connections prior to the paving or resurfacing, if it is apparent
that service will be required during the five year period following the paving or resurfacing.
610.07. Effective Date and Applicability to Existing Facilities. Companies with
facilities, in, on, over, under or along public ground on the effective date of this ordinance must
take prompt action to comply with this ordinance and the permits authorized by this ordinance.
A company, however, is not required to reapply for a permit obtained from the City prior to the
effective date of this ordinance. A company is not required to pay the difference between the
permit fee of a previously obtained permit and the equivalent newly obtained permit under this
ordinance. All other provisions of this ordinance apply to existing facilities.
610.08. Acceptance of Requirements. By receiving a permit pursuant to this
ordinance, the company accepts and agrees to comply with all of the requirements of this
ordinance.
610.09. Public Ground Other Than Right-Of-Way. Nothing in this ordinance is
intended to grant to the company authority beyond that given by Minnesota Statutes Section
222.37 for use of the public rights-of-way for construction and operation of facilities. If the City
allows the company to use its non-right-of-way public ground, the terms of this ordinance apply
to the extent they are consistent with the contract, statutory and common law rights the City
owns in such property.
610.10. Regulations; Permit Schedules. The director is authorized and directed to
prepare suitable regulations and schedules for the administration of permits issued under this
ordinance.
610.11. Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is contrary to law and
therefore unenforceable, such provision will be severed and will not affect the other provisions
of this ordinance. (Added by Ordinance No. 95-12, passed July 25, 1995)
Rockford City Code
600-34
611 Fireworks
611.01. Sale of Fireworks. It is unlawful to sell fireworks in the City of Rockford in
violation of Minnesota Statutes, § 624.20 through 624.25, inclusive, which are adopted by
reference. Legal fireworks as defined in this Section may, however, be sold upon issuance of a
license issued by the City.
611.02. Definition. For the purposes of this Section legal fireworks is defined to
mean:
Wire or wood sparklers of not more than 100 grams of mixture per item. Other sparkling
items which are non-explosive and non-aerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical
mixture per tube or a total of 200 grams or less for multiple tubes, snakes and glow
worms, smoke devices, or trick noisemakers which include paper streamers, party
poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops, each consisting of not more than
twenty-five hundredths grains of explosive mixture.
611.03. Application. The application for a license shall contain the following
information: name, address, and telephone number of applicant; the address of the location
where fireworks will be sold; the type of legal fireworks to be sold; the estimated quantity of legal
fireworks that will be stored on the licensed premises.
611.04. Processing Application The application must be filed with the City
Administrator together with the permit fee. Following an inspection of the premises proposed to
be licensed, the City Administrator shall issue the permit if conditions for license approval are
satisfied and the location is properly zoned. If the City Administrator denies the permit
application, the permit applicant may, within ten (10) days, appeal the decision to the City
Council.
611.05. Conditions of License. The license shall be issued subject to the following
conditions:
(1) The license is non-transferable, either to a different person or location.
(Ordinance 02-08, passed May 28, 2002)
(2) Fire suppression:
(a) If the licensed premises is a permanent structure, it must contain an
automatic sprinkler system.
(b) Fire suppression equipment shall be provided as required by the Fire
Chief if the licensed sales are conducted from a temporary structure.
(Ordinance 12-02, adopted June 12, 2012)
(3) The license must be publicly displayed on the licensed premises.
(4) The premises are subject to inspection by City employees including law
enforcement officers during normal business hours.
(5) The sale of legal fireworks must be in an allowed use of the premises.
Rockford City Code
600-35
(6) The premises must be in compliance with the State Building Code and State Fire
Code. (Ordinance 02-08, passed May 28, 2002)
611.06. License Period and License Fee. Licenses shall be issued for a calendar
year. The license fee is established in Chapter 212 of the Rockford City Code. License fees
shall not be prorated. (Ordinance 02-08, passed May 28, 2002)
611.07. Revocation of License. Following written notice and an opportunity for a
hearing, the City Administrator may revoke a license for violation of this Section or state law
concerning the sale, use or possession of fireworks. If a license is revoked, neither the
applicant nor the licensed premises may obtain a license for twelve (12) months. (Ordinance
02-08, passed May 28, 2002)
Rockford City Code
600-36
612 Housing Code
PURPOSE. There exist in the City of Rockford structures that are now or that may in the
future become substandard. Such conditions, together with inadequate provision for light and
air, insufficient protection against fire hazards, lack of proper heating, and unsanitary conditions,
constitute a menace to public health, safety and welfare of its citizens. It is further found and
declared that the existence of such conditions adversely affects public health and safety and
leads to continuation, extension and aggravation of urban blight. It is further found that
adequate protection of public health, safety and welfare, therefore requires the establishment
and enforcement of minimum property standards for the exterior of owner and Non-owner
occupied residential dwellings and interior standards for Non-owner occupied residential
dwellings. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
Subd. 1. Exterior Property Standards for Owner Occupied and Non-owner
occupied residential Dwellings. The owner of any owner and Non-owner occupied residential
dwelling shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Ground Cover. Every residential premise shall be maintained in a condition to
control erosion, dust and mud by suitable landscaping with grass, trees, shrubs,
or other planted ground cover or by paving with asphalt, concrete or by such
other suitable means as shall be approved by the enforcement officer.
(2) Insect and Rodent Infestations. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to
control and/or eliminate any infestation of insects, rodents or other pests in all
exterior areas, and accessory structures on the premises.
(3) Accessory Structures. All accessory structures including, but not limited to,
detached garages, sheds and fences, shall be maintained structurally sound and
in good repair. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods,
shall be protected from the elements and decay by or by other protective
covering or treatment. Any new paint applied shall not be lead base. Service
doors to residential garages shall be provided with securing locks.
(4) Exterior Sidewalks, Walkways and Stairs. All sidewalks, walkways and exterior
stairs shall be maintained in safe sound conditions free of defects and hazards.
(Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
Subd. 2. Exterior Structure for Owner Occupied and Non-owner occupied
residential Dwellings. The owner of any owner occupied and non-owner occupied residential
dwelling shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Foundations, walls, roof and other exterior surfaces. Every foundation, exterior
wall, roof and all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a professional
state of maintenance and repair.
A. The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all
points.
B. All exterior wood, vinyl and metal surfaces shall be protected from the
elements and decay by maintained paint, stain or other protective
Rockford City Code
600-37
covering or treatment. Joints in siding materials and between siding and
other feature shall be maintained weather-resistant. Metal surfaces
subject to rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and treated to inhibit future
rust or corrosion. For purposes of this Section, if forty percent (40%) or
more of a wall or other surface area, such as: fascia, soffits, rake, has the
protective coating deteriorated, then the wall or surface shall be restored
to a protected condition.
C. The roof shall be impervious to water and have no defects that admit
water or dampness to the interior of the building. No building roof shall be
used for storage of any materials or objects unless approved by the
enforcement officer.
(2) Stairs, Porches, Decks and Railing.
A. Every outside stair, every porch and deck shall be constructed safely and
capable of support a load as determined by the Building Code and shall
be kept in sound conditions and good repair. Every stairway, porch, deck
or step that is more than thirty (30) inches above grade shall have
guardrails and intermediate rails so that a 4” sphere can not pass trough
in accordance with the Minnesota State building code or maintained in
accordance with the Building code in effect when originally constructed. If
repairs include replacing more than fifty (50) percent it must be brought
up to current code standards.
B. Every flight of stairs that is more than three (3) risers high shall have
handrails in accordance with the Building Code or maintained in
accordance with the building code under which it was originally
constructed.
C. Stairs, steps, porches, decks, handrails, balustrades and guardrails
deemed hazardous by the enforcement officer shall be corrected so as to
be in compliance with the Building Code.
(3) Windows, doors and hatchways. Every window, exterior door and basement
hatchway shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in sound conditions and
repair.
A. Windows shall be fully supplied with window panes that are without open
cracks or holes.
B. Every window required for ventilation, or other outside opening used for
ventilation purposes, shall be supplied with a screen of not less than
sixteen (16) mesh per inch. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
Subd. 3. Completion of Exterior for Owner Occupied and Non-owner Occupied
Residential Dwellings. The roof and all exterior surfaces of all residential owner occupied and
Non-owner occupied residential dwelling units, buildings and accessory structures, shall be
completed with exterior finish materials within 12 months after the date of issuance of a building
permit for the new construction alteration, remodeling or relocation of such building or structure.
All such exterior surfaces of the structure issued a building permit before the effective date of
Rockford City Code
600-38
this ordinance for the new construction; alteration, remodeling or relocation of such structure
shall be completed twelve months after the date of issuing of such permit. Term “finish
materials” as used in this section shall mean stucco, brick, stone, shingles, or shakes, redwood,
cedar, vinyl, steel, fibrous cement and masonite siding materials, and shall include windows and
doors. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
Subd. 4. Interior Structure for Non-owner occupied residential Rental Residential
Dwellings. Non-owner occupied residential dwellings shall comply with at least the following
interior standards:
(1) Walls and ceilings. All interior walls and ceilings must be in good general repair
(i.e. No falling or loose plaster, gypsum, or ceiling tiles.
(2) All bathrooms shall have an operable window or exhaust fan.
(3) Ground fault protected outlets will be required in bathrooms, outlets within three
(3) feet of kitchen sink, and all exterior outlets.
(4) Rooms must be capable of maintaining sixty-sight (68) degrees temperature
three (3) feet from floor level.
(5) Hot water is required at kitchen sink, bathroom sink and tub/shower.
(6) Smoke detectors shall be required in all bedrooms and in the immediate vicinity
outside of the bedroom.
(7) Every fixture, facility or piece of equipment requiring sewer connection shall have
a functioning connection, free from defects, leaks, or obstructions, and shall
possess sufficient capaCity to drain all other fixtures, facilities, or pieces of
equipment which fee into it. The sewer system must be capable of conveying all
sewage into the municipal sanitary sewer system.
(8) Every fixture, facility, or piece of equipment requiring a water connection shall
have a functioning connection, free from defects, leaks, or obstructions. Each
water connection shall possess sufficient capaCity to adequately supply all
fixtures, facilities, or pieces of equipment to which connected with an
uncontaminated, controllable flow of water. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24,
2005)
Subd. 5. License Requirement for Non-owner occupied residential Dwellings. No
person shall operate a Non-owner occupied residential dwelling without first having obtained a
license to do so from the City of Rockford as hereinafter provided. Each such operating license
shall be issued annually and shall expire on the anniversary date of issuance. License renewals
shall be filed at least 30 days prior to license expiration date.
LICENSE FEES. License fees, as set forth by City Council resolution, shall be due 30
days prior to the license application date; in the cases of new, unlicensed dwellings, license fees
shall be due upon issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
(1) A delinquency penalty of 5% of the license fee for each day of operation without a
valid license shall be charged operators of rental dwelling after written notification
Rockford City Code
600-39
has been given by the City. Once issued a license is nontransferable and the
licensee shall not be entitled to a refund of any license fee upon revocation or
suspension; however, the licensee shall be entitled to a license fee refund, prorated
monthly, upon proof of transfer of legal control or ownership.
(2) No operating license shall be issued or renewed for a non-owner occupied
residential dwelling unit unless such owner designates in writing to the compliance
official the name of his resident agent who is responsible for maintenance and
upkeep and who is legally constituted and empowered to receive service of notice
of violation of the provisions of the City ordinances, to receive orders and to institute
remedial action to effect such orders and to accept all service or process pursuant
to law. The compliance official shall be notified in writing of any change of resident
agent.
(3) Every licensee of a multiple dwelling shall cause to be conspicuously posted in
the main entryway or other conspicuous location therein the current license for
the respective multiple dwelling.
(4) No operating license shall be transferable to another person or to another Nonowner
occupied residential dwelling. Every person holding an operating license
shall give notice in writing to the compliance official within five business days after
having legally transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of any licensed
rental dwelling. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person
succeeding to the ownership or control of such Non-owner occupied residential
dwelling or dwellings. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
Subd. 6. Enforcement. The provisions of this ordinance shall be construed to be
directory only, and shall not be construed to create a duty on the part of the City or its officers or
employees to enforce. The City and its officers and employees shall not be liable for any failure to
enforce the provisions of this code. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
COMPLAINTS. The compliance officer or designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter
when a complaint is filed by one of the following: an occupant of the dwelling, a member of the
Rockford Fire Department, a member of the Wright County Sheriff’s Department, a visitor or a City
staff member. Once a complaint has been filed with the City an inspection of the property shall be
scheduled. A fee, as set forth by City Council resolution, shall be charged for all inspections
necessary based upon a complaint filed with the City. The inspection fee(s) will be payable to the
City within 30 days after the inspection. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
COMPLIANCE ORDER. After an inspection of the dwelling triggered by a complaint and
the compliance officer determines that any building or portion thereof, or the premises surrounding
any of these, fails to meet the provisions of this ordinance, a compliance order setting forth the
violations of the ordinance and ordering the owner, occupant, operator, or agent to correct such
violations shall be issued. This compliance order shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Describe the location and nature of the violations of this ordinance.
(3) Establish a reasonable time for the correction of such violation and notify of appeal
recourse.
Rockford City Code
600-40
(4) Be served upon the owner or agent or occupant, as the case may require. Such
notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon
any such occupant, if a copy thereof is:
A. Served upon owner, agent or occupant personally; or
B. Sent by registered mail to his last known address; or
C. Upon failure to effect notice through (a) and (b) as set out in this section,
posted at a conspicuous place in or about the building, or portion thereof,
which is affected by the notice. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24,
2005)
RIGHT OF APPEAL. When it is alleged by any person to whom a compliance order is
directed that such compliance order is based upon erroneous interpretation of this ordinance, such
person may appeal the compliance order to the City Council sitting as a Board of Appeals. Such
appeals must be in writing, must specify the grounds for the appeal, must be accompanied by a
filing fee set forth per council resolution, in cash or cashier's check, and must be filed with the City
clerk within five (5) business days after service of the compliance order. The filing of an appeal
shall stay all proceedings in the furtherance of the action appealed from, unless such a stay would
cause imminent peril to life, health, or property. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
BOARD OF APPEALS DECISION. Upon at least five (5) business days notice to the
appellant of the time and place for hearing the appeal, and within thirty (30) days after said appeal
is filed, the board of appeals shall hold a hearing thereon, taking into consideration any advice and
recommendation from the compliance officer. The board of appeals may reverse, modify, or affirm
in whole or in part, the compliance order and may order return of all or part of the filing fee if the
appeal is upheld. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
RESTRICTIONS ON TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. It shall be unlawful for the owner of
any building, or portion thereof, upon whom a pending compliance order has been served to sell,
transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose thereof to another person until the provisions of the
tag or compliance order have been complied with, unless such owner shall furnish to the grantee,
lessee, or mortgage a true copy of any notice of violation or compliance order and shall obtain and
possess a receipt of acknowledging. Anyone securing an interest in the building, or portion thereof,
who has received notice of the existence of a violation tag or compliance order shall be bound by
same without further service of notice and shall be liable to all penalties and procedures provided
by this ordinance. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
EXECUTION OF COMPLIANCE ORDERS BY PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Upon failure to
comply with a compliance order within the time set therein and no appeal having been taken, or
upon failure to comply with a modified compliance order within the time set therein, the criminal
penalty established hereunder notwithstanding, the City Council may, by resolution, cause the cited
deficiency to be remedied as set forth in the compliance order. The cost of such remedy shall be a
lien against the subject real estate and may be levied and collected as a special assessment in the
manner provided by Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 429, but the assessment shall be payable in a
single installment. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
PENALTIES. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance by doing any act
or omitting to do any act which constitutes a breach of any section of this ordinance, shall, upon
Rockford City Code
600-41
conviction thereof by lawful authority, be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000) or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days or both, together with the costs of
prosecution. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate punishable offense.
No provision of this ordinance designating the duties of any official or employee of the City shall be
so construed as to make such official or employee liable for the penalty provided in this section
because of failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the City Council to impose such
penalty on such official or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty.
Every operating license issued under the provisions of this ordinance is subject to suspension or
revocation by the City Council should the licensed owner or his duly authorized resident agent fail
to operate or maintain licensed rental dwellings and units therein consistent with the provisions of
the ordinance of the City of Rockford and the laws of the State of Minnesota. In the event that an
operating license is suspended or revoked by the City Council for just cause, it shall be unlawful for
the owner or his duly authorized agent to thereafter permit any new occupancy of vacant or
thereafter vacated rental units until such time as a valid operating license may be restored by the
City Council. Any person violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by
imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both, together with the costs of prosecution. Each
day of each violation shall constitute a separate punishable offense.
The Zoning Administrator or Building Official or his designated agents shall be the compliance
official who shall administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance and who is hereby
authorized to inspect Non-owner occupied residential dwelling units and other buildings when
complaints are filed with the City that a violation of this ordinance has been or is being committed.
Inspections shall be conducted during reasonable daylight hours, and the compliance official shall
present evidence of official capaCity to the occupant in charge of a respective dwelling unit.
Any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a building may refuse to permit free access and
entry to the structure or premises under his control for inspection pursuant to this ordinance,
whereupon the compliance official may seek a court order authorizing such inspection.
UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.
(1) Any building or portion thereof, which is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary,
unsafe, vermin or rodent infested, or which lacks provision for basic illumination,
ventilation or sanitary facilities to the extent that the defects create a hazard to the
health, safety or welfare of the occupants or of the public may be declared unfit for
human habitation, the compliance official shall order same vacated within a
reasonable time and shall post a placard on same indicating that it is unfit for
human habitation, and any operating license previously issued for such dwelling
shall be revoked.
(2) It shall be unlawful for such building or portion thereof to be used for human
habitation until the defective conditions have been corrected and written approval
has been issued by the compliance official. It shall be unlawful for any person to
deface or remove the declaration from any such building.
SECURE UNFIT AND VACATED BUILDINGS. The owner of any building or portion
thereof, which has been declared unfit for human habitation, or which is otherwise vacant for a
period of 60 days or more, shall make same safe and secure so that it is not hazardous to the
Rockford City Code
600-42
health, safety and welfare of the public and does not constitute a public nuisance. Any vacant
building open at doors or windows, if unguarded, shall be deemed to be a hazard to the health,
safety and welfare of the public and a public nuisance within the meaning of this ordinance and
shall be made safe and secure immediately.
HAZARDOUS BUILDING DECLARATION. In the event that a building has been declared
unfit for human habitation and the owner has not remedied the defects within a prescribed
reasonable time, the building may be declared a hazardous building and treated consistent with the
provisions of Minnesota Statutes. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
Subd. 7. Enforcement and Inspection Authority. The Zoning Administrator shall be the
designated agent for administering and enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance and who is
hereby authorized to cause inspections for residential dwellings units when reason exists to
believe that a violation of this Ordinance has been or is being committed. The Zoning
Administrator may delegate to his or her authorized designee authority to take any action
authorized under this Ordinance.
Non-Owner Occupied Dwelling is defined as follows: A home that is occupied by a person or
persons that do not have title to the property. Non–owner occupied shall not apply to fewer
than two units per dwelling. (Ordinance 05-06, adopted May 24, 2005)
Rockford City Code
600-43
613 Vacant Building Registration
Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare,
by establishing a program to identify and register vacant buildings and by determining what
actions the City will take and what actions the owners of the buildings must take. (Ordinance
11-04, adopted July 11, 2011)
Subd. 1. Findings. The City Council finds that buildings which remain vacant and
unoccupied for any significant period of time become an attractive nuisance to children, a
harborage for rodents, an invitation as a temporary abode, an increased fire hazard, an
increased risk of explosion due to the theft of internal piping, and that the unkempt grounds
surrounding such property invite the dumping of garbage and rubbishes; that such buildings are
often permitted to become dilapidated; that such buildings contribute to the growth of blight
within the City, depress the market values of surrounding properties to the detriment of the
various taxing districts and require additional governmental services; that the use and
maintenance of property in such condition and manner endangers the public safety and health,
constitutes an unreasonable use and conditions to the annoyance, discomfort and repose of a
considerable number of the public, is detrimental to the public good and to the common welfare;
and renders a considerable number of the public insecure in the use and enjoyment of their
property, and thus may constitute a nuisance condition. Adequate protection of public health,
safety and welfare, therefore, requires the establishment and enforcement of the means by
which such nuisance conditions may be abated. (Ordinance 11-04, adopted July 11, 2011)
Subd. 2 Definitions.
DANGEROUS STRUCTURE: A structure that is potentially hazardous to persons or property,
including, but not limited to: a) a structure that is in danger of partial or complete collapse; b) a
structure with any exterior parts that are loose or in danger of falling; or c) a structure with any
parts, such as floors, porches, railings, ramps, balconies, or roofs, that are accessible and that
are either collapsed, or in danger of collapsing or unable to support the weight of normally
imposed loads.
SECURE BY OTHER THAN NORMAL MEANS: Refers to a buildings secured by means other
than those used in the design of the building.
UNOCCUPIED: A building which is not being used for legal occupancy.
UNSECURED: A building or portion of a building that is open to entry by unauthorized persons
without the use of tools.
VACANT BUILDNG: A building or portion of a building that is:
A. Unoccupied and unsecured for five (5) days or more;
B. Unoccupied and secured by other than normal means for fifteen (15) days or more;
C. Unoccupied and in any phase of an active foreclosure proceeding under Minnesota
Statutes;
Rockford City Code
600-44
D. Unoccupied and dangerous structure;
E. Unoccupied and posted for no occupancy or unfit for human habitation;
F. Unoccupied and has a City Code violation existing for five (5) days or more;
G. Condemned and illegally occupied; or
H. Vacant building does not mean any building being constructed pursuant to a valid
unexpired building permit issued pursuant to City Building Code regulations. (Ordinance
11-04, adopted July 11, 2011)
Subd. 3 Registration.
A. The owner of a vacant building shall register the building with the City no later than
seven (7) days after the building becomes a vacant building as defined in this chapter.
B. The City may register an unoccupied building as a vacant building when the City takes
ordinance enforcement action or action to abate an ordinance violation against the
unoccupied building or the grounds upon with it is located. In such case, the City shall
complete all forms required by this section and may special assess all registration costs
against such property.
C. A registration shall be completed on a form provided by the City. Such completed
registration may be sent to the owner and all other parties holding an ownership or
security interest in the property. The completed form shall include the following:
1. A description of the premises including address.
2. The names and addresses of the owners of the property.
3. The names and addresses of all known lien holders.
4. The period of time the building is expected to remain vacant.
5. A plan or timetable for returning the building to appropriate occupancy.
D. The owner shall notify the City in writing of any changes in the information supplied as
part of the vacant building registration within seven (7) days of such change.
E. The owner of the building shall keep the vacant building secured and safe and the
building grounds maintained.
F. The owner shall disconnect utilities to the vacant building when required by the City
Building Official.
G. Any new owner of a “vacant building” as defined by this chapter must notify the City in
writing of the change of ownership within seven (7) days of the change of ownership.
H. The owner of a vacant building must allow the City access for inspections. The City will
provide the owner with five (5) days notice for any inspection request except where a
Rockford City Code
600-45
hazardous unsafe conditions exists, in which case the City may access the vacant
building for inspection purposes after making a reasonable effort to contact the owner
via telephone. (Ordinance 11-04, adopted July 11, 2011)
Subd. 4 Fee.
A. The owner of a vacant building shall pay an annual registration fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). Said fee may be modified by City council resolution from time to time.
Subsequent annual fees shall be paid on the anniversary of the initial registration. This
fee is imposed to defray the costs of registering and monitoring the vacant building.
B. The first annual fee shall be paid not later than ten (10) days after the building has
become “vacant building” as defined by this chapter. (Ordinance 11-04, adopted July
11, 2011)
Subd. 5 City Action. The City may take the following actions in relation to a vacant building.
The building owner shall reimburse the City for all costs incurred by the City pursuant to this
chapter.
A. The City may shut off water service to the vacant building, unless the owner can show
good cause why water service should remain on.
B. The City may inspect the premises of the vacant building each month.
C. The City may take any other action required to secure the building. Any additional cost
shall be charged back to the owner of the property.
D. The City may mow the lawn, landscape or grounds of any vacant building as needed if
the plant growth violates the City ordinance and the owner fails to timely cut the lawn.
The owner shall pay the City for the costs incurred.
E. The City may plow sidewalks and driveways located on the vacant property, remove
garbage from vacant property, and take any other actions authorized by the law to
remedy an ordinance violation.
F. The City may conduct site inspections of the property upon which the vacant building is
located as needed to ensure that the building is secure, the grounds are maintained and
compliance with the terms of this chapter is achieved. (Ordinance 11-04, adopted July
11, 2011)
Subd. 6. Certification of Unpaid Service Charges. In the event the building owner fails
to reimburse the City within thirty (30) days of mailing of a bill by the City for costs incurred by
the City pursuant to enforcement of this chapter against a vacant property, or in the event the
building owner fails to pay the registration fee required by the chapter, the City may certify such
unpaid charges to the County auditor for collection with the next year’s property taxes after ten
(10) days’ mailed notice to the property owner sent via first class U.S. mail to the owner’s
address as listed on the tax records at the Wright or Hennepin County recorder’s office.
(Ordinance 11-04, adopted July 11, 2011)
Subd. 7. Penalty. Any owner who fails to register a vacant building under this chapter or
who provides inaccurate or false information shall face an administrative fine of one hundred
Rockford City Code
600-46
dollars ($100.00) for each month that the building remains unregistered. (Ordinance 11-04,
adopted July 11, 2011)
Subd. 8. Appeal. Any owner of a vacant building who believes that an order or penalty
issued under this chapter is based on an erroneous interpretation of this chapter or
misstatement of facts may appeal to the City Council. Such appeal must be in writing and must
specify the grounds for the appeal. Any appeal must be filed within ten (10) days of the action
taken with which the owner disagrees. (Ordinance 11-04, adopted July 11, 2011)
Rockford City Code
700-1
700 Liquor and Beer
701. Liquor
(Title of Chapter amended by Ordinance No. 86-7 passed May 27, 1986)
(Entire Chapter Amended by Ordinance 09-01 passed April 14, 2009)
701.01. Adoption of State Law by Reference. The provisions of M.S. Ch. § 340A,
as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions
of operation, restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and all
other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of intoxicating liquor and
3.2 percent malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this Chapter as
if set out in full. It is the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to M.S. Ch. §
340A are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the
time this Chapter is adopted.
701.02. City May Be More Restrictive Than State Law. The Council is authorized
by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it may be amended from time to time, to impose, and
has imposed in this chapter, additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic
beverages within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. § 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time.
701.03. Definitions. In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101,
as it may be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this
Chapter:
LIMITED ESTABLISHMENT is defined as a food service that provides one or more of the
following:
(1) Prepackaged food that receives heat treatment and is served in the package;
(2) Frozen pizza that is heated and served;
In addition the city requires a small menu of ten (10) items or more that are heated and
served on the premises and a seating capacity of at least thirty (30) persons. (Ordinance
#12-07, adopted November 13, 2012)
LIQUOR. As used in this chapter, without modification by the words “An intoxicating” or “A 3.2
percent malt,” includes both intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor.
RESTAURANT. An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor or
manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises, where full waitress/waiter table
service is provided, where a customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food
course is served and consumed while seated at a single location. To be a restaurant as defined
by this section, an establishment shall have a license from the State as required by M.S.
§157.16, as it may be amended from time to time, and meet the definition of either a “limited
establishment”, “small establishment,” “medium establishment” or “large establishment” as
defined in M.S. §157.16, subd. 3d, as it may be amended from time to time. (Ordinance #12-
07, adopted November 13, 2012)
Rockford City Code
700-2
701.04. Nudity on the Premises of Licensed Establishments Prohibited.
Subd. 1. The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that nudity is prohibited as provided in this
section on the premises of any establishment licensed under this Chapter. This is to protect and
assist the owners, operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the
public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and combination of alcohol,
nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual
harassment or activities likely to lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including
prostitution, sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds that the prohibition of
nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this chapter, as set forth in this
section, reflects the prevailing community standards of the City.
Subd. 2. It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or persons on
the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and
genitals covered with a nontransparent material. It is unlawful for any person to be on the
licensed premises when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and
genitals covered with a non-transparent material.
Subd. 3. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by
law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine, or 3.2 percent malt
liquor license or the imposition of a civil penalty.
701.05. Term and Expiration of Licenses. Each license shall be issued for a
maximum period of one year. All licenses, except temporary licenses, shall expire on June 30 of
each year unless another date is provided by ordinance. All licenses shall expire on the same
date. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms.
701.06. Kinds of Liquor Licenses. The City may issue the following licenses and
permits, up to the number specified in M.S. Ch. § 340A.
Subd. 1. 3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued only to golf
courses, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and establishments used exclusively for the
sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.
Subd. 2. 3.2 percent malt liquor off-sale license may be issued only with the
approval of the Municipality and Commissioner of Public Safety.
Subd. 3. Temporary 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses may be issued only with the
approval of the Municipality and Commissioner of Public Safety; which may be issued only to a
club, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization.
Subd. 4. Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only with the approval
of the Municipality and Commissioner of Public Safety; which may be issued only to exclusive
liquor stores.
Subd. 5. On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to the following
establishments as defined by M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and
this chapter: hotels, restaurants, bowling centers, theaters, clubs or congressionally chartered
veterans organizations, theaters and exclusive liquor stores. Club licenses may be issued only
with the approval of the Municipality and Commissioner of Public Safety. The Council may in its
sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the
Rockford City Code
700-3
licensed premises at a community festival held within the city under the provisions of M.S. §
340A.404, subd. 4b, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may in its sound
discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed
premises at any convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the
premises of a sports, convention, or cultural facility owned by the city, under the provisions of
M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4a, as it may be amended from time to time.
Subd. 6. Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses as provided by M.S. §
340A.504, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time. Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor
licenses may be issued only to a restaurant as defined in Section 7.03 of this Section, club,
bowling center, or hotel which has a seating capacity of at least thirty (30) persons, which holds
an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, and which serves liquor only in conjunction with the
service of food. Sunday on-sale 3.2 malt liquor license requires Council approval. (Ordinance
#12-07, adopted November 13, 2012)
Subd. 7. Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of the
Municipality and Commissioner of Public Safety; which may be issued only in connection with a
social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious, or other nonprofit corporation that has
existed for at least three (3) years. No license shall be for longer than four consecutive days,
and the City shall issue no more than twelve (12) days worth of temporary licenses to any one
organization in one calendar year.
Subd. 8. On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Municipality and
Commissioner of Public Safety to: theaters, restaurants that have facilities for seating at least
twenty-five (25) guests at one time and meet the criteria of M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 5, as it may
be amended from time to time. The holder of an on-sale wine license who also holds an on-sale
3.2 percent malt liquor license is authorized to sell malt liquor with content over 3.2 percent
(strong beer) without an additional license.
Subd. 9. Consumption and display licenses, with the approval of the Municipality
and Commissioner of Public Safety; authorizes the establishment to allow the consumption and
display of intoxicating liquor on the licensed premises. The permit does not authorize the sale
of intoxicating liquor.
701.07. License Fees; Pro Rata.
Subd. 1. No license or other fee established by the City shall exceed any limit
established by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, for a liquor license.
Subd. 2. The Council may establish from time to time in the Ordinance Section 212
the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is authorized to issue. The license fee may not exceed
the cost of issuing the license and other costs directly related to the enforcement of the liquor
laws and this chapter. No liquor license fee shall be increased without providing mailed notice of
a hearing on the proposed increase to all affected licensees at least thirty (30) days before the
hearing.
Subd. 3. The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the
commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a monthly basis.
Subd. 4. All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is filed with
the City. If the application is denied, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
Rockford City Code
700-4
Subd. 5. A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may occur only if
authorized by M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.
Subd. 6. Off-sale intoxicating liquor license fees are subject to a reduction of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) if all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The licensee agrees to have a private vendor train all employees within sixty (60)
days of hire and annually thereafter in laws pertaining to the sale of alcohol, the
rules for identification checks, and the responsibilities of establishments serving
intoxicating liquors;
(2) The licensee agrees to post a policy requiring identification checks for all persons
appearing to be thirty (30) years old or less; and
(3) A cash award and incentive program is established by the licensed, to award
employees who catch underage drinkers, and a penalty program is established to
punish employees in the event of a failed compliance check.
701.08. Council Discretion to Grant or Deny a License. The Council in its sound
discretion may either grant or deny the application for any license or for the transfer or renewal
of any license. No applicant has a right to a license under this chapter.
701.09. Application for License.
Subd. 1. Application Form. Every application for a license issued under this
chapter shall be on a form provided by the City. Every application shall state the name of the
applicant, the applicant’s age, representations as to the applicant’s character, with references
as the Council may require, the type of license applied for, the business in connection with
which the proposed license will operate and its location, a description of the premises, whether
the applicant is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has been in that
business at that place, and other information as the Council may require from time to time. An
application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be in the form prescribed by the
Municipality and shall also contain the information required in this section. The form shall be
verified and filed with the City. No person shall make a false statement in an application.
Subd. 2. Financial Responsibility (Liability Insurance).
(1) Prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter for a premises other than
that which is owned by the City of Rockford, the applicant shall file with the City:
(a) A certificate that there is in effect an insurance policy or pool providing
minimum coverage’s of (1) $100,000.00 because of bodily injury to any
one person in any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one
person, in the amount of $300,000.00 because of bodily injury to two (2)
or more persons in any one occurrence, and in the amount of $50,000.00
because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one
occurrence, and (2) $100,000.00 for loss of means of support of any one
person in any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person,
$300,000.00 for loss of means of support of two (2) or more persons in
any one occurrence; an annual aggregate of $600,000.00 may be
included in the insurance coverage; or,
Rockford City Code
700-5
(2) Prior to the issuance of any license under this Chapter for a premises owned by
the City of Rockford, the applicant shall file with the City:
(a) A certificate, with the City listed as an additional insured, that there is in
effect an insurance policy or pool providing minimum coverage’s of (1)
$1,000,000.00 because of bodily injury to any one person in any one
occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person, in the amount of
$2,000,000.00 because of bodily injury to two (2) or more persons in any
one occurrence, and in the amount of $300,000.00 because of injury to or
destruction of property of others in any one occurrence, and (2)
$1,000,000.00 for loss of means of support of any one person in any one
occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person, $2,000,000.00 for
loss of means of support of two (2) or more persons in any one
occurrence; an annual aggregate of $2,000,000.00 may be included in
the insurance coverage.
Subd. 3. Surety Bond.
(1) Each application for an off-sale license shall be accompanied by a surety bond,
cash or United States government bonds in the sum of three thousand dollars
($3,000.00). Each application for an on-sale license shall be accompanied by a
surety, cash or United States government bonds in the sum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00). Each such bond, cash payment, or United States
government bond shall be conditioned on the licensee obeying all laws governing
the business and paying all taxes, fees, penalties and other charges and must
provide that the bond, cash payment, or government bonds are forfeited to the
City on a violation of law or non-payment of taxes, fees, penalties or other
charges. Surety bonds accompanying an application for an off-sale or on-sale
may be reviewed by the City Attorney.
Subd. 4. Workers’ Compensation Insurance.
(1) Every applicant for the issuance of or renewal of an on-sale or off-sale license
shall present to the City acceptable evidence of compliance with the workers’
compensation insurance coverage requirement of M.S. § 176.182, by providing
the name of the insurance company, the policy number, and date of coverage, or
the permit to self-insure.
(a) The workers’ compensation insurance policy required of this section shall
provide that it may not be cancelled for cause by the insured or the
insurer without first giving ten days written notice to the City, addressed to
the Clerk.
701.10. Description of Premises. The application shall specifically describe the
compact and contiguous premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed. The
description may not include any parking lot or sidewalk.
701.11. Applications for Renewal. At least forty-five (45) days before a license
issued under this Chapter is to be renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the
Rockford City Code
700-6
City. The decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion of the
Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.
701.12. Transfer of License. No license issued under this chapter may be
transferred without the approval of the Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is
deemed to be a transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior Council approval is a
ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer a license shall be treated the
same as an application for a new license, and all of the provisions of this Code applying to
applications for a license shall apply.
701.13. Investigation.
Subd. 1. On an initial application for a license, on an application for transfer of a
license and, in the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public interest to do so, on an
application for renewal of a license, the City shall conduct a background investigation of the
applicant or it may contract with the Wright County Sheriff’s Department for the investigation.
The applicant shall pay with the application an investigation fee of two hundred fifty dollars
($250) which shall be in addition to any license fee. The results of the investigation shall be
sent to the Municipality.
701.14. Hearing and Issuance. The Council shall investigate all facts set out in
the application and in the background investigation. Opportunity shall be given to any person to
be heard for or against the granting of the license. After the investigation the Council shall in its
sound discretion grant or deny the application. If the city denies issuance of a license the
applicant may request a hearing within thirty (30) days. No license shall become effective until
all fees are paid, insurance and surety bonds certificates have been submitted, has been
approved by the Municipality.
701.15. Restrictions on Issuance.
Subd. 1. Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises
described in the application.
Subd. 2. Not more than one (1) license shall be directly or indirectly issued within
the City to any one person.
Subd. 3. No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises on
which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or other financial claims of the City
are delinquent and unpaid.
Subd. 4. No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible for a
license under state law.
Subd. 5. No license shall be issued to any person who is not a resident of the
state. If the applicant is a corporation, all of the shareholders shall be residents of the State. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to any license existing on the effective date of this
Chapter or to the renewal of an existing license.
701.16. Conditions of License. The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the
conditions of the license specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the
condition is met.
Rockford City Code
700-7
Subd. 1. Within sixty (60) days after employment, every person selling or serving
liquor in an establishment which has an on-sale license shall receive training regarding the
selling or serving of liquor to customers. The training shall be provided by an organization
approved by the Council. Proof of training shall be provided in writing to the Clerk, by the
licensee.
Subd. 2. Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business and
the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises is
deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided
by this Chapter and the law equally with the employee.
Subd. 3. Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, City
employee, or any other person designated by the Council to conduct compliance checks and to
otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of the licensee during business hours and
after business hours during the time when customers remain on the premises without a warrant.
Subd. 4. No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during hours
when the sale of liquor is prohibited.
Subd. 5. Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and of
this chapter is a continuing condition of any license.
Subd. 6. The liquor license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the licensed
establishment at all times.
701.17. Hours and Days of Sale.
Subd. 1. The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by M.S. §
340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, except that the City Council may, by
resolution or ordinance, provide for more restrictive hours than State law allows.
Subd. 2. No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any
consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in an on-sale licensed premises
more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
Subd. 3. No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other container
containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor to remain upon any table, bar, stool, or
other place where customers are served, more than thirty (30) minutes after the time when a
sale can legally occur.
Subd. 4. No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on
the on-sale licensed premises more than thirty (30) minutes after the time when a sale can
legally occur.
Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for revocation or suspension of the
license.
701.18. Minors on Premises.
Rockford City Code
700-8
Subd. 1. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be employed in any
rooms constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at
retail on sale, except that persons under the age of eighteen (18) may be employed as
musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person or dishwashing services in places defined as
a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multi-purpose building serving food in rooms in which
intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on sale.
Subd. 2. No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years may enter a licensed
establishment except to work, consume meals or attend a social function and must vacate the
premises no later than 10:00 p.m.
701.19. Suspension and Penalties.
Subd. 1. The following are the minimum periods of suspension or penalties which
shall be imposed by the Council for violations of the provisions of this chapter or M.S. Ch. 340A,
as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they
may be amended from time to time:
(1) First license violation will incur a two hundred dollar ($200.00) administrative fine.
(2) Second violation within any three (3) year period will incur a five hundred dollar
($500.00) administrative fine and one (1) day suspension with date of suspension
to be determined by the city council.
(3) Third violation within any three-year period shall incur a one thousand dollar
($1,000.00) administrative fine and one (1) week suspension with the date of
suspension to be determined by the City Council.
Subd. 2. Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall affect an
immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter or state law without further
action of the Council. Notice of cancellation or lapse of a current liquor liability policy shall also
constitute notice to the licensee of the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a
license who has received notice of lapse of required insurance or of suspension or revocation of
a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a request is made in writing to the Clerk, a
hearing before the Council shall be granted within ten (10) days.
Subd. 3. The term “violation” includes any and all violations of the provisions in this
section, or of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated
under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time. The number of violations shall
be determined on the basis of the history of violations for the preceding three (3) year period.
Revocation shall occur within sixty (60) days following a violation for which revocation is
imposed.
Rockford City Code
800-1
800 Traffic & Motor Vehicles
801. Traffic and Parking
801.01. Definitions. Any term used in this chapter and defined in Minnesota
Statutes, Section 169.01 has the meaning given it by that section.
801.015. Definitions. “All Terrain Vehicles” means a motor vehicle other than a
snowmobile designed primarily to be used on other than roads, highways, streets, and alleys.
(Ord. 85-4, adopted May 28, 1985.)
801.02. Turning, Restriction on Turns. The council, by resolution, may, whenever
necessary to preserve a free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents:
(1) Designate any intersection as one where the turning of vehicles to the left or to
the right, or both, is to be restricted at all times or during specified hours. The
street superintendent shall mark, by appropriate signs, any intersection so
designated. No intersection on a trunk highway shall be so designated until the
consent of the Commissioner of Highways to such designation is first obtained.
(2) Designate any intersection or street as one where U-turns of vehicles is
prohibited. The street superintendent shall mark, by appropriate signs, any
intersection or street so designated.
No person shall turn a vehicle contrary to the directions on such signs.
801.03. Through Street; One-Way Streets. The council, by resolution, may
designate any street or portion of a street as a through highway or a one-way roadway where
necessary to preserve the free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents. The street superintendent
shall post appropriate signs at the entrance to such streets. No trunk highway shall be so
designated unless the consent of the Commissioner of Highways to such designation is first
secured.
801.04. Truck Restrictions. The council, by resolution, may designate streets on
which travel by commercial vehicles in excess of a specified gross weight is prohibited. The
street superintendent shall erect appropriate signs on such streets. No person shall operate a
commercial vehicle on such posted streets in violation of the restrictions stated.
801.05. Seasonal Weight Restrictions. The maintenance department may
recommend the prohibition of operation of vehicles upon any street within the city or
recommend weight restrictions on vehicles to be operated on such street whenever the street by
reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions will be seriously damaged or
destroyed unless the use of vehicles on the street is prohibited or the permissible weights
thereof reduced. The council shall act on such recommendation and may direct the
maintenance department by resolution to erect and maintain appropriate signs plainly indicating
the prohibition or restriction at each end of that portion of the street so effected. No person shall
operate a vehicle on a posted street in violation of the prohibition or restriction.
Rockford City Code
800-2
801.06. Parking Regulations.
Subd. 1. Parallel Parking. On all city streets, cars shall be parked parallel to the
curb or edge of the roadway in accordance with law. (Ord. No. 84-7, adopted September 14,
1984)
Subd. 2. No Parking, Stopping or Standing Zones. The council may, by resolution,
designate certain streets or portions of streets as no parking or no stopping or standing zones
and may limit the hours in which the restrictions apply. The street superintendent shall mark by
appropriate signs each zone so designated. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control devise, no person
shall stop or park a vehicle in an established no stopping or standing zone when stopping or
standing is prohibited. No vehicle shall be parked in a no parking zone during hours when
parking is prohibited except that a vehicle may be parked temporarily in such zone for the
purpose of forming a funeral procession and a truck may be parked temporarily between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any business day for the purpose of loading or unloading
where access to the premises is not otherwise available.
Subd. 3. Time Limit Parking Zones. The council may, by resolution, designate
certain areas where the right to park is limited during hours specified. The street superintendent
shall mark by appropriate signs each zone so designated. During the hours specified on the
sign, no person shall park a vehicle in any limited parking zone for a longer period than is so
specified.
Subd. 4. Time Restrictions. No vehicle shall be parked on non-residential streets
between 4:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.; and no vehicle shall in any case be parked upon any street in
any one place for a longer continuous period than twelve (12) hours.
Subd. 5. Impoundment. Any police officer may remove a vehicle from a street to a
garage or other place of safety when the vehicle is left unattended and constitutes a violation of
the parking ordinance or an obstruction to traffic or hinders snow removal or street improvement
or maintenance operations. Such vehicle shall not be released until the fees for towing and
storage are paid in addition to any fine imposed for violation of this chapter. (Ord. No. 93-10,
adopted October 12, 1993)
Subd. 6. Owner Responsibility. The presence of any motor vehicle on any street
when standing or parked in violation of this chapter is prima facie evidence that the registered
owner of the vehicle committed or authorized the commission of the violation.
Subd. 7. Parking on City Right-of-Way. Except as set forth below, no motor
vehicle shall be parked upon the City right-of-way. (Ord. No. 89-11, adopted August 14, 1989)
(1) Where parallel parking is allowed and where there is an adjacent curb, each
motor vehicle stopped or parked shall be stopped or parked with the right hand
wheels of the vehicle parallel with, and within twelve inches of, the right hand
curb, and, where painted markings appear on such curb or on the street, such
vehicle shall be within such markings, front and rear; provided that upon a oneway
roadway, all motor vehicles shall be so parked, except that the left hand
wheels of the vehicle may be parallel with and within twelve inches from the left
hand curb, but the front of the vehicle in any event and with respect to the
Rockford City Code
800-3
remainder of the vehicle, shall be in the direction of the flow of traffic upon such
one-way street.
(2) Where angle parking has been established and is allowed, as shown by curb
marking or sign posting, or both, each vehicle stopped or parked shall be at an
angle of approximately 45 to 60 degrees with the front wheel touching the curb
and within any parking lines painted on the curb or street, provided that the front
wheel not touching the curb shall be the portion of the vehicle furthest in the
direction of one-way traffic.
(3) Upon streets not having a curb, each vehicle shall be stopped or parked on the
paved portion of the roadway, and within twelve inches of the edge of the paving.
(Ord. No. 89-11, adopted August 14, 1989)
Subd. 8. Parking of Certain Vehicles Restricted. No person shall park any of the
following described vehicles on any residential street or alley unattended for more than six
hours:
(1) Vehicles that weigh 10,000 pounds or more.
(2) Vehicles having an over-all length of more than twenty (20) feet, or a width at any
point of more than seven and one half (7 1/2) feet.
(3) Dump trucks, tractors, truck-tractors, trailers, boats, and boat trailers, semitrailers,
or any heavy machinery.
(4) Any truck, trailer or semi-trailer which is being used for the transportation of
livestock or has been used for the transportation of livestock and has not been
cleaned. (Ord. 96-09, adopted December 23, 1996)
801.07. Truck Zones, Loading Zones, Etc.
Subd. 1. Establishment and Hours. The council may, by resolution, establish
spaces in streets as loading zones or truck zones. The hours of 7:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. of any
day except Sundays, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day
and Christmas Day or such other time as the council may specify in the resolution establishing
the zone shall be the loading zone or truck zone hours. The street superintendent shall mark
each such zone by appropriate signs.
Subd. 2. Truck Zone Regulations. During truck zone hours, no person shall stop,
stand, or park any vehicle except a truck in a truck zone. No person shall stop, stand or park a
truck in a truck zone during truck zone hours except to receive or discharge passengers or
freight and then only for a period no longer than is necessary for the purpose.
Subd. 3. Loading Zone Regulations. During loading zone hours, no person shall
stop, stand or park any vehicle in a loading zone except to receive or discharge passengers or
freight and then only for a period no longer than is necessary for the purpose. No person shall
occupy a loading zone with a vehicle other than a truck for more than five minutes during such
hours.
Rockford City Code
800-4
Subd. 4. Procedure and Cost. Any person desiring the establishment of a loading
zone or truck zone abutting premises occupied by him shall make written application therefore
to the council. If the council grants the request, the proper city officer shall bill the applicant for
the estimated cost of placing signs and of painting the curb. When the amount is paid to the
clerk-treasurer, the designated law enforcement agency shall install the necessary signs and
paint the curb.
Subd. 5. Semi-Trailers. No person shall allow a semi-trailer to stand or be parked
unattached from a tractor unit for any length of time on any street in the city except in an
emergency in order to change tractors.
801.08. Snow Season Parking. During the period from November
1st to April 1st no person shall park a vehicle on or within fifteen (15) feet of the curb line or edge
of paved surface between the hours of 2 a.m. to 6 a.m.
Subd. 1. Ice/Snow Accumulation. It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on
any street after ice accumulation, continuous or intermittent snow fall during which there has
been an accumulation of two inches or more of snow on any street until the same has been
plowed or removed from the full width of the roadway.
Subd. 2. Enforcement. Vehicles parked in violation of this chapter will be towed
and stored at the owner's expense.(Ordinance 18-08, adopted August 15, 2018)
801.09. Establishment of Safety Zones, Lanes of Traffic, Etc. To assist in the
direction and control of traffic, to improve safe driving conditions at any intersection or
dangerous location, and to warn pedestrians or drivers of motor vehicles of dangerous
conditions or hazards, the council may establish safety zones, lanes of traffic, and stop
intersections, and may order installation by the street superintendent of stop signs, yield signs,
warning signs, signals, pavement markings or other devices. No regulation may be established
on a trunk highway unless the consent of the Commissioner of Highways is first secured.
801.10. Removing Keys. No person shall leave a motor vehicle, except a truck
which is engaged in loading or unloading, unattended on any street, used car lot, or unattended
parking lot without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing all ignition keys
from the vehicle. Whenever any designated law enforcement agent finds any motor vehicle
standing in violation of this provision, he shall remove the keys from the vehicle and deliver
them to city hall.
801.11. Exhibition Driving, Prohibited. No person shall turn, accelerate,
decelerate or otherwise operate a motor vehicle within the city in a manner which causes
unnecessary engine noise or backfire, squealing tires, skidding, sliding, swaying, throwing of
sand or gravel or in a manner simulating a race. Squealing or screeching sounds emitted by
tires or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires is prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section.
801.115. 801.115 All Terrain Vehicles.
Subd. 1. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health,
safety and welfare, by establishing guidelines for the operation of All Terrain Vehicles within the
City limits.
Rockford City Code
800-5
Subd. 2. Findings: The City finds it is sometimes necessary to allow an all terrain
vehicle within the city limits and upon city streets for transportation purposes.
Subd. 3. Definitions: The following terms as used in this Section shall have the
same meaning as in Minnesota Statute § 84.92.
A. “Class 2 all-terrain vehicle” means an all-terrain vehicle that has a total dry weight of
1,000 to 1,800 pounds.
B. “Operate” means to ride upon and control the operation of an all-terrain vehicle.
C. “Operator” means every person who operates or is in actual physical control of an all
terrain vehicle.
Subd. 4. Equipment:
A. Mufflers. Standard mufflers shall be properly attached and in constant operation to
reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No
person shall use a muffler cutout, by pass, straight pipe, or similar device on an allterrain
vehicle; and the exhaust system shall not emit or produce a sharp popping or
crackling sound.
B. Brakes. Brakes shall be adequate to control the movement and to stop and hold under
any conditions of operation.
C. Lights. At least one clear lamp shall be attached to the front of the all-terrain vehicle
with sufficient intensity to reveal persons or vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions. Such
headlamps shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an
oncoming vehicle operator. The all-terrain vehicle shall also be equipped with at least
one red tail lamp having a minimum candle power of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red
light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during the hours of darkness
under normal atmospheric conditions. This equipment shall be required and shall be in
operating condition when the all-terrain vehicle is operated between the hours of one
hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise or at times of reduced visibility.
Subd. 4. Requirements for Operation:
A. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle within the City unless the all-terrain vehicle
is registered pursuant to Minnesota Statute § 84.922.
B. Any person operating an all-terrain vehicle within the City shall meet the applicable
education and training requirements under Minnesota Statute § 84.925.
Subd. 5. Operating Restrictions: Except as herein specifically permitted and
authorized, no person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle:
A. On a public sidewalk or walkway provided for use for pedestrian travel;
B. On private property of another without lawful authority or written consent of the owner or
Rockford City Code
800-6
occupant;
C. On any publicly owned lands and frozen waters, including but not limited to, cemeteries,
park property, playgrounds, recreational areas and golf courses, except areas
authorized for use by the proper public authorities;
D. On any public or private school grounds unless permission is expressly obtained from
responsible school authorities;
E. In a manner so as to tow any person or thing on a public street or highway except
through use of the rigid tow bar attached to rear of the all-terrain vehicle;
F. In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs,
annoys or interferes with the peace and quite of other persons;
G. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the persons or property of
another or cause injury or damage to persons or property; or
H. At a speed greater than 10 mph when within 100 feet of any lakeshore, except in
channels, or of a fisherman, ice house, skating rink, or sliding area, nor where the
operation would conflict with the lawful use of property or would endanger other persons
or property.
Subd. 6. Operations on Streets and Highways: No person shall operate an allterrain
vehicle on any municipal street or roadway except as provided in this Subsection.
A. A class 2 all-terrain vehicle that is currently licensed may be operated, for transportation
purposes only and not recreational purposes, upon a municipal street, roadway or alley,
so long as it maintains its course on the far right hand side of such street, roadway, or
alley and in the same direction as the traffic on the nearest lane of the roadway adjacent
thereto. Where available, alleys shall be used for all-terrain vehicle traffic rather than
municipal streets or roadways.
B. No all-terrain vehicle may be operated on any street, roadway or alley at a speed
exceeding ten (10) mph.
C. No all-terrain vehicle shall enter any uncontrolled intersection without making a complete
stop. The operator of an all-terrain vehicle shall yield the right of way to any vehicle or
pedestrian.
D. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle on any street, roadway, alley or shoulder
so as to be traveling side-by-side with another all-terrain vehicle or other vehicle in the
same lane or immediate area.
E. No person under sixteen (16) years of age shall operate an all-terrain vehicle on any
street, roadway, alley or shoulder thereof.
F. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle on any street, roadway, alley or shoulder
thereof unless it is equipped with working turn signals and a sign indicating that it
operates at speeds slower than other traffic, and it has current public liability and bodily
injury insurance.
Rockford City Code
800-7
G. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle on any street, roadway, alley or shoulder
thereof, unless the person has a valid driver’s license.
Subd. 7. Operations of All-Terrain Vehicle While Under the Influence of Alcohol or
a Controlled Substance: It is unlawful for any person to operate or to be in physical control of
any all-terrain vehicle in the City while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance
or under the influence of a combination of alcohol and a controlled substance.
Subd. 8. Littering. No persons shall deposit paper, litter, rubbish or debris on public
or private property, or throw paper, litter, rubbish or debris from an all-terrain vehicle.
Subd. 9. Chasing Animals. It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run over or
kill any bird, or animal domestic or wild, with an all-terrain vehicle.
Subd. 10. Hours of Operation. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle within
the City limits between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
Subd. 11. Unattended All-Terrain Vehicles. It is unlawful for the owner or operator of
an all-terrain vehicle to leave or allow an all-terrain vehicle to remain unattended on public
property or on privately owned parking lots used by the public, while the motor is running, while
the key is available, or with the ignition unlocked. (Ordinance #11-06, adopted July 26, 2011)
801.12. Flood Control Dike. No person shall operate or park any motor vehicle or
snowmobile upon the flood control dike without the advance permission of the council.
801.13. Resolutions. All traffic control resolutions in force on the effective data of
this chapter shall hereby remain in force.
801.14. Penalty. Any person convicted of violating any parking regulation of this
chapter is guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
Rockford City Code
800-8
802. Snowmobiles
802.01. Definitions.
Subd. 1. Snowmobile. “Snowmobile” means a self-propelled vehicle designated
for travel primarily on snow or ice steered by wheels, skis, or runners. Snowmobile: shall not
include “all terrain vehicles” as defined in section 801.015. (Ord. No. 85-4, adopted May 28,
1985)
Subd. 2. Operate. “Operate” means to ride upon and control the operation of a
snowmobile.
Subd. 3. Operator. “Operator” means every person who operates or is in actual
physical control of a snowmobile.
802.02. Where Prohibited/Authorized. Persons operating snowmobiles within the
city limits of the city must travel only on the designated trail which is as follows:
(1) The trail would follow the south side of Walnut Street from the westerly city limits
until it reaches the west edge of the Rockford School property; then across
Walnut Street at a 90 degree angle across Rockford School property to the
intersection of Ash Street and Cedar Street. The trail would continue across Ash
Street and follow along the south side of Cedar Street to the intersection of
Cedar Street and Mechanic Street; turn right onto Mechanic Street and follow
Mechanic Street to the intersection at Bridge Street; continue across Bridge
Street and follow along the south side of Bridge Street to County Road #50; turn
right and follow the west side of County Road #50 to Lake Rebecca Park
Reserve.
(2) Snowmobiles may also be operated along the designated trail authorized by the
Department of Natural Resources Grant and Aid Trail.
(3) All designated trails will be marked and include stop signs. Snowmobile
operators are expected to adhere to all vehicle operation regulations.
(4) Snowmobiles are prohibited from any public sidewalk/ trailway provided for
pedestrian travel, on private property without the owner’s permission, and all
other public property unless designated as the snowmobile trail. Street use will
be permitted by taking the shortest, most direct route to and from the designated
snowmobile trail, following all traffic laws, operating the snowmobile on the right
side of the road within the curb in single file, and at a maximum speed of 10 mph.
(Ord. No. 00-07, adopted December 12, 2000)
802.03. Street Crossing. A snowmobile may make direct crossing of a street or
highway, except an interstate highway or freeway, provided:
(1) The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of
the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and
safe crossing.
(2) The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop at every intersection.
Rockford City Code
800-9
(3) The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which constitutes an
immediate hazard.
(4) In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such street or highway with another public street or highway.
(5) If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to onehalf
hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility, only if both front and
rear lights are on.
802.04. Laws and Chapters. Chapters 801 and 803 of this code and Minnesota
Statutes 84.81 to 84.88 and Minnesota Statutes Ch. 169, shall apply to the operation of
snowmobiles upon streets and highways, except those which by their nature have no
application.
802.05. Right-Of-Way. No snowmobile shall enter any intersection without
yielding the right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so close to the
intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.
802.06. Minors.
Subd. 1. Operation. No person under 14 years of age shall operate on streets or
the roadway surface of highways or make a direct crossing of a trunk, county state-aid, county
highway, or city street as the operator of a snowmobile. A person 14 years of age or older, but
less than 18 years of age, may operate a snowmobile on streets and highways as permitted
under this chapter and make a direct crossing on such streets and highways only if he has in his
immediate possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued by the Commissioner, as
provided by M.S. 84.872.
Subd. 2. Owner Responsibility. It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile to
permit the snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provisions of this section.
802.07. Manner of Operation. No person shall operate a snowmobile:
(1) At any place while under the influence of alcohol or drugs as defined in M.S.
169.121;
(2) At a rate of speed greater than 15 miles per hour;
(3) At any place in a careless, reckless or negligent manner or heedlessly in
disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger or cause injury or damage to any person or property.
(4) During the hours from 10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. (Ordinance No. 02-02, adopted
January 8, 2002)
(5) So as to tow any person or thing in a public street or highway except through use
of a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of the snowmobile.
Rockford City Code
800-10
(6) On any streets or roads where travel is prohibited by state law or on any street
adjacent to public skating rink grounds, or dike or in any cemetery.
802.08. Equipment. No person shall operate a snowmobile any place within the
city unless it is equipped with the following:
(1) Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of
operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No person shall
use a muffler cutout, bypass, straight pipe or similar device on a snowmobile
motor.
(2) Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the
snowmobile under any condition of operation.
(3) A safety or so-called “deadman” throttle in operating condition. A safety or
“deadman” throttle is defined as a device which, when pressure is removed from
the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged from the
driving track.
(4) When operated between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour
before sunrise or at times of reduced visibility at least one clear lamp attached to
the front, with sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of
at least 100 feet ahead during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions. Such head lamp shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected
into the eyes of an oncoming snowmobile operator. It shall also be equipped with
at least one red tail lamp having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to
exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during
hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.
(5) Reflective material at least 16 square inches on each side, forward of the
handlebars, so as to reflect light at a ninety degree angle.
802.09. Removal of Keys. Every person leaving a snowmobile in a public place
shall lock the ignition, remove the key and take the same with him.
802.10. Emergency Use. Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this chapter, a
snowmobile may be operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the period of
time when, and at locations where, snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile
impractical.
802.11. Animals. It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any
animal with a snowmobile.
Rockford City Code
800-11
803 Manufactured Home Park Speed Limit
803.01. Adoption by Reference. Minnesota Statutes 327.27, subd. 2, and 327.14
are adopted by reference.
803.02. Speed Limit. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in excess of ten
(10) miles per hour in any manufactured home park.
Rockford City Code
800-12
804 Junk Motor Vehicles
804.01. Regulations of Junk Motor Vehicles. It shall be unlawful to abandon or
store a junk motor vehicle within the City on public or private property, unless stored within an
enclosed garage. Any junk motor vehicle abandoned or stored in violation of this chapter shall
be impounded by the official law enforcement agency of the City. (Ord. No. 92-11, adopted
April 28, 1992)
804.02. Junk Motor Vehicle Defined. “Junk Motor Vehicle” means any vehicle
which is not in operable condition, or which is wholly or partially dismantled, or which is used for
the sale of parts or as a source kept for scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any kind, or which
is not properly licensed for operation within the State of Minnesota or by the State of Minnesota.
(Ord. No. 92-11, adopted April 28, 1992)
804.03. Exceptions.
Subd. 1. Definition. “Collector's vehicle” means any vehicle for which the State of
Minnesota has issued a pioneer license, a classic car license, a collector license, or a street rod
license, or which bears original plates in accordance with state law.
Subd. 2. Regulations. A collector's vehicle on its owner's property shall not be
considered a junk motor vehicle, regardless of whether it is operable, provided the pioneer,
classic car, collector, street rod, or original license plate is affixed to the vehicle and the vehicle
is completely covered by a covering designed for the purpose of covering the vehicle.
Subd 3. Conditional Use Permits. A non-residential holder of a conditional use
permit is hereby exempt from this Chapter and must comply with the conditions set up in the
Conditional Use Permit issued to that business. (Ord. No. 92-11, adopted April 28, 1992)
Rockford City Code
800-13
805 Operation and Regulation of Motorized Golf Carts
805.01. Operation. Persons who are physically handicapped as defined in
Minnesota Statutes, Section 169.045, subdivision 2, are authorized to operate motorized golf
carts on designated roadways or portions of roadways within the city. The operator must
observe all traffic laws, except such as cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts.
(Ord. No. 07-09, adopted June 12, 2007)
805.02. Permit Required. No person shall operate a motorized golf cart without
obtaining a permit as provided herein. Permit fee shall be set forth in section 212.02. Permits
shall be granted on a per application basis and determined by length of the disability. (Ord. No.
07-09, adopted June 12, 2007)
805.03. Application. Every application for a permit shall be made on a form
supplied by the City and shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The nature of the applicant’s physical handicap.
(3) The roadways or portions thereof on which the motorized golf cart shall be
operated on.
(4) The time of operations of the motorized vehicle.
(5) Such other information as the City may require. (Ord. No. 92-14, adopted May
26, 1992)
805.04. Conditions of the Permit. No permits shall be granted unless the
following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant must demonstrate that he/she is a handicapped person as defined
in Minnesota Statues, Section 169.345, Subd. 2.
(2) The applicant must submit a certificate signed by a physician that the applicant is
able to safely operate a motorized golf cart on the roadways or that a person with
a Minnesota Drivers license shall operate the motorized golf cart.
(3) The applicant must provide evidence of insurance as provided by Minnesota
Statute Section 65B.40, Subd. 5 for motorcycles. (Ord. No. 92-14, adopted May
26, 1992)
805.05. Designation of Roadways. The following highways are prohibited for use,
other than crossing, as follows:
(1) State Trunk Highway 55.
(2) Wright County CSAH 20. (Ord. No. 07-09, adopted June 12, 2007)
805.06. Times of Operation. Motorized golf carts may only be operated on
designated roadways from sunrise to sunset. They shall not be operated in inclement weather
Rockford City Code
800-14
or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions, or when there is
insufficient light to clearly see persons or vehicles thereon at a distance of 500 feet. (Ord. No.
92-14, adopted May 26, 1992)
805.07. Other Regulations. The motorized golf cart must be equipped with rear
view mirrors as required by statute for other vehicles. The motorized golf cart must display a
slow moving vehicle emblem, as described by statute, on the rear thereof. (Ord. No. 92-14,
adopted May 26, 1992)
805.08. Suspension or Revocation. The City Council may suspend or revoke a
permit at any time if there is evidence that the permittee cannot safely operate a motorized golf
cart on the designated roadways. (Ord. No. 92-14, adopted May 26, 1992)
Rockford City Code
900-1
900 Nuisances and offenses
901. General Nuisances
901.01. Public Nuisance Defined. Whoever, by his act or failure to perform a
legal duty intentionally, does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance,
which is a misdemeanor:
(1) Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures, or
endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort, or repose of any considerable
number of members of the public; or
(2) Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage, any public highway
or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or
(3) Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or this chapter to be a
public nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically provided.
901.02. Public Nuisance Affecting Health. The following are hereby declared to
be nuisances affecting health:
(1) Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable matter;
(2) All diseased animals running at large;
(3) (Repealed by Ord. 11-03, adopted May 24, 2011)
(4) Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after death;
(5) Accumulations of manure, refuse, or other debris;
(6) The discharge, disposal, accumulation, or collection of sewage or industrial
waste in violation of Section 401 of this code;
(7) Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight or which are
so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and disagreeable
odors;
(8) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or body of water
by sewage, industrial waste, or other substances;
(9) All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or private
property;
(10) Any grass that exceeds twelve inches in height upon public or private property.
(Added by Ordinance No. 92-16, passed June 23, 1992.)
(11) Burning in violation of Chapter 505 of this code;
(12) Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable
quantities;
Rockford City Code
900-2
(13) All public exposure of persons having a contagious disease;
(14) Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not licensed by the City
Board of Health.
901.03. Public Nuisances Affecting Morals and Decency. The following are
hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
(1) All gambling devices, slot machines, and punch boards;
(2) Betting, bookmaking, and all apparatus used in such occupations;
(3) All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse,
gambling houses, houses of ill fame, and bawdy houses;
(4) All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in violation of
law or where, in violation of law, persons are permitted to resort for the purpose
of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or other
disposition in violation of law, and all liquor and other property used for
maintaining such a place;
(5) Any vehicle used for the illegal transportation of intoxicating liquor, or for
promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal purpose.
901.04. Public Nuisances Affecting Peace and Safety. The following are declared
to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:
(1) All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours after the snow or
other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
(2) All trees, hedges, billboards, or other obstructions which prevent persons from
having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
(3) All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a sidewalk or
street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
(4) All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations;
(5) Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of streets,
alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds except under such conditions as are
permitted by this code or other applicable law;
(6) Placing or storing on any street, sidewalk, alley, or public right-of-way any boxes,
goods, wares, merchandise, building materials, machinery, business or trade
article, except for the purpose of immediately transferring the same to some
other proper place;
(7) Any tree, shrub, bush, or other vegetation located on private property which
obstructs routine use or travel on any public right-of-way;
Rockford City Code
900-3
(8) Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a dangerous
manner;
(9) Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public
street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing
traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;
(10) All hanging signs, awnings, and other similar structures over streets and
sidewalks, or so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed and
maintained as provided by ordinance;
(11) The allowing of rain water, ice, or snow to fall from any building or structure upon
any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
(12) Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and within three feet
of a public sidewalk or way;
(13) All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated or
operated on private property as to attract the public;
(14) Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public property;
(15) Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household
appliances, automobile bodies, or other material, in a manner conducive to the
harboring of rats, mice, snakes, or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation
among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health, or safety
hazards from such accumulation;
(16) Accumulation in the open of broken or unused metal, wood, lumber, cement,
electrical fixtures, plumbing fixtures, building materials (but excluding building
materials awaiting use in construction or improvement presently in progress on
the same premises), trash, debris, rubbish, in a manner conducive to the
harboring of rats, mice, snakes, or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation
among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health, or safety
hazards from such accumulation;
(17) Any well, hole, or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in such other
condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming on the
premises where it is located;
(18) Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public street drain,
storm sewer, gutter, or ditch with trash or other materials;
(19) Digging excavations, placing culverts, placing dams, or doing any act which may
alter or affect the drainage of public property, streets, alleys or sidewalks; or alter
or affect flows of the public storm sewer and drainage ditch system, without
authorization by the city;
(20) The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk, or other public property of any
glass, tacks, nails, bottles, or other substance which may injure any person or
animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over such substance;
Rockford City Code
900-4
(21) The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on adjacent
private property;
(22) Throwing, placing, or depositing dirt, sand, leaves, trash, lawn clippings, weeds,
grass, snow, or other materials in the streets, sidewalks, other public ways and
the gutters thereof; (Amended by Ordinance No. 92-02, passed January, 28,
1992)
(23) Permitting dirt or mud from construction or landscaping activities to be carried or
deposited unto nearby streets, sidewalks, other public ways and the gutters
thereof;
(24) All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the person or
property of anyone;
(25) Operate any artificial lighting facilities upon any private property without an
effective shade or equivalent device to protect nearby residential premises from
being adversely affected thereby;
(26) Any used refrigerator, ice box, or freezer with door latch intact which is
accessible to children.
(27) Dead trees on public or private property, found to be a safety hazard by the Tree
Inspector. (Added by Ordinance No. 94-13, passed October 11, 1994)
(28) Property that is not in compliance with the guidelines of the city’s storm water
management and erosion control guidelines. (Amended by Ordinance No. 02-
03, dated February 12, 2002)
(29) “Diving Or Jumping From Bridges” Diving or jumping from public bridges or piers
into unknown water depths an debris may result in injury or death. It is a petty
misdemeanor for any person to dive or jump from any public bridge or pier in the
city where such prohibited activity is properly posted and signed. (Amended by
Ordinance No. 02-03, dated June 10, 2003)
901.05. Enforcement.
Subd. 1. Officers. The health officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter
with reference to nuisances affecting public health. The administrator shall enforce the
provisions relating to nuisances affecting public safety. The public works department shall
enforce the storm water management and erosion control nuisances. The police department
shall enforce the provisions relating to nuisances affecting public morals and shall assist the
other designated officers in the enforcement of other provisions of this chapter. Such officers
shall have the power to inspect private premises and take all reasonable precautions to prevent
the commission and maintenance of public nuisances. (Amended by Ordinance No. 02-03 2-
12-02)
Rockford City Code
900-5
Subd. 2. Construction. The provisions of 901.05, Subdivision 1, shall be construed
to be directory only, and shall not be construed to create a duty on the part of the city or its
officers or employees to any person. The city and its officers and employees shall not be liable
for any failure to enforce the provisions of sections 901 through 904 of this code.
901.06. Abatement.
Subd. 1. General. Whenever the officer charged with enforcement determines that
a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on premises in the city, the officer shall notify in
writing the owner or occupant of the premises of such fact and order that such nuisance be
terminated and abated. The notice shall be served in person or by certified or registered mail. If
the premises are not occupied and the owner is unknown, the notice may be served by posting
it on the premises. The notice shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and
time, not exceeding 30 days, within which the nuisance is to be abated and shall state that the
city shall proceed to abate the nuisance unless within specified time the affected person shall
abate the nuisance or the affected person shall demand a hearing by notifying the city clerk in
writing. A hearing shall be held within 30 days after the demand, before the city council. The city
council may rescind or modify the officer's abatement order. If the owner, occupant or agent fail
or neglect to comply with the requirement of the notice, or order from the officer or city council,
then the officer shall proceed to have the nuisance described in the notice removed or abated
from the lot or parcel of ground and report the cost thereof to the city clerk, or other like officer.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 86-13, passed October 13, 1986)
Subd. 2. Emergency Abatement. When the officer charged with enforcement
determines that a nuisance constitutes a serious and eminent danger to the public safety or
health, the officer may summarily abate the nuisance after a reasonable attempt to notify the
owner or occupant of the property. The officer shall immediately thereafter notify in writing the
owner or occupant of the premises of the action taken. The notice shall be served in person or
by registered or certified mail.
901.07. Recovery of Cost.
Subd. 1. Personal Liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been
abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement, including
administrative costs. As soon as the work has been completed and the cost determined, the
clerk-treasurer or other official designated by the council shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail
it to the owner. Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the
clerk-treasurer.
Subd. 2. Assessment. If the nuisance is a public health or safety hazard on private
property or the accumulation of snow and ice on public sidewalks, the clerk-treasurer shall, on
or before September 1 next following abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges
along with all other such charges as well as other charges for current services to be assessed
under Minnesota Statutes, Section 429.101, against each separate lot or parcel to which the
charges are attributable. The council may then spread the charges against such property under
that statute and other pertinent statutes for certification to the county auditor and collection
along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the
council may determine in each case.
Rockford City Code
900-6
902. Hazardous Buildings and Excavations
902.01. Adoption by Reference. The “Hazardous Building Law,” Minn. Stat.
463.15 through 463.261, is adopted by reference. Any hazardous building or dangerous
excavation may be abated in accordance with the provisions of that law.
Rockford City Code
900-7
903. Noise
903.01. Subd. 1. Public Nuisance Noise Prohibited. No person shall make,
continue, or cause to be made any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise or any noise which
unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety,
or welfare of others or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their property value. This
general prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of 903.02.
Subd. 2. Horns, Signaling Devices, etc.
(1) The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or
other vehicle on any street, public place, or private property within the city except
as a present danger warning;
(2) The creation by means of any such horn or signaling device of any unreasonably
loud or harsh sound;
(3) The sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of
time;
(4) The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity;
(5) The use of any horn, whistle, or other device operated by engine exhaust;
(6) The use of any such signaling device when traffic is held up for any reason.
Subd. 3. Radios, Amplifiers, etc. The using, operating, or permitting to be played
any radio, musical instrument, phonograph, juke box, amplifier, or other machine or device for
the producing, reproducing, or amplifying of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace,
quiet, or comfort of persons residing or working, or peaceably gathered in its vicinity. The
operation of said machine or device between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and. 7:00 A.M. shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section if done in such manner as to be plainly
audible:
(1) Within any building or structure used for residential purposes; or
(2) At a distance of fifty feet the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located.
Subd. 4. Loud Speakers, Amplifiers for Advertising. The using, operating, or
permitting to be played any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker,
sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is
cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention
of the public to any building or structure.
Subd. 5. Yelling, Shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing at
any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office,
or in any dwelling, hotel, motel, or other place of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
Subd. 6. Animals, Birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing
frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the
vicinity.
Rockford City Code
900-8
Subd. 7. Whistles or Sirens. The blowing of a locomotive whistle or steam whistle
attached to any stationary boiler or in any siren whatsoever except to give notice of the time to
begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or by public emergency vehicles.
Subd. 8. Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any vehicle
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises
therefrom and which complies with all applicable state laws and regulations.
Subd. 9 Defect in Vehicle or Load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise which shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons
in the vicinity.
Subd. 10. Sound Trucks for Advertising Purposes. The use of sound trucks or any
other vehicle equipped with sound-amplifying devices for the purposes of advertising any
program, project, or meeting of any public agency, private business, religious organization, civic
group, political party, or charitable organization.
Subd. 11. Loading, Unloading, Opening Boxes. The creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and
destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers.
Subd. 12. Construction or Repairing of Buildings. The erection (including
excavating), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building between the hours of 9:00 P.M. and
7:00 A.M. on Monday thru Saturday and all day Sunday and the following State Legal Holidays:
New Years Day, Martin Luther King's Birthday, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Veterans Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas, except where single
individuals or families work on single family residences owned by them; for their own occupancy
provided that the building inspector may, in cases of emergency, grant permission to repair at
any time when he finds that such repair work will not affect the health and safety of the persons
in the vicinity. (Amended by Ordinance No. 94-12, passed August 9, 1994.)(Amended by
Ordinance No. 05-08, passed June 28, 2005)
Subd. 13. Schools, Courts, Churches, Hospitals. The creation of any excessive
noise on any street or private property adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church,
court, or hospital while the same are in use which unreasonably interferes with the use thereof
provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school,
hospital or court street.
Subd. 14. Hawkers, Peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers, and
vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
Subd. 15. Pile Drivers, Hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 9:00
P.M. and 7:00 A.M. on Monday thru Saturday and all day Sunday and the following State Legal
Holidays: New Years Day, Martin Luther King's Birthday, Presidents Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Veterans Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas of any pile
driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, jack hammer, derrick, power or electric hoist, or other
appliance the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. (Amended by Ordinance No.
05-10, passed August 9, 2005)
Rockford City Code
900-9
Subd. 16. Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any
internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of
operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine
is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise.
Subd. 17. Noise in Residential Areas. No person shall, between the hours of 10:00
P.M. and 7:00 A.M. congregate because of or participate in any party or gathering of people
from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume so as to disturb the peace, quiet, or repose of
persons residing in any residential area. Noise between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
of such volume as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet from the residential dwelling
unit wherein such party or gathering is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section. No persons shall visit or remain within any residential dwelling unit wherein such party
or gathering is taking place except the owner, persons residing in that unit, or persons who have
gone there for the sole purpose of abating the disturbance.
903.03. Responsibility. The owner and tenant of any premises on which a
violation of 903.01 and 903.02 occurs shall make every reasonable effort to see that the
violation ceases. Violation of 903.01 and 903.02 shall be deemed the act of the custody, or
having charge of premises who allows or permits the violation to take place. Violation of 903.01
and 903.02 shall also be deemed the act of the non-resident landlord, provided he has received
written notice from the city of the violation and has failed to make every reasonable effort to see
that the violation ceases.
903.04. Penalties. Violation of 903.01 through 903.02 is a petty misdemeanor.
903.05. Civil Remedies.
Subd. 1. Nuisance. Violation of 903.01 through 903.02 may be abated as a
nuisance as provided by 901.06 and 901.07.
Subd. 2. Other Remedies. 903.01 through 903.03 may be enforced by injunction
or other appropriate civil remedy.
903.06. Exemption. The provisions of section 903.02, Subd. 3, which restrict
hours of operation shall not apply to City approved community-wide festival (s), which may
operate until 11:59 p.m. (Added by Ordinance No. 93-11, passed November 23, 1993)
Rockford City Code
900-10
904. Tree Diseases
904.01. Policy Findings. The council has determined that the health of the trees
within the municipal limits is threatened by fatal tree diseases. It is further determined that the
loss of trees growing upon public and private property would substantially depreciate the value
of property within the city and impair the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of
the public. It is declared to be the intention of the council to control and prevent the spread of
tree diseases and this chapter is enacted for that purpose.
904.02. Provisions of Law Adopted. Sections 1.0109 through 1.0111 of 3
Minnesota Code of Agency Rules, Department of Agriculture, Shade Tree Program (1978
Edition) as the same may have been amended, is adopted by reference.
904.03. Forester.
Subd. 1. Position created. The powers and duties of the city forester as provided
by this chapter are conferred on the utilities superintendent.
Subd. 2. Duties. It is the duty of the forester to coordinate, under the direction and
control of the council, all activities of the city relating to the control and prevention of tree
diseases. The forester shall recommend to the council the details of a program for the control of
tree diseases, and perform the duties incident to such a program adopted by the council.
904.04. Program. It is the intention of the council to conduct a program of plant
pest control pursuant to the authority granted by Minnesota Statutes 18.022. This program is
directed specifically at the control and elimination of tree diseases, and is undertaken at the
recommendation of the Commissioner of Agriculture. The forester shall act as coordinator
between the Commissioner of Agriculture and the council in the conduct of this program.
904.05. Nuisance Declared. The following are declared to be public nuisances
whenever they may be found within the city:
(1) Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the
Dutch Elm Disease fungus, Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau, or which
harbors any of the elm bark beetles, Scolytus multistrialus (eich.) or Hylurgopinus
rufipes (March).
(2) Any elm tree or part thereof, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood, or other
elm material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or sprayed
with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide.
(3) Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the oak
wilt disease fungus ceraloiystis fogacearum.
(4) Any dead oak trees or part thereof which in the opinion of the forester constitutes
a hazard, including, but not limited to, logs, branches, stumps, firewood, or other
oak material, which has not been stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with
an effective fungicide.
(5) Any other shade trees with an epidemic disease.
Rockford City Code
900-11
904.06. Abatement. It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as
defined in 904.05 to remain on any premises owned or controlled by him within the city. Such
nuisance may be abated in the manner prescribed by 904.10 - 904.14.
904.07. Inspection and Investigation. The forester shall inspect all premises and
places with the city as often as practicable to determine whether any condition described in
Section 904.05 of this chapter exists thereon. He shall investigate all reported incidents of
diseased trees.
904.08. Entry on Private Premises. The forester or his duly authorized agents
may enter upon private premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of
the duties assigned him under this chapter.
904.09. Diagnosis. The forester shall, upon finding conditions indicating disease
infestation, immediately send appropriate specimens or samples to the Commissioner of
Agriculture for analysis, or take such other steps for diagnosis as may be recommended by the
Commissioner of Agriculture. Except as provided in 904.11 through 904.13 no action to remove
infected trees or wood shall be taken until positive diagnosis of the disease has been made.
904.10. Abatement of Tree Disease Nuisances. In abating the nuisances defined
in 904.05, the forester shall cause the infected tree or wood to be sprayed, removed, burned, or
otherwise effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of tree
diseases. Such abatement procedures shall be carried out in accordance with current technical
and expert opinions and plans as may be designated by the Commissioner of Agriculture.
904.11. Procedures for Removal of Infected Trees and Wood.
Subd. 1. Ordinary Procedure. Whenever the forester finds with reasonable
certainty that the infestation defined in 904.05 exists in any tree or wood in any public or private
place in the city, he shall proceed as follows:
(1) If the forester finds that the danger of infestation of other trees is not imminent
because of dormancy, he shall notify the abutting property owner and/or the
owner of the property upon which the tree is located, by certified mail that the
nuisance will be abated within a specified tine, not less than five days from the
date of mailing of such notice. The forester shall immediately report such action
to the council, which shall proceed by:
A. abating the nuisance as a public improvement under Minnesota Statutes,
Chapter 429.101, or
B. abating the nuisance as provided in 904.12.
Subd. 2. Immediate Action. If the forester finds with reasonable certainty that
immediate action is required to prevent the spread of the disease, he may proceed to abate the
nuisance forthwith. He shall report such action immediately to the council and to the owner of
the property where the nuisance is located.
904.12. Council Action. Upon receipt of the forester's report required. by 904.11,
the council shall, by resolution, order the nuisance abated. Before action is taken on such
resolution, the council shall publish notice of its intention to meet to consider taking action to
Rockford City Code
900-12
abate the nuisance. This notice shall be mailed to affected property owners and published once
no less than one week prior to such meeting. The notice shall state the time and place of the
meeting, the property affected, action proposed, the estimated cost of the abatement, and the
proposed bases of assessment, if any, of costs. At the hearing or adjournment thereof, the
council shall hear property owners with reference to the scope and desirability of the proposed
project. The council shall thereafter adopt a resolution confirming the original resolution with
such modifications as it considers desirable and provide for the doing of the work of day labor or
by contract.
904.13. Records. The forester shall keep a record of the costs of abatements
done under this section and shall report monthly to the clerk-treasurer all work done for which
assessments are to be made stating and certifying the description of land, lots, parcels involved
and the amount chargeable to each.
904.14. Assessments. On or before September 1 of each year the clerk-treasurer
shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel to
which they are attributable under this chapter. The council may then spread the charges or any
portion thereof against the property involved as a special assessment under Minnesota statutes
429.101 and. other pertinent statutes for certification to the county auditor and collection the
following year along with current taxes.
904.15. Treatment. Whenever the forester determines that any tree or wood
within the city is infected with disease, he may spray or otherwise treat all nearby high value
trees, with an effective disease-destroying agent. Spraying and other treatment activities
authorized by this section shall be conducted in accordance with technical and expert opinions
and plans of the Commissioner of Agriculture and under the supervision of the Commissioner
and his agents whenever possible. The notice provisions of 904.12 apply to spraying and
treatment operations conducted under this section.
904.16. Transporting Wood Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to transport
within the city any diseased wood or any bark-bearing elm or oak wood without having first
obtained permission from the forester. The forester shall grant such permission only when the
purpose of this chapter will be served thereby by minimizing the risk of spread of the disease.
904.17. Stockpiling. Any bark bearing elm wood may be stockpiled within the city
limits during the period September 15 through April 1. Any such wood not utilized by April 1
must then be removed and disposed of as provided by law.
904.15. Interference Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or
interfere with the forester or his agents while they are engaged in the performance of duties
imposed by 904.01 - 904.18.
Rockford City Code
900-13
905. General Offenses
905.01. Public Drinking.
Subd. 1. Consumption. No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or nonintoxicating
malt liquor on any public sidewalk or street, or in a vehicle upon a public street.
Subd. 2. Possession. No person shall have in possession intoxicating liquor or
non-intoxicating malt liquor in an open container on any public sidewalk or street or in a vehicle
upon a public street.
905.02. Bathing Suit Required. No person shall voluntarily enter the river within
the city without being garbed in a bathing suit sufficient to cover his or her person according to
the standards generally adopted and accepted by the public.
Rockford City Code
900-14
906 False Alarms (Repealed by Ordinance 10-05, adopted November 23, 2010)
907 Storage, Collection, Disposal, and Transportation of Waste Materials
907.01. Definitions.
(1) The term garbage means all decomposable and organic solid wastes, including
materials resulting from handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food,
but excluding human excrement, sewage and other water carried wastes.
(2) The term refuse means all non-combustible wastes including ashes, crockery,
household rubbish, and all combustible wastes including rags and old clothes;
but does not include any material such as earth, sand, brick, stone, plaster or
other similar substances that may accumulate as a result of construction
operation; it also does not include appliances, auto parts, tree limbs, or
flammable material including gasoline and motor oil.
(3) The term industrial waste means all organic inorganic wastes except garbage,
resulting from any manufacturing, building repairing, demolition, construction,
processing, grain cleaning, the operation of garages and service stations and
other similar activities.
(4) The term residence for this chapter means any dwelling located within the city
boundaries including residential, commercial, schools, and churches.
(5} The term recyclable materials shall mean newspaper, cardboard, computer
paper, ledger paper, glass, tin cans, bi-metal cans, aluminum cans, magazines,
plastic bottles as listed in the recycling contract and any other recyclable
materials as added to the recycling contract.
(6) The term items to be composted shall mean decomposable items such as
leaves, grass clippings, and yard scraps.
(7) The term commercial waste producers shall mean all residences with over four
(4) units, any business, school, and churches.
(8) The term residential waste producers shall mean all residences with up to four
(4) units.
907.02. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain and protect the
health, safety, comfort and repose of the public regulations of sanitation, open burning, storage,
collection disposal and transportation of waste materials in the city.
907.03. Deposit of Refuse Restricted.
(1) No person shall deposit, cause to be deposited or situate garbage, refuse or
containers for garbage or refuse upon any street, alley, vacated lot or upon any
ground appurtenant to any building in the city, except upon the premises wherein
the garbage or refuse originated. No person shall bury any refuse in the city.
Rockford City Code
900-15
(2) No person except as licensed by Hennepin or Wright County and having
obtained a permit from the city shall transport garbage from commercial waste
producers over any street or alley in the city or shall disturb, collect or in any
manner interfere with garbage or refuse placed in containers for collection, or
interfere in any manner with containers for garbage or refuse.
(3) No person shall disturb, collect or in any manner interfere with recyclable
materials placed in containers or along side of containers for collection, or
interfere in any manner with containers for recyclable materials, except as
authorized by the city or by the person who placed the recyclable materials in the
containers for collection.
(4) Private use of any city dumpster shall be forbidden. Dumpsters located within a
city park shall be for park use only.
(5) No person unless authorized by the City Refuse Collection Contract shall
transport garbage from any residential waste producers over any street or alley in
the city or shall disturb, collect or in any manner interfere with garbage or refuse
placed in containers for collection, or interfere in any manner with containers for
garbage or refuse.
907.04. Storage of Garbage, Refuse and Recyclables.
(1) Except as otherwise provided, all garbage and refuse shall be kept in rust
resistant, water tight, nonabsorbent and easily washable containers which are
equipped with bail or handles and covered with close-fitting covers. Insofar as
practicable, all garbage shall be drained of liquids.
(2) All containers shall be washed and treated with disinfectant as often as
necessary to prevent a nuisance. Recyclable containers shall be vendorapproved
containers.
(3) The property owner shall control the garbage and refuse on the premises so as
to keep the premises in a clean and sanitary condition and shall have the
garbage and refuse removed at regular intervals, being at least once each week,
or as often as deemed necessary by the City Health Officer. Pickup and removal
of recyclable materials shall be at regular intervals and shall be established by
council and listed in the recycling contract.
907.05. Collection of Garbage, Refuse and Recyclables.
(1) The city council has entered into a Refuse Collection Contract with three haulers
which are hereby responsible for the weekly collection of all garbage/refuse from
the residential waste producers in a zone as specified in the contract. The city
council shall set the day of collection for both Hennepin and Wright county.
(2) The property owner or occupant of a commercial waste producer in the city shall
provide for the collection of the garbage and refuse on the premises in a clean
and sanitary condition, with a licensed hauler from either Hennepin or Wright
county having obtained a Permit from the city, but in no event less frequently
Rockford City Code
900-16
than one pickup per week, or as often as deemed necessary by the City Health
Officer.
(3) All garbage/refuse collected in the city shall be transported on the streets and
alleys in vehicles with leak-proof bodies of easily cleanable construction
designed not to create a nuisance. Vehicles carrying refuse/garbage and
recyclable materials within the city shall be so operated that the contents do not
spill or drip upon streets or alleys or otherwise create a nuisance. Every vehicle
shall be kept to prevent nuisances and equipped with a broom and shovel. Each
collection vehicle driver shall be instructed on the weight restrictions set by the
city council allowing a seven (7) ton per axle load limit for garbage trucks
licensed in the city. (Amended by Ordinance No. 94-02, passed January 25,
1994.)
(4) The city shall provide for the curbside collection of recyclables for residential
dwellings as listed in the recycling contract.
907.06. Permits for Garbage and Waste Collection. (Amended by Ordinance No.
95-15, passed September 26, 1995)
(1) Any person, firm or corporation desiring to collect garbage/refuse from any
commercial waste producer within the city shall submit a written application to the
city council for a permit.
(2) The city council shall consider such application, and if it finds that the applicant is
a responsible person and has the proper equipment, facilities, resources and
personnel to provide adequate collection service under this chapter and that it
would be in the public interest to do so, it may direct the city clerk to issue the
applicant the permit.
(3) The fee shall be submitted with the application as listed in ordinance 212 fees.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 95-08, passed May 9, 1995.)
(4) The applicant shall submit to the clerk a certificate of insurance against liability
imposed by law for injury, death and property damage in an amount acceptable
to the council.
(5) The permit shall be issued for a period of one year.
907.07. Compost Regulations.
Subd. 1. Conditions and Regulations.
(1) Private Compost Sites. Persons are allowed to have one compost site on their
property. The compost site must not be located in the front yard nor any closer
than 5 feet to the side yard property line or closer than 5 feet to the rear yard
property line. All private compost sites must be contained within screening or
fencing to prevent blowing and scattering of material. A private compost site must
not be any larger than 25% of your yard. No private compost site may exceed
25% of the total lot size and shall not exceed 500 square feet and four feet in
height.
Rockford City Code
900-17
(2) Municipal Compost Site. The city municipal compost site is designated on the
public works waste water treatment plant/garage site. The site will be a fenced
area and the entrance shall be clearly marked by signs, which will also state the
time of operation for the site. The city council may from time to time, by
resolution, as the Council may determine, change the location of the above
referenced site or the time of operation.
A. Only compost material that originates or comes from within the city limits
shall be collected or accepted at the municipal site, unless otherwise
authorized by the city council.
B. Compost materials shall be received at the collection site in bulk form or
in reusable, recyclable or disposable bags or containers which must be
emptied and shall not be added to the compost pile. No plastic bags or
containers shall be left at the site. Vehicles delivering compost materials
in bulk form must be enclosed or covered.
C. Compost material shall not contain extraneous materials including animal
wastes or municipal solid waste, garbage or refuse.
D. The composting operation, including delivery shall not generate off-site
nuisances, such as dust, odor and wind blown debris. The operation shall
be free of pests and vermin.
E. Compost materials must be fenced, screened or covered, to prevent
blowing or scattering of materials and to prevent animals from disturbing
or removing the contents.
F. No compost materials may be treated with any kind of herbicides or
pesticides.
G. Composting shall be accomplished in accordance with the regulations
and requirements of all other agencies, organizations, or entities have
jurisdiction over such activity.
H. There shall be no fee charged for city residents to drop their yard waste at
the municipal site, and no charge for city residents to pickup the finished
material. The city will notify residents when compost is available for their
use and schedule times for receiving it.
(3) Penalty. Any person or entity violating any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $700.00 or by imprisonment for a
period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both, plus in either case, the costs of
prosecution. In addition, if that person's or entity's behavior, in violation of this
section, is also violative of State of Minnesota law regarding civil or criminal
trespass, the city may apply its remedies under those provisions of law.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 93-08, passed June 8, 1993)
Rockford City Code
900-18
907.08. Recyclable Regulations.
Subd. 1. The city council shall contract after receiving bids or negotiating the
current contract for the collection of certain recyclable materials from residences in the city on
such terms and for such periods as the council may determine.
907.09. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine of not more than seven hundred ($700.00) dollars or imprisonment for not more than ninety
(90) days, or both.
(This Chapter added by Ordinance No. 92-10, passed April 28, 1992. )
Rockford City Code
900-19
908 Graffiti
908.01. Graffiti Prevention
Subd. 1. Purpose and Intent. The City Council of the City of Rockford is enacting
this Code to help prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for the
removal of graffiti from public and private property. The Council finds that graffiti is a public
nuisance and destructive of the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire
community. Unless the City acts to remove graffiti from public and private property, the graffiti
tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti, and entire neighborhoods
are affected and become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the City.
The City Council intends, through the adoption of this Code, to provide additional enforcement
tools to protect public and private property from acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement. The
Council does not intend for this Code to conflict with any existing anti-graffiti state laws.
Subd. 2. Definitions. For the purpose of this Code, the following words shall have
the meaning respectively ascribed to them in the section, exempt where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
(1) Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container that is adapted or made for
the purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of defacing
property.
(2) Board-tipped marker means any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement with
a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width is greater than one-fourth (1/4)
of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is not water soluble.
(3) Etching equipment means any tool, device, or substance that can be used to
make permanent marks on any natural or man-made surface.
(4) Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other
defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or
engraved upon or otherwise affixed to any surface or public or private property by any
graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the
owner or occupant of the property, or despite advance authorization, is otherwise
deemed a public nuisance by the City Council.
(5) Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker,
gummed labels, paint stick, or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other devise
capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade surface.
(6) Paint stick or graffiti stick means any device containing a solid form of paint,
chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by
pressure and leaving a mark of at least one-eighth (1/8) of an inch in width.
(7) Person means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal
entity.
Rockford City Code
900-20
908.02. Prohibited Acts.
Subd. 1. Defacement. It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any
natural or manmade surface on any city-owned property, or without the permission of the owner
or occupant, on any non-city-owned property.
(1) Possession of Graffiti Implements.
A. By Minors at or Near School Facilities. It is unlawful for any person under
the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any graffiti implement while on
any public property, grounds facilities, buildings, or structures, or in areas
immediately adjacent to those specific locations upon public property, or
upon private property without the prior written consent of the owner or
occupant of such private property.
B. In Designated Public Places. It is unlawful for any person to possess any
graffiti implement while in or upon any public facility, park, playground,
recreational facility, or other public building or structure owned or
operated by the City or while in or within fifty (50) feet of an underpass,
bridge abutment, storm drain, or similar types of infrastructure unless
otherwise authorized by the City.
908.03. Accessibility to Graffiti Implements.
Subd. 1. Furnishing to Minors Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, other
than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or
permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any aerosol paint container,
broad-tipped marker, or paint stick to any parents or guardian of the person. (Markers
containing water soluble ink or pigmented liquid are exempt from this section.)
(1) Display and Storage.
A. Every person who owns, conducts, operates, or manages a retail
commercial establishment selling aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, or
broad-tipped markers must store containers, sticks or markers in an area
primarily observable, through direct visual observation or surveillance
equipment, by employees of the retail establishment during the regular
course of business.
1. In the event that a commercial retail establishment is unable to
store the aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, or broad-tipped
markers in an area as provided above, the establishment must
store the containers, sticks, and markers in an area not accessible
to the public in the regular course of business without employee
assistance.
2. Signage Required. Every person who operates a retail
establishment selling graffiti implements must:
a. Place a sign in clear public view at or near the display of
such products stating: “Graffiti is against the law. Any
Rockford City Code
900-21
person who defaces real or personal property with paint or
any other liquid or device is guilty of a crime punishable by
imprisonment of up to ninety (90) days and/or a fine up to
$700.00.”
b. Place a sign in the direct view of such person responsible
for accepting customer payment for graffiti implements
stating: “selling spray paint, paint sticks, broad-tipped
markers to persons under eighteen (18) years of age is
against the law and punishable by imprisonment of up to
ninety (90) days and/or a fine up to $700.00.”
908.04. Penalties.
Subd. 1. Fines and Imprisonment. Any person violating this Code is guilty of a
Misdemeanor.
(1) In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian are jointly and severely
liable with the minor for payment of all fines.
(2) Failure of the parents or legal guardian to make payment will result in the filing of
a lien on the parents’ or legal guardians’ property that includes the fine and
administrative costs.
Subd. 2. Restitution. In addition to any punishment specified in this Section, the
court will order any violator to make restitution to the victim for damages or less caused directly
or indirectly by the violator’s offense in the amount or manner determined by the court. In the
case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be ordered jointly and severely liable with
the minor to make the restitution.
Subd. 3. Civil Responsibility for Damages for Wrongful Sale, Display or Storage.
Any person who sells, displays or stores, or permits the sale, display or storage, of any graffiti
implement in violation of the provisions of this Code is personally liable for all costs, including
attorney’s fees and court costs, incurred by any party in connection with the removal of graffiti,
the repair of any property containing graffiti, or such party’s prosecution of a civil claim for
reimbursement or damages resulting from such graffiti removal or property repair, arising from
the use by any person of such wrongfully soil, displayed or stored graffiti implement in violation
of the provisions of this Code, provided that such liability shall not exceed $1,500.00.
Subd. 4. Specific Penalties for Vandalism and or Graffiti found in any City Park
shall result in:
(1) requirement to pay for any and all damages,
(2) any violation shall be considered a petty misdemeanor or a general
misdemeanor subject to a fine of $300 to $700, respectively,
(3) individual(s) shall be required to perform community service, and
(4) individual(s) shall be banned from all City Parks for a period of not less than one
(1) year.
Rockford City Code
900-22
908.05. Graffiti as Nuisance.
Subd. 1. The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of this
Code is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and, therefore, is subject to removal and
abatement provisions specified in this Code.
Subd. 2. It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the graffiti has
been applied and any person who may be in possession or who has the right to possess such
property to, at all times, keep the property clear of graffiti.
908.06. Removal of Graffiti by Perpetrator. Any person applying graffiti on public
or private property has the duty to remove the graffiti within twenty-four (24) hours after notice
by the City or private owner of the property involved. Such removal must be done in a manner
prescribed by the City Administrator and/or Public Works Supervisor or any additional person as
authorized by the City Council. Any person applying graffiti is responsible for the removal or for
the payment of the removal. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall
constitute an additional violation of this Code. Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated
minor, the parents or legal guardian are also responsible for such removal or for the payment for
the removal.
908.07. Removal of Graffiti by Property Owner or City. If graffiti is not removed by
the perpetrator according to Section 908.06, graffiti shall be removed pursuant to the following
provisions:
(1) Property Owner Responsibility. It is unlawful for any person who is the owner or
has the primary responsibility for control of property or for repair or maintenance
of property in the City to permit property that is defaced with graffiti to remain
defaced for a period of ten (10) days after service by first class mail of notice of
the defacement. The notice shall contain the following information:
A. The street address and legal description of the property sufficient for
identification of the property;
B. A statement that the property is a potential graffiti nuisance property with
a concise description of the conditions leading to the finding;
C. A statement that the graffiti must be removed within ten (10) days after
receipt of the notice and that if the graffiti is not abated within that time,
the City will declare the property to be a public nuisance, subject to the
abatement procedures in this City Code.
(2) Exceptions to the Property Owner Responsibility. The removal requirements of
subsection (1) above does not apply if the property owner or responsible party
can demonstrate that:
A. The property owner or responsible party lacks the financial ability to
remove the defacing graffiti; or
B. The property owner or responsible party has an active program for the
removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part of
that program, in which case, it is unlawful to permit such property to
Rockford City Code
900-23
remain defaced with graffiti for a period of fifteen (15) days after service
by First Class Mail of notice of the defacement.
(3) Right of City to Remove.
A. Use of Public Funds. Whenever the City becomes aware or is notified
and determines that graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned
property viewable from a public or quasi=public place, the City is
authorized to use public funds for the removal of the graffiti, or for the
painting or repairing of the graffiti, but will not authorize or undertake to
provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive an area than that
where the graffiti is located, unless the City Administrator, or the designee
of the City Administrator, determines in writing that a more extensive area
is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic
disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the property
owner or responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or
repairing the more extensive area.
B. Right of Entry on Private Property. Prior to entering upon private property
or property owned by a public entity other than the City for the purpose of
graffiti removal, the City must attempt to secure the consent of the
property owner or responsible party and a release of the City from liability
for property damage or personal injury. If the responsible party fails to
remove the offending graffiti within the time specified by this Code, or if
the City has requested consent to remove or paint over the offending
graffiti and the property owner or responsible party has refused consent
for entry on terms acceptable to the City and consistent with the terms of
this Section, the City will commence abatement and cost recovery
proceedings for the graffiti removal according to the provisions specified
below.
C. Abatement and Cost Recovery Proceedings.
1. Notice of Due Process Hearing. The City Administrator, or the
designee of the City Administrator, serving as the Hearing Officer,
must provide the property owner of record and the party
responsible for the maintenance of the property, if a person
different than the owner, not less than forty-eight (48) hours notice
of the City’s intent to hold a due process hearing at which the
property owner or responsible party is entitled to present evidence
and argue that the property does not constitute a public nuisance.
Notice must be served in the same manner as a summons in a
civil action according to state law. If the owner of record cannot
be found after a diligent search, the notice may be served by
posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property
for a period of ten (10) days and publication thereof in the official
newspaper of general circulation published in the area in which
the property is located.
Rockford City Code
900-24
2. Determination of Hearing Officer. The determination of the
Hearing Officer after the due process hearing is final and not
appealable. If, after the due process hearing, regardless of the
attendance of the Owner or the responsible party or their
respective agents, the Hearing Officer determines that the
property contains graffiti viewable from a public or quasi-public
place, the Hearing Officer must give written notice in an
eradication order that, unless the graffiti is removed within ten (10)
days, the City may enter upon the property, cause the removal,
painting over (in such color as that meets with the approval of the
Hearing Officer), or such other eradication thereof as the Hearing
Officer determines appropriate, and provide the Owner and the
responsible party thereafter with an accounting of the cost of the
eradication effort on a full cost recovery basis.
3. Eradication Effort. Not sooner than the time specified in the order
of the Hearing Officer, the City Administrator, or the designee of
the City Administrator, is to implement the eradication order and
provide an accounting to the Owner and the responsible party of
the costs thereof.
4. Cost Hearing. The Owner or responsible party may require a cost
hearing before the Hearing Officer on the eradication accounting,
and appropriate due process must be extended to the Owner or
responsible party. If following the cost hearing or, if no hearing is
requested, after the implementation of the eradication order, the
Hearing Officer determines that all or a portion of the cost are
appropriately chargeable to the eradication effort, the total amount
set forth in the eradication accounting, or an amount thereof
determined as appropriate by the Hearing Office, is due and
payable by the Owner or responsible party within thirty (30) days.
Any amount of eradication charges assessed by the Hearing
Officer that are less than the total amount set forth in the
eradication accounting must be explained by written letter from the
Hearing Officer to the City Council.
(4) Lien. As to such property where the responsible party is the property owner, if all
or any portion of the assessed eradication charges remain unpaid after thirty (30)
days, the portion thereof that remains unpaid constitutes a lien on the property
that was the subject of the eradication effort.
(Amended by Ordinance 02-01, dated January 8, 2002)
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Scope and Interpretation
01-1
1001.01 SCOPE AND INTERPRETATION
Subd. 1. Scope. The use of all land and every building or portion of a building
erected, altered in respect to height and area, added to or relocated, and every use
within a building or use accessory thereto in the city shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. Any existing building or structure and any existing use or
properties not in conformity with the regulations in this chapter shall be regarded as
non-conforming, but may be continued, extended or changed, subject to the special
regulations provided in this chapter with respect to non-conforming properties or uses.
Subd. 2. Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter,
the regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions
of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any other regulation, the
provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any other
regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the more restrictive provision
shall be controlling.
Subd. 3. Private Agreements. This chapter does not abrogate any easement,
covenant, or any other private agreement where such is legally enforceable; provided,
that where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive, or impose higher
standards or requirements than such easements, covenants, or other private
agreements, the requirements of this chapter shall be controlling.
Subd. 4. Authority. This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by
the Municipal Planning Act, Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.351 to 462.363.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-1
1001.02 RULES AND DEFINITIONS
Subd. 1. Rules of Word Construction. For the purposes of this Chapter, certain
terms of words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
A. The word “person” includes an owner or representative of the owner, firm,
association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as
an individual.
B. The word “building” shall include the word “structure”, the word “lot” shall include
the word “plot”, “piece”, or “parcel”.
C. The present tense includes the future tense.
D. The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is permissive.
E. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
F. All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest tenth of a foot.
G. When calculating parking stall requirements, arty fraction of a number shall
constitute an additional parking space.
H. When calculating residential density, any fraction of a number shall not constitute
an additional dwelling unit.
I. For terminology not defined in this Section, the most current Webster's dictionary
shall be used to define such terms.
Subd. 2. Definitions. The following words and terms, wherever occur in this
Chapter, shall be interpreted as herein defined:
Accessory Building. A subordinate building which is located on the same lot or parcel
as the main building and the use of which is clearly incidental to those of the Main use.
Accessory Use. A use subordinate to the main use on a lot and used for purposes
customarily incidental to those of the main use.
Alley. Any public space or thoroughfare less than sixteen (16) feet, but not less than ten
feet in width which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and
designed to provide secondary property access.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-2
Allowable Use. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district
provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and performance standards of
said district.
Antenna. Commercial, public, or private broadcasting towers exceeding 100% (or two
times) of the district height limitations.
Apartment. A portion of a building consisting of a room or suite of rooms which is
designed for, intended for, or used as a residence by a single family or an individual,
and is equipped with cooking facilities. Includes dwelling unit and efficiency unit.
Apartment Building. Three (3) or more dwelling units or apartments grouped in one
building, with each unit sharing a common area for ingress and egress.
Automobile Laundry (Car Wash). A building, or portion thereof, containing facilities for
washing two or more automobiles, using mechanical devices.
Automobile Repair - Major. General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning engines,
motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame or fender straightening
or repair; overall painting or paint job; vehicle steam cleaning.
Automobile Repair-Minor. Installation, including cellular telephones, audio systems,
and minor repairs, upholstering, replacement of parts (tires, glass, etc.) and minor motor
services to passenger automobiles and trucks not exceeding twelve thousand (12,000)
pounds gross weight, but not including any operation specified under “Automobile
Repair-Major”.
Automobile Wrecking. The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers,
or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, or wrecked vehicles
or their parts. (See Junk Yard)
Basement. That portion of a building between floor and ceiling, which is partly below
and partly above grade (as defined in this section).
Buffer. The use of land, topography, difference in elevation, space, fences or
landscape plantings to screen or partially screen a use or property from the vision of
another use or property.
Buildable Area. The space remaining on a lot after the minimum setback and open
space requirements of this Chapter have been met and excluding easements.
Building. Any structure having a roof and built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattel or movable property of any kind, and includes any structure.
Building Height. The vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-3
average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum
shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of building:
a. The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five (5)
foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or
ground surface is not more than ten (10) feet above lowest grade.
b. An elevation ten (10) feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or
ground surface described in Item a above is more than ten (10) feet above lowest
grade.
The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of
the building.
Building Line. An imaginary line separating buildable area and required yards.
Building Line Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the building and
the lot line.
Cellar. That portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is wholly or partly
below grade and so located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is
equal to or greater than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling.
Cemetery. A site or property set apart for the burial or interment of the dead.
Church. A building wherein people regularly assemble for religious worship and which
is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.
Comprehensive Plan. A comprehensive plan prepared and approved by the City,
including a compilation of policy statements, goals, standards, fiscal guidelines, and
maps indicating the general locations recommended for the various functional classes
of land use, places and structures, and for the general physical development of the City,
including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such
plan or parts thereof.
Concept Plan. A report in map and text form submitted as the first phase of a Planned
Unit Development (PUD) proposal, depicting the location, general purpose, general type
of land use and circulation patterns, primary relationships between site elements and
between the proposed development and surrounding development, proposed general
schedule of development, and information on the developer.
Condominium. A multiple dwelling or development containing individually owned
dwelling units and jointly owned and shared areas and facilities, which dwelling or
development is subject to the provisions of the Minnesota Condominium Law,
Minnesota Statutes, Section 515.A.1-101 to 515.A.4-115.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-4
Day Care Facility. Any facility licensed by the State Department of Public Welfare,
public or private, which for gain or otherwise regularly provides one or more persons
with care, training, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation or developmental guidance on
a regular basis, for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, in a place other
than the person's own home. Day care facilities include but are not limited to: family
day care homes, group family day care homes, day care centers, day nurseries, nursery
schools, day-time activity centers, day treatment programs and day services, as defined
by Minnesota State Statutes, Section 245. 782.5.
Density, Residential. A number expressing the relationship of the number of dwellings
to an acre of land as established in the Comprehensive Plan.
District. Sections of the City for which the regulations governing the height, area, use
of building and premises are the same.
Dog Kennel. Any premises where three or more dogs, over six months of age, are
owned, boarded, bred, or offered for sale.
Dwelling. A building or portion thereof, designated exclusively for residential
occupancy, including one-family, two-family, and multiple family dwellings, but not
including hotels, motels, boarding houses, or manufactured housing.
Dwelling, Multiple (Apartment). A building designed with three (3) or more dwelling
units exclusively for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of
each other, but sharing hallways and main entrances and exits. A two-family dwelling
(duplex) with a separate rooming unit(s) shall be considered and classified as a multiple
family dwelling.
Dwelling, Single-Family. A dwelling unit designed exclusively for occupancy by one
(1) family.
a. Attached: A dwelling which is joined to another at one or more sides by a party
wall.
b. Detached: A dwelling unit not attached to another dwelling or structure or is
entirely surrounding by open space.
Dwelling, Two-Family. A residence designed for or occupied by two (2) families only,
with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. A two-family dwelling
(duplex) with a separate rooming unit(s) shall be considered and classified as a multifamily
dwelling.
a. Double Bungalow: A two-family dwelling with two (2) units side-by-side.
b. Duplex: A two-family dwelling unit with one (1) unit above the other.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-5
Dwelling Site. A designated location for residential use by one or more persons using
temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational vehicle sites.
Dwelling Unit. A residential building or portion thereof intended for occupancy by one
(1) or more persons with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and eating, but not
including hotels, motels, nursing homes, seasonal cabins, boarding or rooming houses,
resorts, tourist homes, or trailers.
Dwelling Unit Occupancy. Occupancy of a dwelling unit for the purpose of enforcing
provisions of this Chapter shall be limited by restrictions as included in the definition of
family in this Section.
Dwelling Unit, Temporary. A residence allowed for a specific time which is intended
for occupancy by one (1) or more persons with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and
eating. Temporary dwelling units shall not include garages, tents, or accessory
buildings.
Essential Services. Overhead or underground electrical, gas, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal
systems used by public utilities or governmental departments or commissions or as are
required for the protection of the public health, safety, or general welfare, including
towers, poles, wires, substations, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables,
reservoirs, wells, elevated tanks, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith, but not including buildings, except
those buildings that are an integral part of the essential service.
Family. An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption
or a group of not more than five (5) persons who need not be related by blood or
marriage living together in a dwelling unit.
Fence. Any partition, structure, wall, or gate erected as a dividing marker, barrier, or
enclosure and located along the boundary or within the required lot area.
Flood Related.
a. Accessory Use or Structure. A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
b. Basement. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or
base sub-grade (belowground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of
excavation below ground level.
c. Conditional Use. A specific type of structure or land use listed in the official
control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review procedure and with
appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the official zoning controls or
building codes and upon finding that: (1) Certain conditions as detailed in the
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-6
Zoning Ordinance exist and (2) the structure and/or land use conform to the
comprehensive land use plan if one exists and are compatible with the existing
neighborhood.
d. Equal Degree of Encroachment. A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
e. Flood. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of a
wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
f. Flood Frequency. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood
stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
g. Flood Fringe. That portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. Flood fringe
is synonymous with the term “floodway fringe” used in the Flood Insurance Study
for the City.
h. Flood Plain. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, watercourse or
lake which have been or hereafter maybe covered by the regional flood.
i. Flood-Proofing. A combination of structural provisions, adjustments or changes
to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or
elimination of flood damages.
j. Floodway. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and
those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to carry
or store the regional flood discharge.
k. Obstruction. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any
channel, watercourse or regulatory flood plain which may impede, retard, or
change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or
collecting debris carried by such water.
l. Principal Use or Structure. Means all uses or structures that are not accessory
uses or structures.
m. Reach. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a
stream or river influence by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban area,
the segment or a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings
would most typically constitute a reach.
n. Regional Flood. A flood which is representative of large floods known to have
occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-7
expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100 year
recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term “base flood”
used in the Flood Insurance Study.
o. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. A point not less than one (1) foot above
the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway.
p. Structure. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds,
detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, travel trailers/vehicles not
meeting the exemption criteria specified in Section 1001.23 and other similar
items.
q. Variance. A modification of a specific permitted development standard required
in an official control including this ordinance to allow an alternative development
standard not stated as acceptable in the official control, but only as applied to a
particular property for the purpose of alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty or
unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in a community's
respective planning and zoning enabling legislation.
Floor Area, Gross. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of the
building or portion thereof devoted to a particular use, including accessory storage
areas located within selling or working space such as activities, to the production or
processing of goods, or to business or professional offices. However, the floor area
shall not include: basement or cellar floor area other than area devoted to retailing
activities, the production or processing of goods, or to .business or professional offices.
The floor area of a residence shall not include the cellar area.
Garage, Private (Residential). An accessory building or accessory portion of the
principal building which is intended for and used to store the private passenger vehicles
and non-commercial trucks not exceeding twelve thousand (12,000) pounds gross
weight, of the family or families resident upon the premises, and in which no business
service or industry is carried on unless specifically authorized by this Chapter.
Garage, Public. Any garage other than a private garage. May also mean parking ramp.
Gas Station. See Motor Fuel Station.
Governing Body. The Rockford City Council.
Grade (Adjacent Ground Elevation). The lowest point of elevation of the finished
surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and a point five feet distant
from said wall, or the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground
between the exterior wall of a building and the property line if it is less than five feet of a
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-8
public sidewalk, alley, or other public way, the grade shall be the elevation of the
sidewalk, alley, or public way.
Group Home. A dwelling principally for boarding; a temporary residence of more than
one family combined as one household.
Home Occupation. Any occupation or profession of a service character which is
secondary to the main use of the premises and which may generate additional traffic,
parking, dust, noise, disturbance, odor, light, risk/safety, excessive use of resources
(such as water, etc.); which alters or changes the character of the single family dwelling
unit in any manner; exhibits any exterior evidence of the home occupation or any home
occupation in which customers or delivery persons in excess call at the single family
dwelling.
Hotel (Motel). Any building or portion thereof where lodging is offered to transient
guests for compensation and in which there are more than three sleeping rooms, with
no cooking facilities in an individual room or apartment.
31 Impervious Surface. A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards the
entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities
and at an increased rate of flow than prior to development. Examples include rooftops
and asphalt, concrete, paver stone and gravel surfaces including sidewalks, patios,
storage areas and driveways.
Junk Yard. An open area where waste, used, or second hand materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled; including
but not limited to, scrap iron and other materials, paper rags, rubber, tires, lumber,
and bottles. A junk yard includes an auto wrecking yard, but does not include uses
established entirely within closed buildings nor sanitary land fills.
Land Alteration. The movement of soils by way of grading, filling or excavation.
Land Reclamation. The process of the re-establishment of acceptable topography (i.e.
slopes), vegetative cover, soil stability and the establishment of safe conditions
appropriate to the subsequent use of the land.
Landscaping. Plantings such as trees, flowers, grass and shrubs and improvements
directly related thereto.
Loading Space. A space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a
group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials and which abuts upon a street, alley or other
appropriate means of access.
Lot. A parcel or portion of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-9
spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public
street.
Lot Area. The total land area within the lot lines.
Lot, Base. Lots meeting all specifications in the zoning district prior to being subdivided
into a two-family dwelling, townhome, or quadraminium unit lot subdivision.
Lot, Corner. A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior angle of
such intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Lot Depth. The distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the
foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rear most points of the side lot lines
in the rear.
Lot, Double Frontage. An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets.
Lot, Front. The front of a lot shall be considered to be that boundary abutting a public
right-of-way having the least width.
Lot Improvement. Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object, or
improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a physical betterment of
real property, or any part of such betterment.
Lot, Interior. A lot, other than a corner lot, including through or double frontage lots.
Lot Lines. The lot boundary limits. When a lot line abuts a street, park or other public
property, except an alley, such line shall be known as a street line and when a lot abuts
an alley, it shall be known as an alley line.
Lot Line, Rear. That boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If the rear lot
line is less than ten (10) feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot
line shall be a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum
distance from the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
Lot of Record. Any lot which is legally established according to applicable regulations
at the time of its creation, which is one unit of a plat heretofore duly approved and filed,
or one unit of an auditor's outlot or a registered land survey, or a parcel of land not so
platted, subdivided or registered but for which a deed, auditor's subdivision or registered
land survey has been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds prior to September
26, 1983.
Lot, Substandard. A lot or parcel of land for which a deed has been recorded in the
office of the Wright County Recorder upon or prior to the effective date of this Chapter
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-10
which does not meet the minimum lot area, structure setbacks or other dimensional
standards of this Chapter.
Lot, Through. A lot fronting on two parallel streets.
Lot, Unit. Lots created from the subdivisions of a base lot for two-family dwelling,
townhome, or quadraminium dwelling having different minimum lot size requirements
than the conventional base lots within the zoning district.
Lots Width. The minimum required horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at right angles to the lot depth, at the minimum building setback line. If no
setback line is established, the distance between the side lot lines measured along the
public right-of-way.
Manufactured Home (Mobile Home). A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which in the traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or more in width or
forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred
twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning
and electrical systems contained therein.
Manufactured Home Lot. A section of ground in a manufactured home park not less
than 5,200 square feet, designated as the location of one housing unit, and all other
necessary improvements required by this Section.
Manufactured Home Park. Any park, court, lot, parcel or tract of land, designed,
improved, maintained or intended for the purpose of supplying a location for
manufactured home units or upon which any manufactured homes are parked. It shall
include all buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment thereof, whether
a charge is made for the use of the manufactured home park or not.
Mining. The extraction of sand, gravel, or other material from the land in the amount of
fifty cubic yards or more and removal from the site.
Municipal Water and Sewer Systems. Utility systems serving a group of buildings,
lots, or an area of the city, with the design and construction of such utility systems as
approved by the City Engineer.
Natural Resource Analysis. A report in map and text form identifying the existing
natural features of a parcel of land and the relationship of a proposed use to the existing
natural conditions of the parcel.
Non-Conforming Structure, Use or Lot - Illegal. A lot, building, structure, premise, or
use unlawfully established and in violation of regulations applicable at the time of
development or initiation.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-11
Non-Conforming Structure, Use or Lot - Legal. A lot, building, structure, premise, or
use lawfully established prior to the adoption of this Chapter or any amendment thereto
which does not now conform with the applicable conditions or provisions of this Chapter
for the district in which the structure or use is located.
Nursery School. A non-residential facility exclusively providing activities of an
educational or enriching nature for six or more children of up to the age of six and
licensed by the State of Minnesota.
Nursing Home. A private building with facilities for the care of children, the aged, or
the infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but not containing
equipment for surgical care or for treatment of disease or injury. The nursing home shall
be licensed by the State Board of Health as provided for in Minnesota State Statutes.
Occupancy. The purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. The term
shall also include the building or room housing such use. Change of occupancy is not
intended to include change of tenants or proprietors.
Open Space. Any open area not covered by structures, but not limited to the following
uses: required or established yard areas, parking areas, sidewalks, school walks, trails,
recreation areas, water bodies, shorelands, watercourses, wetlands, groundwater
recharge areas, floodplain, floodway, flood fringe, erodible slopes, woodland, and soils
with severe limitation for development.
Parcel. An individual lot or tract of land.
Performance Standard. Criterion established for setbacks, fencing, landscaping,
screening, drainage, accessory buildings, outside storage and to control noise, odor,
toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat or other
nuisance elements generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
Person. A natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, and also
includes a firm, partnership, or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the
agent of any of the aforementioned.
14 Planned Unit Development. A zoning district that allows a mixing of buildings and
uses can occur which cannot be otherwise addressed under this section and/or
whereby internal site design standard deviations from this section may be allowed to
improve site design and operation.
Prefabricated Home. A non-mobile housing unit that is basically fabricated at a central
factory and transported to a building site where final installations are made, permanently
affixing the module to a foundation on the site.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-12
Railroad Right-of-Way. A strip of land with railway tracks and auxiliary facilities for
track operation.
Recreational Vehicle. Includes manufactured homes less than thirty-five (35) feet in
overall length, including those with telescope or fold down, chassis, mounted campers,
house cars, motor homes, tent trailers, slip-in-campers (those mounted in a pickup truck
or similar vehicle), converted buses, and converted vans used primarily for recreational
purposes. Cars used for racing shall not be included within this definition.
33Residential Care Facility. Any program, defined by Minnesota statutes section
245A.02, subdivision 14, that provides twenty four (24) hour a day care, supervision,
food, lodging, rehabilitation, training, education, habilitation, or treatment outside a
person's own home, including a nursing home or hospital that receives public funds,
administered by the commissioner of the department of human services to provide
services for five (5) or more persons whose primary diagnosis is mental retardation or a
related condition or mental illness and who do not have a significant physical or medical
problem that necessitates nursing home care; a program in an intermediate care facility
for four (4) or more persons with mental retardation or a related condition; a nursing
home or hospital that was licensed by the commissioner of the department of human
services on July 1, 1987, to provide a program for persons with a physical handicap that
is not the result of the normal aging process and considered to be a chronic condition;
and chemical dependency or chemical abuse programs that are located in a hospital or
nursing home and receive public funds for providing chemical abuse or chemical
dependency treatment services under Minnesota statutes 254B. Residential programs
include home and community based services for persons with mental retardation or a
related condition that are provided in or outside of a person's own home.
Restaurant (Class I) Traditional Restaurant. Food is served to a customer and
consumed by him/her while seated at a counter or table. Cafeteria – Food is selected
by a customer while going through a line and taken to a table or counter for
consumption.
Restaurant (Class II) Fast Food Restaurant. A majority of customers order and are
served their food at a counter and take it to a table or counter where it is consumed.
However, a significant number may take the food outside to eat in an automobile or off
the premises. Drive-In Restaurant – Most customers consume their food in an
automobile, regardless of how it is served. Carry Out and Delivery Restaurant – Food is
prepared for consumption off the premises only.
School. A building used for the purpose of elementary or secondary education, which
meets all the requirements of compulsory education laws of the State of Minnesota, and
not providing residential accommodations.
Secondary Use. A use which ordinarily is not essentially a permitted or conditional use
within the district; which is within a building containing an allowable use, which is
intended primarily for an allowable use, which is intended primarily for the use,
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-13
convenience, and benefit of the principal use of persons residing, employed, or
somehow engaged in activities of the principal use.
Semi-Public Use. Uses owned by private or private non-profit organizations which are
open to some, but not all of the public, such as denominational cemeteries, private
schools, clubs, lodges, recreational facilities, churches, etc.
Sexually Oriented Uses. Sexually oriented uses include sexually oriented bookstores,
sexually oriented motion picture theaters, sexually oriented motion picture sales/rentals,
sexually oriented mini-motion picture theaters, sexually oriented massage parlors,
sexually oriented steam room/bathhouse/sauna facilities, sexually oriented
companionship establishments, sexually oriented rap/conversation parlors, sexually
oriented health/sport clubs, sexually oriented cabarets, sexually oriented novelty
businesses, sexually oriented motion picture arcades, sexually oriented modeling
studios, sexually oriented hotels/motels, sexually oriented body painting studios, and
other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses or places open to some or all
members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display,
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or “specified anatomical areas”
which are capable of being seen by members of the public. Activities classified as
obscene as defined by Minnesota Statutes §617.241, as may be amended, are not
included.
A. Specified Anatomical Areas.
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; and
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
B. Specified Sexual Activities.
1. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse,
oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed
genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the
use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any
of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery,
coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty,
pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or
2. Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal
or tumescence; or
3. Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or
masturbation; or
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-14
4. Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or
female breast; or
5. Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in
undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged
in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other
physical restraint of any such persons; or
6. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an
animal by a human being; or
7. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
C. Sexually Oriented Uses - Accessory. The offering of retail goods for sale which
are classified as Sexually oriented uses on a limited scale and which are
incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services offered by the
establishment. Examples of such items include the sale of Sexually-oriented
magazines, the sale and/or rental of Sexually-oriented motion pictures, the sale
of Sexually-oriented novelties, and the like.
D. Sexually Oriented Uses - Principal. The offering of goods and/or services which
are classified as Sexually oriented uses as a primary or sole activity of a
business or establishment and include but are not limited to the following:
1. Sexually Oriented Use - Body Painting Studio. An establishment or
business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance,
whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron
when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of “specified
anatomical areas”.
2. Sexually Oriented Use - Bookstore. A building or portion of a building
used for the barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter,
pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape, or motion picture film if
such building or portion of a building is not open to the public generally but
only to one or more classes of the public excluding any minor by reason of
age or if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
3. Sexually Oriented Use - Cabaret. A building or portion of a building used
for providing dancing or other live entertainment, if such building or portion
of a building excludes minors by virtue of age or if such dancing or other
live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-15
4. Sexually Oriented Use - Companionship Establishment. A companionship
establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides
the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion
between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such
service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
5. Sexually Oriented Use - Conversation/Rap Parlor. A conversation/rap
parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the
service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion, if
such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
6. Sexually Oriented Use - Escort Service. A business that provides one or
more persons to accompany a customer to places and/or activities that
occur off-premises of the escort service operation, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
7. Sexually Oriented Use - Health/Sport Club. A health/sport club which
excludes minors by reason of age, or if such club is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”.
8. Sexually Oriented Use - Hotel or Motel. Sexually oriented hotel or motel
means a hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from
patronage and wherein material is presented which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to "specified sexual activities" or “specified anatomical areas”.
9. Sexually Oriented Use - Massage Parlor. Health Club. A massage parlor
or health club which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides
the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”.
10. Sexually Oriented Use – Mini-Motion Picture Theater. A building or
portion of a building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for
presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing
practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons
therein.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-16
11. Sexually Oriented Use - Modeling Studio. An establishment whose major
business is the provision, to customers, of figure models who are so
provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification to such customers and who engage in “specified sexual
activities” or display “specified anatomical areas” while being observed,
painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or
otherwise depicted by such customers.
12. Sexual Oriented Use - Motion Picture Arcade. Any place to which the
public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or
motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any
one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
13. Sexually Oriented Use - Motion Picture Theater. A building or portion of a
building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting
material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice
excludes minors by virtue of age or if such material is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or “specified
anatomical areas” for observation by patrons therein.
14. Sexually Oriented Use - Novelty Business. A business which has as a
principal activity the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or
devices which are designed for sexual stimulation.
15. Sexually Oriented Use - Sauna. A sauna which excludes minors by
reason of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used
for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air
as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the
sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
5 Sexually Oriented Use - Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility. A building or portion of
a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of
pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning,
relaxing or reducing agent if such building or portion of a building restricts minors
by reason of age or if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas”.
27 Shoreland Related:
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-17
Building line. A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high water level at the
required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.
Bluff. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having all of the
following characteristics. An area with an average slope of less than 18 percent
over a distance for fifty (50) feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff:
a. Part of all of the feature is located in a shoreland area.
b. The slope rises at least twenty-five (25) feet above the ordinary high water
level of the water body.
c. The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point twenty-five (25)
feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages thirty (30)
percent or greater.
d. The slope must drain toward the water body.
Drainage. The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading or other means which include runoff controls to minimize erosion and
sedimentation during and after construction or development, the means for
preserving the water supply and the prevention or alleviation of flooding.
Drainageway. Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch, swale or
similar depression into which surface water flows.
Easement. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner
to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.
Impervious Surface. A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards
the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in greater
quantities and at an increased rate of flow than prior to development. Examples
include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, storage areas, and concrete, asphalt or
gravel driveways.
Shoreland. Land located within the following distances from public waters: one
thousand (1000) feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond or
flowage and three hundred (300) feet from a river or stream or the landward
extent of a floodplain down a river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits of
shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by
topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances
and when approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources.
Shoreland Impact Zone. Land located between the ordinary high water level of
a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of fifty (50) percent of the
structure setback.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-18
Watercourse. Any natural or man-made passageway on the surface of the earth
so situated and having such a topographical nature that surface water stands or
flows through it from other areas. The term includes ponding areas, drainage
channels, swales, waterways, creeks, rivers, lakes, streams, wetland areas, and
any other open surface water flow which is the result of storm water or ground
water discharge. This term does not include man-made piping systems
commonly referred to as storm sewers.
Sign Related:
28 Abandoned Sign. Any sign and/or its supporting sign structure which remains
without a message or whose display surface remains blank for a period of one
(1) year or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no
longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Signs applicable to a
business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership or
management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the
property remains vacant for a period of one (1) year or more. Any sign remaining
after demolition of a principal structure shall be deemed to be abandoned. Signs
which are present because of being legally established nonconforming signs or
signs which have required a conditional use permit or a variance shall also be
subject to the definition of abandoned sign.
28 Awning. A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass designed and
intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, and
which projects from a wall or roof of a structure primarily over a window, walk, or
the like. Any part of an awning which also projects over a door shall be counted
as an awning.
28 Awning Sign. A building sign or graphic printed on or in some fashion
attached directly to the awning material.
28 Balloon Sign. A sign consisting of a bag made of lightweight material
supported by helium, hot, or pressurized air which is greater than twenty-four
(24) inches in diameter.
28 Building Sign. Any sign attached or supported by any building.
28 Canopy. A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal, or glass on a
support, which provides shelter over a doorway.
28 Canopy Sign. Any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy, made of fabric,
plastic, or structural protective cover over a door or entrance. A canopy sign is
not a marquee and is different from service area canopy signs.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-19
28 Changeable Copy Sign. A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or
illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the
surface of the sign. Changeable copy signs do not include signs upon which
characters, letters, or illustrations change or rearrange only once in a 24-hour
period.
28 Commercial Speech. Speech advertising a business, profession, commodity,
service or entertainment.
28 Elevation. The view of the side, front, or rear of a given structure(s).
28 Elevation Area. The area of all walls that face any lot line.
29 Erect. Activity of constructing, building, raising, assembling, placing, affixing,
attaching, creating, painting, drawing or any other way of bringing into being or
establishing.
28 Flag. Any fabric or similar lightweight material attached at one end of the
material, usually to a staff or pole, so as to allow movement of the material by
atmospheric changes and which contains distinctive colors, patterns, symbols,
emblems, insignia, or other symbolic devices.
28 Flashing Sign. A directly or indirectly illuminated sign which exhibits changing
light or color effect by any means, so as to provide intermittent illumination which
includes the illusion of intermittent flashing light by means of animation. Also any
mode of lighting which resembles zooming, twinkling, or sparkling.
28 Freestanding Sign. Any sign which has supporting framework that is placed
on, or anchored in, the ground and which is independent from any building or
other structure.
28 Grade. Grade shall be construed to be the final ground elevation after
construction. Earth mounding criteria for landscaping and screening is not part of
the final grade for sign height computation.
28 Ground Sign. Any freestanding sign with its sign face mounted on the ground
or mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign and which has a total height
not exceeding eight (8) feet.
28 Height of Sign. The height of the sign shall be computed as the vertical
distance measured from the base of the sign at grade to the top of the highest
attached component of the sign.
28 Illuminated Sign. Any sign which contains an element designed to emanate
artificial light internally or externally.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-20
28 Marquee. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a theater
building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of that building,
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
28 Marquee Sign. Any building sign painted, mounted, constructed or attached in
any manner, on a marquee.
28 Non-Commercial Speech. Dissemination of messages not classified as
commercial speech which include, but are not limited to, messages concerning
political, religious,
social, ideological, public service and informational topics.
28 Off-Premises Sign. A commercial speech sign which directs the attention of
the public to a business, activity conducted, or product sold or offered at a
location not on the same lot where such sign is located. For purposes of this
sign ordinance, easements and other appurtenances shall be considered to be
outside such lot and any sign located or proposed to be located in an easement
or other appurtenance shall be considered an off-premises sign.
28 Owner. In the case of a lot, the legal owner of the lot as officially recorded by
the applicable county, and including fee owners, contract for deed purchasers
and ground lessees. In the case of a sign, the owner of the sign including any
lessees.
28 Pole Sign. See Pylon Sign.
28 Portable Sign. Any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported,
including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign
may be removed and the remaining chassis or support is converted to another
sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground since this
characteristic is based on the design of such a sign.
28 Projecting Sign. Any sign which is affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends more than two (2) feet beyond the surface
of such building or wall face.
28 Public Notices. Official notices posted by public officers, employees or their
agents in the performance of their duties, or as directed by such officers,
employees or agents.
28 Public Street Right-of-Way. The entire right-of-way of any public street.
28 Pylon Sign. Any freestanding sign which has its supportive structure(s)
anchored in the ground and which has a sign face elevated above ground level
by pole(s) or beam(s) and with the area below the sign face open.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-21
28 Residential District. Any district zoned for residential uses.
28 Roof. The exterior surface and its supporting structure on the top of a building
or structure. The structural make-up of which conforms to the roof structures,
roof construction and roof covering sections of the International Building Code.
28 Roof Line. The upper-most edge of the roof or in the case of an extended
facade or parapet, the upper-most height of said facade.
28 Roof Sign. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and above the roof of
a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the
highest portion of the roof.
28 Roof Sign, Integral. Any building sign erected or constructed as an integral or
essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, so that no part of
the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and so that no
part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six
(6) inches.
28 Rotating Sign. A sign or portion of a sign which turns about on an axis.
28 Shimmering Sign. A sign which reflects an oscillating sometimes distorted
visual image.
28 Sign. Any letter, word or symbol, poster, picture, statuary, reading matter or
representation in the nature of advertisement, announcement, message or visual
communication, whether painted, posted, printed, affixed or constructed,
including all associated brackets, braces, supports, wires and structures, which is
displayed for informational or communicative purposes.
28 Sign Face. The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the
message of the sign is exhibited.
28 Sign Structure. Any structure including the supports, uprights, bracing and
framework which supports or is capable of supporting any sign.
Sign, Surface Area. The entire area within a single, continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of the actual sing surface. It does not include any
structural elements outside of the limits of such sign and not forming an integral
part of the display. Only one side of a double-face or V-shaped sign structure
shall be used in computing total surface area.
28 Site. A lot or combination of contiguous lots which are intended, designated,
and/or approved to function as an integrated unit.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-22
28 Suspended Sign. Any building sign that is suspended from the underside of a
horizontal plane surface and is connected to this surface.
28 Total Site Signage. The maximum permitted combined area of all signs
allowed on a specific lot.
28 Visible. Capable of being seen by a person of normal visual acuity (whether
legible or not) without visual aid.
28 Wall. Any structure which defines the exterior boundaries or courts of a
building or structure and which has a slope of sixty (60) degrees or greater with
the horizontal plane.
28 Wall Sign. Any building sign attached parallel to, but within two (2) feet of a
wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an
outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or
building, and which displays only one (1) sign surface.
28 Window Sign. Any building sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof,
designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity,
event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes
or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
13 Significant Tree. A healthy tree measuring at least six inches (6”) in diameter for
deciduous trees or twelve (12) feet in height for coniferous trees.
Site Plan. A map drawn to scale depicting the development of a tract of land, including,
but not limited to, the location and relationship of structures, streets, driveways,
recreation areas, parking areas, utilities, landscaping, and walkways, as related to a
proposed development.
Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and
the upper surface of the floor next above, including below ground portions of earth
sheltered buildings, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building
included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If
the finished floor level directly above a basement, or unused under floor space is more
than six (6) feet above grade as defined herein for more than fifty (50) percent of the
total perimeter or is more than twenty (12) feet above grade as defined herein at any
point, such basement or unused under floor space shall be considered as a story.
Street. A public right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a highway,
thoroughfare, arterial, parkway, collector, through-way, road, avenue, boulevard, lane,
place, drive, court or otherwise designated, which has been dedicated or deeded to the
public for public use and which affords principal means of access to abutting property.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-23
Street-Collector. Collector roadways connect neighborhoods within and between subregions
and distribute traffic between arterials and local streets. Parking is restricted as
necessary and posted speed limits typically range between 30 and 45 mph. Collector
streets typically should have two driving lanes, two parking lanes, and a
bicycle/pedestrian surface if necessary. Collector streets are typically spaced 0.25-1.0
miles apart. Traffic control typically involves local street stops, four-way stops, and
some traffic signals. Collectors typically carry 1,000 - 15,000 vehicles per day.
Street-Local. Local streets provide direct land access within neighborhoods and other
homogeneous land use areas and provide connections to collector streets. Parking is
usually unrestricted, the posted speed limit is 30 mph or less, and streets are two lanes
wide plus space for parking. Traffic control is most likely to involve strategies such as
stop signs, cul-de-sacs, and diverters. Local streets typically carry about 1,000 vehicles
or less per day. Residential streets typically carry about ten (10) trips per household per
day.
Street-Minor Arterial. Minor arterials connect adjacent sub-regions and activity
centers within sub-regions. Land access is usually restricted and trips are somewhat
longer than on collector streets. Parking is often restricted and the posted speed limit is
35-45 mph. Width is dependent on the volume carried. Minor arterials are typically
spaced 0.5 - 2.0 miles apart. Traffic control typically includes traffic signal timing and
land access spacing. Typical traffic volumes range from 5,000 to 30,000 ADT.
Street-Intermediate Arterial. Intermediate arterials function at a level between the
minor arterial and major arterial categories. Intermediate arterials are not limited access
facilities but serve primarily trips between rather than within sub-regions.
Street Pavement. The wearing or exposed surface of a street or roadway used by
vehicular traffic.
Street-Principal (Major, Arterial). Major arterials provide a high level of mobility
between sub-regions, serving medium to long distance trips. Principal arterials are
grade separated or have high capacity controlled at-grade intersections. No parking is
permitted, the posted speed limit is typically 40-55 mph and traffic volumes range from
10,000 to 50,000 ADT. Major arterials are typically spaced one to three miles apart.
Street Width. The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a
street.
Structure. Anything which is built, constructed or erected; an edifice or building of any
kind; or any piece of work artificially built up and/or composed of parts joined together in
some definite manner whether temporary or permanent in character. Among other
things, structures include buildings, manufactured homes, walls, fences, swimming
pools, billboards and poster panels.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-24
Townhouses. Structure housing three (3) or more dwelling units contiguous to each
other only by the sharing of one (1) common wall, such structures to be of the town or
row houses type as contrasted to multiple apartment structures.
13 Tree Protection. Snow fencing or polyethylene laminar safety netting placed at the
drip-line of the significant trees to be preserved. Tree protection measures shall remain
in place until all grading and construction activity is terminated.
33Undue Hardship. The same as that term is defined in Minnesota statutes chapter
462.357, as may be amended, meaning that the property in question cannot be put to a
reasonable use if used under the conditions allowed by the Zoning Ordinance.
Use. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designated,
arranged, or intended or for which it is occupied, utilized or maintained, and shall
include the performance of such activity as defined by the performance standards of this
Chapter.
33Variance. A modification of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance consistent with
Minnesota statutes chapter 462.357, as applied to a specific property and granted
pursuant to the standards and procedures established by the Zoning Ordinance.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-25
Yard. An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by
any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein.
In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the mean
horizontal distance between the lot line and main building shall be used.
Yard, Depth of. The mean horizontal distance between the line of a building and the
street or alley right-of-way where one exists; otherwise, a lot line.
Yard, Front. A yard extending across any street frontage of a lot between the side lot
lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between any street line and main
building or any projections thereof other than the projections of the usual steps,
entrance-way, unenclosed balconies, or open porch.
Yard. Rear. A yard extending across the rear of a lot, measured between the side lot
lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear
of the main building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies, or
unenclosed porches. On corner lots, the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the
street upon which the lot has its least dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots,
the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
Yard, Required. That distance specified in the yard requirements pertaining to
setbacks. Setbacks and required yards are used interchangeably.
Yard, Side. A yard between the principal building and the side line of the lot extending
from the front lot line of the lot to the rear yard.
Yard Waste Compost Facility. A site used to compost yard waste materials, including
all structures or processing equipment used to control drainage; collect and treat
leachate; and storage areas for the incoming waste, the final product, and residuals
resulting from the composing process.
Yard Waste Materials. Garden wastes, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds and pruning
generated by residential or commercial properties.
Zoning Administrator. The duly appointed officer charged with the administration and
enforcement of this Chapter.
Zoning District. An area or areas of the City (as delineated on the Zoning Map) set
aside for specific uses with specific regulations and provisions for use and development
as defined by this Chapter.
Zoning District Overlay. A zoning district containing regulations superimposed upon
other zoning district regulations and superseding the underlying zoning district use
regulations.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Rules and Definitions
02-26
Zoning District Underlying (Base). All zoning districts except overlay zoning districts.
Zoning Map. The map or maps incorporated into this Chapter as part thereof,
designating the zoning districts.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-1
1001.03 ADMINISTRATION AND FEES
Subd. 1. Administrative Procedure. All proposed developments shall conform
with the provisions of this subdivision when requesting platting, rezoning, or site plan
approval.
A. Upon application for rezoning and platting of a parcel of land, the petitioner shall
present a general development plan. This plan shall be a conceptual rendering
only and shall not require the fine detail of a site plan. The general development
plan shall be drawn to scale with topography of a contour interval not greater
than two feet and showing the following:
1. The proposed site with showing existing development on adjacent
properties within two hundred (200) feet.
2. General location of proposed structures.
3. Tentative street arrangements, both public and private.
4. Amenities to be provided such as recreational areas, open space,
walkways, etc.
5. Tentative plat showing proposed streets and parks in relationship to the
proposed development.
6. General location of parking areas.
7. Proposals for availability of public sanitary sewer, water, and storm
drainage.
B. A public hearing as required in this Chapter shall be scheduled before the
Planning Commission. Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall make recommendation to the Council.
C. The Council shall then consider the rezoning request.
D. If the zoning change is approved, the general development plan shall be
attached to and is a part of the chapter establishing the zoning change.
E. Thereafter, changes in the general development plan will not be allowed without
review by the Planning commission and approval by the council.
F. Before building permits are issued, a site plan shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and approved by the Council.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-2
G. The site plan shall be based upon an accurate certified survey; shall be prepared
by or under the supervision of an architect and/or engineer registered in the State
of Minnesota, and shall contain the following information: site plans shall be
approved if they show conformity to this code, the comprehensive plan and all
other application regulations.
1. Complete details of the proposed site development including, but not
limited to, identification signs, location of buildings, streets, driveways,
parking spaces, dimensions of the lot, lot area and yard dimensions.
13 2. Complete landscaping plans reflecting all information and standards set
forth, including species and showing planting size and mature size of trees
and shrubs proposed. For significant trees to be saved, location, species,
diameter, and tree protection methods must be identified on the landscape
plan.
3. Plans and specifications for fences, walls, and other buffers as required
herein.
4. Complete plans for proposed sidewalks or walkways to service parking,
recreation and service areas within the proposed development.
5. Complete plans and specifications for exterior wall finishes proposed for
all principal and accessory buildings.
6. Complete plans for storage areas for waste and garbage.
7. Complete utility plans and fire protection plans.
H. Properties in the City presently zoned in the R-2, RM, or any of the nonresidential
districts which are not presently developed shall be required to follow
the site plan review procedures of Paragraph 7 above before the development
shall occur. All general development plans and/or site plans which have been
approved by Council action shall comply with all applicable regulations which are
in effect at the time a building permit is applied for, provided that within six
months of the date of said general development plan or site plan approval or a
development contract, a building permit has been executed. If not executed
within six months, the City regulation in effect at the time of the approval of
said site plan or general development plan or development contract shall apply.
Developments which require and which have received site plan approval by
the Council, but for which no building permits have been applied for and issued
within one year of council approval shall be considered null and void and shall be
subject to the site plan re-approval requirements of this section; provided that
within one year of the original Council approval, the original petitioner may
request in writing an extension of not more than six months.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-3
J. Proposed minor structural additions involving 10% or less of the total existing
floor area which meet all requirements may be approved by the zoning
administrator prior to a building permit being issued and shall not require
Planning Commission or Council action.
Following the approval of the site plan required in this subdivision and before
issuance of a building permit, the developer shall guarantee to the City the
completion of all private exterior amenities as shown in the site plan. Such
amenities are hereby defined as landscaping, private driveways, parking areas,
recreational facilities, drainage systems, and other similar facilities. Such
guarantee shall be in the form of a bond, cash deposit or irrevocable letter of
credit. A cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit shall be in the amount of
100% of the estimated cost of such amenities and bond shall be in the amount of
150% of such estimated costs. The time allowed for completion of such private
exterior amenities shall be set out in the resolution approving the site plan and
the guarantee shall provide for its forfeit to the city in the event such completion
date is not met by the developer. For good cause shown, the Council may
extend the time for completion, in which event the developer shall provide a like
guarantee for the extended period. As various portions of such amenities are
completed by the developer and approved by the city, the city may release such
portion of the guarantee as is attributable to such completed work. The developer
shall notify the City in writing, that the improvements have been completed and
may be inspected. Any instrument, submitted as a financial guarantee of
completion of required site improvements, which contains provision for an
automatic expiration date after which the instrument may not be drawn upon,
notwithstanding the status of the required improvements, shall contain the
following statement requiring notice to the city: It is a condition of this
financial guarantee that it shall be deemed automatically extended without
change for six months from the present or any future expiration date(s)
unless sixty days prior to the expiration date(s) unless sixty days prior to the
expiration date(s) we shall notify the city in writing by certified mail that we
elect not to consider this financial guarantee renewed for an additional period.
Financial instruments, other than those cited above, which are submitted as a
guarantee as required by this chapter, and which provide equivalent assurance
to the City, may be approved by the Council.
L. On development proposals requiring site plan review pursuant to this section, the
Council, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall act as the
Board of Zoning Appeals and adjustments with respect to variances from this
chapter proposed by the site plan in accordance with the findings in this section.
M. Fees for plat approval and lot division are set forth in Chapter 212. Applications
for the foregoing must be accompanied by the fee.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-4
N. Whenever a variance, conditional use permit, rezoning and/or preliminary plat
application has been considered and denied by the City Council and/or Planning
and Zoning Commission, a similar application and proposal for variance,
conditional use permit, rezoning, and/or preliminary plat affecting the same
property shall not be considered again by the Planning and Zoning Commission
or City Council for at least six (6) months from the date of its denial, except as
follows:
1. If the applicant or property owner can clearly demonstrate that the
circumstances surrounding the previous application have changed
significantly.
2. If the City Council/Planning and Zoning Commission determines that the
circumstances surrounding a previous application have changed
significantly.
6 3. Application to reconsider a similar application previously denied by the
City Council or Planning and Zoning Commission within one (1) year
from the date of denial shall require a four-fifths (4/5s) vote of the City
Council or Planning and Zoning Commission.
Subd. 2. Zoning Administrator. The office of Zoning Administrator is hereby
established. The Council may appoint as many persons as it deems necessary to carry
out the duties of the office, which duties shall include the following:
A. Issue certificates of occupancy and maintain records thereof.
B. Periodically inspect buildings, structures, and uses of land to determine
compliance with the terms of this chapter.
C. Notify, in writing, any person responsible for violating a provision of this chapter,
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct
it.
D. Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; order removal
of illegal buildings, structures, additions, alterations; order discontinuance of
illegal work being done, or take any other action authorized by this chapter to
insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions, including all maps,
amendments, conditional uses and variances.
E. Maintain permanent and current records of the zoning ordinance, including all
maps, amendments, conditional uses and variances.
F. Maintain a current file of all permits, all certificates and all copies of notices of
violation, discontinuance, or removal for such -time as necessary to insure
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-5
a continuous compliance with the provisions of this chapter and, on request,
provide information to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in any
specific property.
G. Provide clerical and technical assistance to the Planning Commission and Board
of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals.
H. Submit each month to the Planning Commission an itemized summary of
certificates and permits granted and other significant activity of the preceding
month.
I. Receive, file, and forward to the Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals or
Planning Commission all applications for conditional use permits, variances,
amendments or development plans as required herein.
Subd. 3. Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals.
A. Creation and Membership. A Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals is hereby
established and vested with such administrative authority as is hereinafter
provided. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve as the Board of
Zoning Adjustment and Appeals.
B. Powers. The Board shall have power to hear appeals from administrative
determinations and questions of doubt concerning the exact location of district
boundary lines, to hear appeals of administrative determinations from and to
grant adjustment in and exceptions to any of the provisions of this chapter,
except those adjustments and exceptions governed by Council determination, to
the extent of the following, and no further:
1. To consider applications for variance and modifications in any of the
provisions of this chapter relating to:
a. Height, yard, area, and lot width and depth regulations.
b. Sign regulations providing that no such variance may be granted
contrary to the requirements of the Minnesota Outdoor advertising
Control Act and provided further that no variances shall be granted
to permit signs in districts or locations where such signs are
prohibited.
c. Parking and loading regulations.
d. Fence regulations.
e. Minimum floor area requirements.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-6
f. District boundary lines for special protection districts provided the
purpose and intent of the districts are maintained and the
provisions of this chapter are given due consideration.
2. The decision of the Board shall be final subject only to the right of an
applicant to appeal such decisions to the Council. Notice of such appeal
must be filed with the zoning administrator within a period of twenty days
from and after a copy of the board's order has been mailed to the
applicant at the address furnished by the applicant in the application.
33Subd. 4. Variances.
A. Review Criteria. The board of adjustment shall not approve any variance request
unless they find failure to grant the variance will result in undue hardship on the
applicant, and, as may be applicable, all of the following criteria have been met:
1. That because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or
topographical conditions of the specific parcel of land involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere
inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out.
2. That the conditions upon which an application for a variance is based are
unique to the parcel of land for which the variance is sought and are not
applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning
classification.
3. That the purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a financial
hardship, or a desire to increase the value or income potential of the
parcel of land.
4. That the alleged hardship is caused by the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and has not been created by any persons having an interest in
the parcel of land and is not a self-created hardship.
5. That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other land or improvements in the neighborhood in
which the parcel of land is located.
6. That the proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and
air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion of the
public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public safety.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-7
7. That the requested variance is the minimum action required to eliminate
the hardship.
8. Does not involve a use which is not allowed within the respective zoning
district.
B. Procedure. Application for the adjustment permissible under the provisions of
this section shall be made to the Zoning Administrator, in the form of a written
application. An application for an adjustment shall be accompanied by payment
of a fee, as established within this Section. Upon receipt of any application, such
officer shall set a time and place for a hearing before the board on such
application. At least ten days before the date of the hearing, a notice of the
hearing shall be mailed to the applicant and to all property owners within
350 feet of the affected property and to other persons who, in the judgment of
the Zoning Administrator, may be affected by a decision of the Board; although
failure of such owners to receive notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.
Notice of the purpose, time, and place of such public hearing shall be published
in the City's official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the
hearing.
C. Conditions of Approval. In granting any adjustment or variance under the
provisions of this subdivision, the Board shall designate such conditions in
connection therewith as will, in its opinion, secure substantially the objectives of
the regulations or provision to which the adjustment or variance is granted, as to
light, air, and the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general
welfare.
Subd. 5. Conditional Uses. The council may, by resolution, grant conditional use
permits when such permits are authorized by resolution, grant conditional use permits
when such permits are authorized by other sections of this chapter and may impose
conditions and safeguards in such permits to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the community and assure harmony with the comprehensive plan of the city.
A. Application. An application for a conditional use permit shall be made by the
owners(s) of the property and shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. All
applications shall be accompanied by an administrative fee as prescribed by this
Chapter and shall include the following information:
1. A description of the proposed use.
2. A legal description of the property including plat and parcel number.
3. A complete site plan, as described in Section 1001.03, provided that in the
case of home occupations, an accurate drawing of the lot may be used.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-8
4. A map showing the property in question and all property within 350 feet of
the boundaries of the property in question.
5. The names and addresses of the owners of record of all property within
350 feet of the boundaries of the property in question as the same
appears on the records of the County Auditor.
6. Any other information required by the Zoning Administrator, Planning
Commission, or Council.
B. Referral to the Planning Commission. Before any conditional use permit may be
granted, the application shall be referred to the Planning Commission for study
concerning the effect of the proposed use on the Comprehensive Plan and the
character and development of the neighborhood, and for its recommendation to
the Council for the granting of such conditional use permit and the conditions
thereof, if any, for the denial of such conditional use permit.
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal to issue a
conditional use permit in the manner provided in this Chapter. Following the
Planning commission review/hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a
report upon the proposal to the Council and shall recommend to the Council
whatever action it deems advisable. (Subd. 03 amended by Ordinance 86-4,
passed March 25, 1986.)
C. Issuance. Upon receipt of the report of the Planning Commission, the Council
may hold a public hearing in the manner provided in this Chapter. In considering
applications for conditional use permits under this chapter, the Council shall
consider the advice and recommendations of the Planning Commission and the
effect of the proposed use upon the health, safety, and welfare of occupants or
surrounding lands, including, but not limited to, factors of noise, glare, odors,
existing and anticipated traffic conditions, including parking facilities, on adjacent
streets, the effect on values of property in the surrounding area, and the effect of
the proposed use on the Comprehensive Plan. The Council shall also consider
whether the applicant has complied and is likely to comply in the future, with any
additional standards pertinent to the proposed use as set out in other sections of
this and any other chapter of this code. If detrimental to the health, safety or
general welfare of the community and that the same is in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of this chapter and the comprehensive plan, the
Council may grant such permits and may impose conditions and safeguards
therein. The Zoning Administrator shall have the power to enter at reasonable
times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspection and
investigating.
The Council may, by resolution, deny a conditional use permit and include
the findings and reasons for denial in the resolution. If the Planning
Commission recommends denial of a conditional use permit, the findings and
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-9
reasons shall be set forth in their written report to the Council. (Subd. 04
amended by Ordinance 86-4, passed March 25, 1986.)
D. Standards. The Planning Commission shall recommend a conditional use permit
and the Council shall order the issuance of such permit only if it finds that such
use meets at least the following standards at the proposed location:
1. Will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, or general welfare of the neighborhood or the city.
2. Will be harmonious with general and applicable specific objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan of the City and this chapter.
3. Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential
character of that area.
4. Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses.
5. Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services,
including streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse
disposal, water and sewer systems, and schools; or will be served
adequately by such facilities and services provided by the persons or
agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use.
6. Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public
facilities anal services and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare
of the community.
7. Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment, or
conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property, or
the general welfare because of excessive production of traffic, noise,
smoke, fumes, glare, or odors.
8. Will have vehicular approaches to the property which are not so designed
to create traffic congestion or an interference with traffic on surrounding
public thoroughfares.
9. Will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of a natural, scenic, or
historic feature of major importance.
10. Will conform to specific standards of this chapter applicable to the
particular use.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-10
E. Conditions. In recommending or approving any conditional use permit, the
Planning Commission and Council may impose conditions which it considers
necessary to meet the standards of this chapter and to protect the best interests
of the City. These conditions may include; but are not limited to the following:
1. Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with
particular reference to vehicle and pedestrian safety and convenience,
traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or other catastrophe.
2. Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular
attention to the items listed above, and the economic, noise, glare, or odor
effects of the conditional use on nearby property.
3. Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the items (A) and
(B) above.
4. Utilities, with reference to location, availability, and compatibility.
5. Diking, fencing, screening, landscaping, or other facilities to protect
adjacent or nearby property.
6. Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic
safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties in
the district.
7. Required yards and other open space.
8. General compatibility with adjacent and other property in the district.
33F. Expiration:
1. Unless the City Council specifically approves a different time when action
is officially taken on the request, conditional use permits that have been
issued shall expire without further action by the City Council, unless the
applicant commences the authorized use within twelve (12) months of the
date the conditional use permit is issued unless before the expiration of
the twelve (12) month period, the applicant shall apply for an extension
thereof by completing and submitting a request for extension, including the
renewal fee as established by the City Code. The request for extension
shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to complete or utilize the use
permitted in the conditional use permit. A request for an extension not
exceeding twelve (12) months shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Zoning Administrator. Should a second extension of time or any
extension of time longer than twelve (12) months be requested by the
applicant, it shall be presented to the Planning Commission for a
recommendation and to the City Council for a decision.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-11
2. Any use allowed by a conditional user may be continued, including
through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, or improvement,
but not including expansion, except as specifically provided in this chapter,
unless the use is discontinued for a period of more than eighteen months;
After a period of non-use of eighteen months, the conditional use permit
shall be deemed to be expired and void. Reestablishment of the use
shall be applied for and as provided for by this Section for issuance of a
conditional use permit and shall comply with all applicable provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance.
33G. Revocation: The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City Council
may direct, the revocation of any conditional use permit for cause upon
determination that the authorized conditional use is not in conformance with the
conditions of the permit or is in continued violation of the Zoning Ordinance, City
Codes, or other applicable regulations. The City Council or Planning Commission
shall initiate an application and the Zoning Administrator shall notify the
responsible person that they have an opportunity to show cause why the permit
should not be revoked. The application shall be processed and considered
pursuant to this Section. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the responsible
person a copy of the proceedings and findings of the Planning Commission and
City Council.
Subd. 6. Interim Uses.
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses is:
1. To allow a use for a brief period of time until a permanent location is
obtained or while the permanent location is under construction.
2. To allow a use that is presently judged acceptable by the City Council, but
that with anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be
acceptable in the future or will be replaced in the future by a permitted or
conditional use allowed within the respective district.
3. To allow a use which is reflective of anticipated long range change to an
area and which is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan provided
that said use maintains harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses
and is in keeping with the architectural character and design standards of
existing uses and development.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-12
B. Procedure.
1. Existing Uses: Uses defined as interim uses which presently exist as a
legal use or a legal nonconforming use within a respective zoning district
shall be considered approved and shall be treated as allowed uses.
2. New Uses: Uses defined as interim uses which do not presently exist
within a respective zoning district shall be processed according to the
standards and procedures for a conditional use permit as established by
Subd. 05 of this Chapter.
C. General Standards. An interim use shall comply with the following:
1. Existing Uses: Shall be in conformance with zoning and building standards
in effect at the time of initial construction and development and shall
continue to be governed by such regulations in the future.
2. New Uses:
a. Meets the standards of a conditional use permit set forth in Subd.
05.D of this chapter.
b. Conforms to the applicable performance standards of this Chapter.
c. The use is allowed as an interim use in the respective zoning
district.
d. The date or event that will terminate the use can be identified with
certainty.
e. The use will not impose additional costs on the public if it is
necessary for the public to take the property in the future.
f. The user agrees to any conditions that the City Council deems
appropriate for permission of the use.
D. Termination. An interim use shall terminate on the happening of any of the
following events, whichever first occurs:
1. The date stated in the permit.
2. Upon violation of conditions under which the permit was issued.
3. Upon change in the City's zoning regulations which renders the use nonconforming.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-13
4. The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it is located to a
permitted or conditional use as allowed within the respective zoning
district.
Subd. 7. Amendment.
A. Procedure. This code may be amended whenever the public necessity and
convenience and the general welfare require such amendment by following the
procedure specified as follows:
1. Proceedings for amendment shall be initiated by (1) a petition of the owner
or owners of the actual property, the zoning of which is proposed to be
changed; (2) a recommendation of the Planning Commission, or (3) by
action of the Council.
2. To defray administrative costs of processing of requests for amendment of
a fee, as established by the Council, shall be paid by the petitioner.
3. All applications for changes in the boundaries of any zoning district which
are initiated by the petition of the owner or owners of property, the zoning
of which is proposed to be changed, shall be accompanied by a map or
plat showing the lands proposed to be changed and all lands within three
hundred fifty feet of the boundaries of the property proposed to be
rezoned, together with names and addressed of the owners of the lands in
such area as the same appear on the records of the County Auditor of
Hennepin/Wright County which shall be provided by the petitioner.
4. Before any amendment is adopted, the Planning Commission shall hold at
least one public hearing thereon after a notice of the hearing has been
published in the official newspaper at least ten days before the hearing,
and, in the case of district boundary amendments, has been mailed to
property owners within 350 feet of the subject property, although failure of
such owners to receive notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.
Following the hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a report of its
findings and recommendation is transmitted by the Planning Commission
within sixty days, after the hearing, the Council may take action without
awaiting such recommendation.
5. Upon filing of such report, the Council shall hold such public hearings on
the amendment as it deems advisable. After the conclusion of the
hearings, if any, the Council may adopt the amendment or any part thereof
in such form as it deems advisable.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-14
15 6. The Council may, by resolution, deny a proposed amendment and include
the findings and reasons for denial in the resolution. If the Planning
commission recommends denial of a proposed amendment, the findings
and reasons shall be set forth in their written report to the Council.
Approval of a proposed amendment shall require a majority vote of the
City Council. Approval of a proposed Zoning Map amendment which
changes all or part of the existing classification of a zoning district from
residential to either business, industrial, or planned unit development that
allows for commercial or industrial uses shall require a four-fifth’s (4/5’s)
vote of the City Council.
B. Determination of Substantially Similar Use. Any landowner may request a
determination by the Council that a use not included in any district of this
chapter is substantially similar to a use classified as permitted, conditional, or
accessory in the district in which the property is located. An application for
such a determination shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator who shall refer it
to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall consider the
application and shall file its recommendations with the Council. If the Council
determines that the use is substantially similar to a use included in these
regulations, such use shall thereafter be an allowable use whenever the similar
use is authorized.
Subd. 8. Certificate of Occupancy.
A. Application. A certificate of occupancy shall be obtained before any building
hereafter erected or structurally altered is occupied or used; or the use of any
such building is altered.
B. Procedure.
16, 32 1. Application.
a. Requests for a certificate of occupancy for a new building or for an
existing building which has been altered shall be made to the
Zoning Administrator as part of the application for a building permit
as required in this section.
b. Applications for a building permit and certificate of occupancy shall
include a certificate of survey. Applications for a building permit
and certificate of survey for all single family dwellings shall explicitly
show the proposed home type and driveway location. Both the
home type and driveway location must match that indicated on the
approved grading plan unless approved by the City Engineer.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-15
c. No building permit for the erection or alteration of a building shall be
issued before the application has been made for a certificate of
occupancy.
12 2. Issuance. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of occupancy
within ten (10) days after the erection or alteration of a building or part
thereof is completed and found to be in conformance with the applicable
provisions of the City Code.
12 3. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy.
a. The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a period not to exceed six (6) months during the
completion of the erection or alteration of a building and required
site improvements.
b. The temporary certificate of occupancy shall not be respective to
right, duties or obligations of the owners or City relating to the use
or the occupancy of the premises or any other matter except under
such restrictions and provision as will adequately insure the safety
of the occupants.
c. The City may require a cash escrow or other security for completion
of required improvements necessary for issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. Such security shall be in the amount determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
1) Residential Uses, Prior to issuance of a temporary
certificate of occupancy for a residential use, the developer
or builder shall provide the property owner with a certificate
of credit from a local area contractor equal to the costs of
materials and labor as determined by the Zoning
Administrator for all exterior improvements not installed due
to season, including but not limited to driveways and
landscaping, required by this Chapter or the development
contract.
12 4. Non-Conforming Uses. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued for all
lawful nonconforming uses of land or buildings. Application for such
certificate of occupancy for a non-conforming use shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator by the owner or lessee of the building or land
occupied by such non-conforming use by October 1, 1984. It shall be the
duty of the Zoning Administrator to issue a certificate of occupancy for a
lawful non-conforming use, or refusal of the Zoning Administrator to issue
a certificate of occupancy for such non-conforming use shall be prima
facie evidence that such nonconformity is unlawful. An appeal to the
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-16
Board of Adjustment and Appeal may be taken from an adverse decision
of the Zoning Administrator.
12 5. Inspection. A periodic inspection shall be made by the building inspector
of all non-residential buildings and sites which have a certificate of
occupancy, and if it is found that such building does not conform to the
applicable requirements, the certificate of occupancy may be revoked and
the building shall not be occupied until such time as the building is again
brought into compliance with such requirements.
Subd. 9. Enforcement.
A. Compliance with Regulations. No person shall erect, alter, wreck, or move any
building or part thereof without first securing a building permit therefore.
B. Building Permits. Application for a building permit shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator on blank forms to be furnished by the City. Each application for a
permit to construct or alter a building shall be accompanied by a plan drawn to
scale showing the dimensions of the lot to be built upon and the size and location
of the building and accessory buildings to be erected. Each single family dwelling
shall include plans for at least a single stall garage to be built in conjunction with
the home. Applications for any kind of building permit shall contain such other
information as may be deemed necessary for the proper enforcement of this
chapter or any other. The fee for a building permit shall be determined by the
Council. The Zoning Administrator shall issue the building permit only after
determining that the building plans, together with the application, comply with the
terms of this chapter.
C. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in
violation of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator and the City, in addition to all
other remedies, may institute any proper action or proceedings to prevent such
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance, or use to restrain, correct such violation, to prevent the occupancy
of said building, structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business, or use in or about said premises.
D. Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this
Chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails
to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor, except as otherwise
stated in specific provisions hereof.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-17
E. The City shall recover the costs of its enforcement of this Chapter from a person
convicted under Subd. 09.D., including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the
City's attorney in such enforcement.
Subd. 10. Administrative and Escrow Fees. Each applicant shall be charged the
fixed fee specifically provided by the Council as required to cover the costs incurred by
the City in administratively processing, reviewing and issuing of permits and approvals
and shall make an escrow deposit pursuant to Section 1001.03 Subd. 12.
Subd. 11. Expiration. If substantial construction has not taken place within one year
after the date of a permit, the permit shall be void except that, on application, the
Council, after receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, may extend
the permit authorizing only the conditional use specified in the permit and expires if, for
any reason, the authorized use ceases for more than one year.
Subd. 12. Escrow Deposits.
A. Intent. Certain licensed and permitted activities carried on in the city require the
assistance of the city Engineer, city attorney, city planner, or other city personnel.
As these activities primarily benefit private persons rather than the city as a
whole, it is appropriate that the cost of these services be borne by those
benefiting thereby.
B. Escrow Deposit Required. Applications for subdivision approval, rezonings,
conditional use permits, planned unit developments, zoning variances, sewer
connection permits, liquor licenses, building permits, and other municipal
considerations may require a cash deposit which shall be placed in an applicant's
escrow account in an amount sufficient to pay all engineering, legal, and planning
fees, and such other costs as may be made the applicant's responsibility,
incurred in connection with an application shall be charged to the applicant's
escrow account and credited to the city.
C. Guarantee of Payment. The city shall have the authority to certify the collection
of fees through a tax assessment on the property in question.
D. Fee Schedule. The council shall establish fees for services rendered by the city
attorney, city engineer, city planner, and other city personnel. The fee schedule
shall be provided to all persons making application listed in Chapter 209.02 upon
request.
E. Individual Fees. Based on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to 209.03, the
clerk-treasurer shall determine the amount of the escrow deposit required after
consultation with the city attorney, city engineer, city planner, and other city
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Administration and Fees
03-18
personnel whose services may be required. All time, services, and materials tar
be billed to an escrow account shall be itemized.
F. Enforcement.
1. Application. The application listed in Subd. 15.B shall not be accepted or
processed by the city unless accompanied by an escrow deposit as
provided in this chapter.
2. Deficits. If at any time it appears that a deficit will occur in any escrow
account, the clerk-treasurer may then require an additional deposit in the
escrow account sufficient to cover the additional expenses. Failure to
make such additional deposits, or to pay to the city money owed for legal,
engineering or other services for which the applicant is by ordinance made
responsible in connection with an application in Subd. 15.B shall be
grounds for denial or revocation of the permit or license, or cessation of
work on a particular project. Such permit or license shall be revoked only
after a hearing preceded by ten days written notice.
G. Refund. Any money remaining in an applicant's escrow account after payment of
all required engineering, legal, and other fees shall be returned to the applicant.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Non-Conforming Uses
04-1
331001.04 NON-CONFORMING USES
Subd. 1. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the regulation of
nonconforming buildings, structures and uses and to specify those requirements,
circumstances and conditions under which nonconforming buildings, structures and
uses will be operated and maintained. This Zoning Ordinance establishes separate
districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the location of uses which are
permitted in that district. It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of these
districts that nonconforming buildings, structures and uses not be permitted to continue
without restriction and it is the intent of this chapter that all nonconforming uses shall be
eventually brought into conformity.
Subd. 2. Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses. The lawful use of buildings or
land existing on March 1, 1995, which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter
may be continued provided, however, that no such non-conforming use of land shall be
enlarged or increase, nor shall any such non-conforming use be extended to occupy a
greater area of land than that occupied by such use at the time of the adoption of this
chapter, nor shall any such non-conforming use be moved to any other part of the
parcel of land upon which the same was conducted at the time of the adoption of this
chapter.
Subd. 3. Non-Conforming Signs. No sign erected before March 1, 1995, or from
the effective date of any amendments thereto which make such signs non-conforming,
shall be rebuilt, altered, or moved to a new location without being brought into
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
Subd. 4 Continuance Of Legal Nonconformity. Any legal nonconformity,
including the lawful use or occupation of land or premises existing at the time of the
adoption of an additional control under this chapter, may be continued, including
through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, or improvement, but not
including expansion, except as specifically provided in this chapter, unless:
1. The nonconformity or occupancy is discontinued for a period of more than one
year; or
2. Any nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater
than eighty percent (80%) of its market value, and no building permit has been
applied for within one hundred eighty (180) days of when the property is
damaged. In this case, the city of Rockford may impose reasonable conditions
upon a building permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent
property.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Non-Conforming Uses
04-2
3. Any subsequent use or occupancy of the land or premises shall be a conforming
use or occupancy.
Subd. 5. Non-Conforming Uses. The lawful use of a building existing at the time
of the adoption of this chapter may be continued, although such use does not conform
with the provisions hereof. If no structural alterations are made, a non-conforming use of
a building may be changed to another non-conforming use of the same or more
restricted classification. The foregoing provisions shall also apply to nonconforming
uses in districts hereafter changed. Whenever a nonconforming use of a building has
been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not
thereafter be changed to a less restricted use.
Subd. 6. Alterations.
A. Alterations may be made to a residential building containing non-conforming
residential units when they will improve the livability of such units provided,
however, that they do not increase the number of dwelling units in the building.
B. Maintenance of a building or other structure containing or used by a nonconforming
use will be permitted when it includes necessary non-structural repair
and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming
building or use. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the placing of a structure in
safe condition when said structure is declared unsafe by the building codes and
standards of the City.
C. Alteration and normal maintenance to a legal nonconforming building or structure
may be made through the building permit process provided:
1. The alterations do not expand the foundation and/or building size
(including deck additions), unless specifically allowed by this Zoning
Ordinance.
2. The alterations do not increase the building occupancy capacity or parking
demand.
3. The alteration does not increase the degree of the nonconforming
condition of the building, site or the use.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Non-Conforming Uses
04-3
Subd. 7. Non Conforming Lots.
A. General Restriction: No building, structure or use shall be erected, constructed or
established on a nonconforming lot unless a variance is granted by the city,
except as otherwise provided for by this Chapter.
B. Vacant Or Redeveloped Lots: Except in environmental protection districts, legal,
nonconforming, vacant lots of record may be developed for single-family
detached dwellings upon approval of an administrative permit, provided that:
1. Legally Established: The lot in question was legally established in
accordance with requirements of this code existing at the time of its
creation and is a separate, distinct tax parcel.
2. Allowed Use: Single-family residential dwellings are an allowed use within
the zoning district.
3. Access: The lot in question has frontage on and will directly access an
improved public street.
4. Setback And Yard Requirements: The setback and yard requirements of
the zoning district can be achieved while simultaneously resulting in
development which complies with the character and general design of the
immediate area and the objectives of the comprehensive plan and this
Zoning Ordinance.
C. Developed Lots: An existing conforming use on a lot of substandard size and/or
width may be expanded or enlarged if such expansion or enlargement meets all
other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Off-Street Parking and Loading
05-1
1001.05 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Subd. 1. Purpose. The regulation of off-street parking spaces in these zoning
regulations is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and to
promote the safety and general welfare of the public, by establishing minimum
requirements for off-street parking of motor vehicles in accordance with the utilization of
various parcels of land or structures.
Subd. 2. Application. Off-street parking regulations shall apply to all buildings and
uses of land established after September 12, 1983, with the exception of the C-O
zoning district.
Subd. 3. Required Plan. Any application for a site plan approval, for building
permit or for a certificate of occupancy shall include a plan drawn to scale and
dimensioned showing off-street parking and loading space to be provided in compliance
with this section.
Subd. 4. General Provisions.
A. Floor Area. The term “floor area” for the purpose of calculating the number of offstreet
parking spaces required shall be determined on the basis of the exterior
floor area dimensions of the buildings, structures or use times the number of
floors, minus ten (l0) percent, except as may hereinafter be provided or modified.
B. Reduction of Existing Off-Street Parking Space or Lot Area. Off-street parking
spaces and loading spaces or lot area existing upon the effective date of this
Section shall not be reduced in number or size, unless said number or size
exceeds the requirements set forth herein for a similar new use.
C. Non-Conforming Structures.
1. Should a non-conforming structure or use be damaged or destroyed by
fire, it may be re-established if elsewhere permitted in this Chapter, except
that in doing so, any off-street parking or loading space shall be reestablished
in conformance with the requirements of this Section.
11 2. Expansion of a use that is non-conforming due to a lack of concrete curb
required by this section may be allowed by conditional use permit subject
to the following conditions:
a. Exception to providing perimeter concrete curb is a one-time
occurrence.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Off-Street Parking and Loading
05-2
b. The proposed expansion is not more than 2,000 square feet or
twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the existing
principal use, whichever is least.
c. Adequate measures are provided to control storm water drainage
as approved by the City Engineer.
d. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered
and determined to be satisfied.
D. Change of Use or Occupancy of Land. No change of use or occupancy of land
already dedicated to a parking spaces, driveways, or loading spaces shall be
made, nor shall any sale of land, division or subdivision of land be made which
reduces area necessary for parking, parking stalls, or parking requirements
below the minimum prescribed by this Section.
E. Chance of Use or Occupancy of Buildings. Any change of use or occupancy of
any building or buildings including additions thereto requiring more parking area
shall not be permitted until there is furnished such additional parking spaces as
required by this Section.
F. Residential District Parking. Except as provided below in Subdivision 4.G.2 and
except on a limited, temporary basis involving guests or work being performed on
site, on and off-street accessory parking facilities in a residential district shall be
utilized solely for the parking of licensed and operable passenger automobiles,
vans, trucks not to exceed gross capacity of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds;
and recreational vehicles and equipment which are the property of the
occupant, except as provided below in Subdivision 4.G.2. Under no
circumstances shall required facilities accessory to residential structures be used
for the storage of non-qualifying commercial vehicles, commercial equipment, or
for the parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants or
customers of business or manufacturing establishments.
G. Calculating Space.
1. When determining the number of off-street parking spaces results in a
fraction, each fraction shall constitute another space.
2. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of public assembly
in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar
seating facilities, each twenty-two (22) inches of such seating facilities
shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining requirements.
3. Except as provided for under joint parking and shopping centers, should a
structure contain two (2) or more types of use, the sum of each shall be
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Off-Street Parking and Loading
05-3
calculated separately and shall be used for determining the total off-street
parking spaces required.
H. Stall, Aisle and Driveway Design.
1. Parking Space Size. Except for handicapped parking spaces, each
parking space shall not be less than nine (9) feet wide and eighteen (18)
feet in length exclusive of access aisles, and each space shall be served
adequately by access aisles.
2. Street Access. All off-street parking facilities shall be designed and
constructed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a public street.
Except in the case of a planned unit development, each lot shall have
access directly onto an abutting, improved and City accepted public street.
Exception to this access requirement may be allowed as a conditional use
permit pursuant to Section 1001.05, Subd. 4 of this Chapter.
3. Within Structures. The off-street parking requirements may be furnished
by providing a space so designed within the principal building or one
structure attached thereto; however, unless provisions are made, no
building permit shall be issued to convert said parking structure into a
dwelling unit or living area or other activity until other adequate provisions
are made to comply with the required off-street parking provisions of this
Section.
4. Lot Circulation. Except in the case of single, two-family, townhouse,
quadraminium, and manor home dwellings, parking areas shall be
designed so that circulation between parking bays or aisles occurs within
the designated parking lot and does not depend upon a public street or
alley. Except in the case of single, two-family, townhouse, quadraminium,
and manor home dwellings, parking area design which requires backing
into the public street is prohibited.
5. Intersection Separation. No curb cut access shall be located less than
sixty (60) feet from the intersection of two (2) or more street rights-of-way.
This distance shall be measured from the intersection of lot lines.
6. Lot Design. Except in the case of single family, two-family, townhouse,
quadraminium, and manor home dwellings, parking areas and their aisles
shall be developed in compliance with the standards on the Parking Lot
Dimension Table.
7. Curb Cut Size. No curb cut access shall exceed twenty-four (24) feet in
width unless approved by the City Engineer.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Off-Street Parking and Loading
05-4
8. Side Yard Setback. Except with special approval from the Zoning
Administrator, curb cut openings shall be a minimum of five (5) feet from
the side yard property line in all districts.
9. Curb Cut Spacing. Driveway access curb openings on a public street
except for single, two-family, quadraminium, manor home, and townhouse
dwellings, shall not be located less than forty (40) feet from one another.
34 10. Grade.
a. Parking Spaces and Areas. The grade elevation of any parking
area shall not exceed six (6) percent, except as approved by the
City Engineer.
b. Driveways. Unless approved by the City Engineer, the grade
elevation of any driveway shall not exceed:
1) Eight (8) percent for single family, two family, and townhouse
dwellings, except as approved by the City Engineer.
2) Six (6) percent for all other uses.
11. Number of Curb Cuts. Each property shall be allowed one curb cut
access and may be allowed upon city council approval, additional
curb cuts for each one hundred twenty-five (12 5) feet of street frontage.
All property shall be entitled to at least one curb cut. Single family
uses shall be limited to one curb cut access per property unless a
conditional use permit is approved pursuant to Section 1001.03, Subd. 5
of this Chapter.
12. Surfacing.
a. Farmsteads, farming operations, and detached single family
residential uses: Driveways and parking area shall be surfaced with
materials suitable to control dust and drainage.
b. Other Uses:
1) All uses other than those specified in subsection 12.a. above
shall have driveways and parking areas which are surfaced
with asphalt, concrete, cobblestone, or paving bricks.
2) For legal, nonconforming uses existing upon the effective
date of this Chapter, at any time an improvement is made to
property requiring a conditional use permit, interim use
permit, variance, and/or building permit, all nonconforming
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Off-Street Parking and Loading
05-5
design and surfacing of parking areas or driveways existing
on the lot in question shall be brought into full compliance
with this Section.
3) Plans for surfacing and drainage of driveways and stalls for
parking areas of five (5) or more vehicles shall be submitted
to the City Engineer for review and the final drainage plan
shall be subject to written approval.
4) For industrial uses which experience frequent heavy
equipment utilization which could be expected to destroy or
damage required surfacing materials, an exemption to the
surfacing requirements may be allowed by conditional use
permit pursuant to Section 1001.03, Subd. 5 and provided
that:
a) General public and employee access driveways and
parking areas shall not be included in the exemption.
b) At such time as the presence of heavy equipment is
reduced or eliminated, the surfacing of exempted
areas shall be completed in compliance with this
Chapter.
c) All other performance standards related to parking
and driveways shall be met.
d) The provisions of Section 1001.03, Subd. 5E are
considered and determined to be satisfied.
13. Striping. Except for single, two-family townhouse, quadraminiums, and
manor home dwellings, all parking stalls shall be marked with white or
yellow painted lines not less than four (4) inches wide.
14. Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be
hooded and so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining
property, abutting residential uses, and public rights-of-way, and shall be
in compliance with Chapter.
15. Curbing and Landscaping. Except for single, two-family, townhouse,
quadraminiums, and manor home dwellings, all open, off-street parking
shall have a continuous concrete perimeter curb barrier around the entire
parking lot; said curb barrier shall not be closer than five (5) feet to any lot
line except as approved by the City Engineer. Grass plantings and
landscaping shall be provided in all areas bordering the parking area.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Off-Street Parking and Loading
05-6
16. Required Screening. All open off-street parking areas of five (5) or more
spaces shall be screened and landscaped from abutting or surrounding
residential districts and uses, and the public right-of-way in compliance
with this Chapter.
17. Snow Storage. Adequate space for snow storage shall be provided on the
site so as not to reduce the required minimum number of parking spaces.
In those cases where excessive snow cannot be properly stored on site, it
shall be immediately removed from the site.
18. Driveway Turn Around. In the case of single family, two-family,
townhouse, quadraminium, and manor home dwellings, which front on
streets designated as collector, minor arterial, intermediate arterial and
principal arterial by the City's Comprehensive Plan, the installation of a
vehicle turn-around space, immediately adjacent to the access driveway is
allowed and may be required by the City Council. Said space is to be no
larger than ten (10) feet wide and ten (10) feet in length. Where possible,
said space shall be located away from the principal structure and shall be
no closer than twenty (20) feet from the street surface. Said space shall
not to be utilized for parking or storage purposes.
I. Signs. No sign shall be so located as to restrict the sight lines and orderly
operation and traffic movement within any parking lot or driveway. All signs shall
be in conformance with this Chapter.
Subd. 5. Maintenance. It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the lessee
and owner of the principal use, uses or buildings to maintain in a neat and adequate
manner, the parking space, accessways, striping, landscaping and required screening.
Subd. 6. Location. All accessory off-street parking facilities as required by this
Section shall be located and restricted as follows:
A. Required accessory off-street parking shall be on the same lot under the same
ownership as the principal use being served, except under the provisions of
Subd. 10 and Subd. 11 of this Section.
B. Except for single, two-family, townhouse, quadraminium, and manor home
dwellings, head-in parking, directly off of and adjacent to a public street, with
each stall having its own direct access to the public street, shall be prohibited.
C. There shall be no off-street parking within fifteen (15) feet of any street surface.
D. The boulevard portion of the street right-of-way shall not be used for parking.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Off-Street Parking and Loading
05-7
E. Setback Area: Required accessory off-street parking shall not be provided in
required front yards or in required side yards in the case of corner lots, in
agricultural and residential zoning districts.
F. Required off-street parking areas for one and two-family uses shall be in the
rear yard, side yards other than a required side yard, garage, or carport, and
upon a defined driveway. A parking space in excess of that specifically
required by this Section may be located in an area not to exceed twelve
(12) feet in width abutting the driveway on one side only away from the principal
building in the front yard. The parking area designated in the front yard abutting
the driveway shall be surfaced with either concrete, asphalt or in cases of
existing gravel driveways, gravel may be used for such additional parking. At
any time an improvement is made to property requiring a building permit, all nonconforming
surfacing of parking areas or driveways existing on the lot in question
shall be brought into full compliance with this section.
G. With the exception of seasonal recreational equipment of limited size and weight,
the same parking standards for seasonal recreational equipment shall apply as
outlined herein. In cases of seasonal recreational equipment of limited size and
weight, the surfacing required herein shall not apply and the equipment may be
parked over what is traditionally grass. Seasonal recreational equipment of
limited size and weight may include boats, campers designed to be mounted on
automotive vehicles, snowmobiles, boat trailers, motorcycle trailers and tent or
travel trailers.
H. Violations may be enforced through tagging.
Subd. 7. Use of Required Area. Required accessory off-street parking spaces in
any district shall not be utilized for open storage, sale or rental of goods, repair work,
storage of inoperable vehicles, and/or storage of snow.
Subd. 8. Handicapped Parking Spaces. Except for single family, two-family,
townhouse, quadraminium, and manor home dwellings, at least one handicapped
parking space shall be provided for each use. An additional space shall be provided for
each increment of fifty (50) spaces in excess of the initial fifty (50) spaces. Handicapped
spaces shall be at minimum twelve (12) feet by twenty (20) feet, shall be located so as
to provide convenient, priority access to the principal use and shall conform to
Minnesota Statutes, Section 168.021, as may be amended.
8 Subd. 9. Number of Spaces Required. The following minimum number of offstreet
parking spaces shall be provided and maintained by ownership, easement and/or
lease for and during the life of the respective uses hereinafter set forth:
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Off-Street Parking and Loading
05-8
A. Automobile, trailer, marine,, implement, garden supply, building and material
sales, auto repair. Six (6) off-street parking spaces, plus one (1) additional space
for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area over one thousand (1,000)
square feet.
B. Banks. One space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area.
C. Drive-in Banks. Two (2) spaces for each drive-in unit plus drive aisle stacking
space of one hundred eighty (180) feet for each drive-in unit.
D. Boarding and Lodging House. At minimum one (1) space plus at least one (1)
parking space for each person for whom accommodations are provided for
sleeping.
E. Bowling Alley. At least five (5) parking spaces for each alley, plus additional
spaces as may be required herein for related uses contained within the principal
structure plus one (1) space for every employee.
F. Car Wash, machine. Twenty-five (25) spaces, plus five (5) additional spaces per
lane in excess of one (1).
G. Clinics. One (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet of floor area.
H. Churches, auditoriums and other places of assembly. At least one (1) parking
space for each three (3) seats based on the design capacity of the main
assembly hall.
I. Community Centers, Health Studios, Libraries, Museums, Private Clubs, Lodges.
Ten (10) spaces plus one for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet in excess
of two thousand (2000) square feet of floor area in the principal structure.
J. Golf course, tennis or swimming club, etc. Twenty (20) spaces per principal
building, plus eight (8) spaces per two hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
K. Elderly (Senior Citizen) Housing. Reservation of area equal to one (1) parking
space per unit. Initial development is, however, required for only one-half (1/2)
space per unit and said number of spaces can continue until such time as the
City considers a need for additional parking spaces has been demonstrated.
L. Funeral Home. One (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor
area of each chapel with a minimum of twenty (20) parking spaces for each
chapel or parlor, plus one (1) parking space for each funeral vehicle maintained
on the premises. Aisle space shall be provided off-street for making up a funeral
procession.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Off-Street Parking and Loading
05-9
M. Furniture and Appliance Stores. One (1) space per four hundred (400) square
feet of floor area.
N. Hospitals. One space for each two (2) patient beds (excluding bassinets), plus
one (1) additional space for each doctor including visiting doctors, plus one (1)
space for each two (2) employees including nurses; loading and unloading space
for hospital ambulances and similar vehicles are not included in the spaces
required.
O. Manufacturing or Processing Plant. One (1) space for two (2) employees on the
shift of greatest employment, or one (1) space for each five hundred (500)
square feet of floor area whichever is greater. In addition, one (1) space for each
company motor vehicle on the premises.
P. Motels, Motor Hotels, Hotels, Resorts. One (1) space per each rental unit plus
one (1) additional space for each ten (10) units plus one (1) for each employee
on the shift of greatest employment.
Q. Motor Fuel Station. At least four (4) off-street parking spaces plus three (3) offstreet
parking spaces for each service stall. Those facilities designed for sale of
other items than strictly automotive products, parts or service shall be required to
provide additional parking in compliance with other applicable provisions of this
Section.
R. Municipal Administration Buildings, Community Center, Public Libraries, Art
Galleries, Museums, Post Office, etc. One (1) space per three hundred (300)
square feet of floor area.
S. Multiple Family Dwellings. Two (2) rent-free spaces per unit plus one (1) space
for each bedroom per unit over two (2).
T. Multi-story Office Buildings and Financial Institutions other than Banks. One (1)
space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
U. Office Buildings, Professional Offices, Medical and Dental Clinics. Three (3)
spaces plus at least one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of
floor area.
V. Post Office. One (1) space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area
plus one (1) space for each employee.
W. Research, Experimental or Testing Station. One (1) space per each employee
on the largest shift or one (1) space per each five hundred (500) square feet of
floor area whichever is greater.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Off-Street Parking and Loading
05-10
X. Restaurants (Class I), Cafes, Private Clubs Serving Food and/or Drink, Bars, On-
Sale Nightclubs. At least one (1) space for each forty (40) square feet of gross
floor area of dining and bar area and one (1) space for each eighty (80) square
feet of kitchen area.
Y. Drive-in Restaurant and Fast Food Restaurant (Class II). At least one (1) parking
space for each fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area. Additionally, one hundred
eighty (180) feet of drive aisle stacking space shall be provided for drive-through
facilities.
Z. Retail Store and Service Establishment. At least one (1) off-street parking space
for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
AA. Retail Sales and Service Business with Fifty (50) percent or More of Gross Floor
Area Devoted to Storage Warehouse and/or Industry. At least eight (8) spaces or
one (1) space for each two (200) hundred square feet devoted to public sales or
service plus one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of storage
area; or at least eight (8) spaces and one (1) space for each employee on the
maximum shift, whichever is appropriate.
BB. Sanitarium, Convalescent Home Rest Home Nursing Home or Day Nurseries.
Four (4) spaces plus one (1) for each four (4) beds for which accommodations
are offered and one (1) space designated for emergency vehicles.
CC. School, Elementary and Junior High. At least one (1) parking space for each
classroom plus one (1) additional space for each fifty (50) students. Auditorium or
event space shall be subject to a separate, additional calculation.
DD. Service Garage. Four (4) spaces per each service stall.
EE. Single Family, Two-Family, and Townhouse Unit. Two (2) spaces per unit.
FF. Shopping Centers. Six (6) spaces per each one thousand (1,000) square feet of
gross floor area.
GG. Theatres, Civic Centers Auditoriums Stadiums Sports Arenas or Similar Uses.
One (1) space for each four (4) seats, plus one (1) space for each two (2)
employees.
HH. Warehousing, Storage or Handling of Bulk Goods. One (1) space per two
employees of the largest shift or one (1) space per each one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
II. Wholesaling. One (1) space per each employee on the largest shift or one (1)
space per two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area whichever is greater. In
addition, one (1) space per company motor vehicle on the premises.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Off-Street Parking and Loading
05-11
JJ. All Other Commercial. Ten (10) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of
floor area.
KK. Other Uses. Other uses not specifically mentioned herein or unique cases shall
be determined on an individual basis by the City Council. Factors to be
considered in such determination shall include (without limitation) size of
buildings, type of use, number of employees, expected volume and turnover of
customer traffic and expected frequency and number of delivery or service
vehicles.
LL. Space Reductions. Subject to the review and processing of a conditional use
permit as regulated by Section 1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter, the City may
reduce the number of required off-street parking spaces when the use can
demonstrate in documented form a need, which is less than required. In such
situations, the City may require land to be reserved for parking development
should use or needs change.
Subd. 10. Joint Facilities. The City council may approve a conditional use permit,
pursuant to Section 1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter, for one or more businesses to
provide the required off-street parking facilities by joint use of one or more sites where
the total number of spaces provided are less than the sum of the total required for each
business should they provide them separately. To qualify for joint parking the following
conditions are required to exist.
A. Up to fifty (50) percent of the parking facilities required for a theater, bowling
alley, bar or restaurant may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities
provided by types of uses specified as primarily daytime uses in Item D below.
B. Up to fifty (50) percent of the off-street parking facilities required for any use
specified under Item D below as primarily daytime uses may be supplied by the
parking facilities provided by the following night time or Sunday uses: auditoriums
incidental to a public or parochial school, churches, bowling alleys, theaters,
bars, apartments or restaurants.
C. Up to eighty (80) percent of the parking facilities required by this Section for a
church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be
supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by uses specified in Item D
below as primarily daytime uses.
D. For the purposes of this Section, the following uses are considered as primarily
daytime uses: public schools, banks, business offices, retail stores, personal
service shops, household equipment or furniture shops, clothing or shoe repair or
service shops, manufacturing, wholesale and similar uses.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Off-Street Parking and Loading
05-12
E. Conditions Required for Joint Use.
1. The building or use for which application is being made to utilize the offstreet
parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be
located within three hundred (300) feet of such parking facilities.
2. Documentation as specified by the City shall be submitted demonstrating
that there is not substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the
two buildings or uses (for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is
proposed).
3. A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties concerned for
joint use of off-street parking facilities, duly approved as to form and
manner of execution by the City Attorney, shall be filed with the City Clerk
and recorded with the Wright County Recorder.
Subd. 11. Off-Site Parking.
A. Any off-site off-street parking which is used to meet the requirements of this
Chapter shall be a conditional use as regulated by Section 1001.03, Subd. 06 of
this Chapter.
B. Off-site parking shall be developed and maintained in compliance with all
requirements and standards of this Chapter.
C. The parking lot is to be used only for the parking of passenger automobiles of
employees, customers or guests of the person or firm controlling and operating
the lot, said person to be responsible for its maintenance.
D. The parking lot is not to be used for sales, repair work or servicing of any kind.
E. Reasonable access from off-site parking facilities to the use being served shall
be provided.
F. No advertising sign or material is to be located on the property where the parking
lot is located.
G. All parking is to be kept back of the setback building line by barriers unless
otherwise specifically authorized by the City Council.
H. Except as provided below, the site used for meeting the off-site parking
requirements of this Section shall be under the* same ownership as the principal
use being served or under public ownership.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Off-Street Parking and Loading
05-13
I. Off-site parking for multiple family dwellings shall not be located more than one
hundred (100) feet from any normally used entrance of the principal use served.
J. Except as provided below, off-site parking for nonresidential uses shall not be
located more than three hundred (300) feet from the main public entrance of the
principal use being served.
K. Any use which depends upon off-site parking to meet the requirements of this
Section shall maintain ownership and parking utilization of the off-site location
until such time as on-site parking is provided or a site in closer proximity to the
principal use is acquired and developed for parking.
L. Compliance with off-street parking requirements provided through leased offstreet
parking may be approved by the City Council, subject to the following
conditions:
1. The lease shall specify the total number and location of parking spaces
under contract and this number, when added to any on-site parking
required, must be equal to the total number of parking spaces required.
2. The lease instrument shall legally bind all parties to the lease and provide
for amendment or cancellation only upon written approval from the city.
3. The lease agreement shall incorporate a release of liability and any other
provisions, as recommended by the City Attorney that are deemed
necessary to ensure compliance with the intent of this Section.
M. Any such other conditions as may be deemed necessary by the City Council to
protect the welfare and character of the nearby land uses.
Subd. 12. Off-Street Loading.
A. Purpose. The regulation of loading spaces in these zoning regulations is to
alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way so as to promote the
safety and general welfare of the public, by establishing minimum requirements
for off-street loading and unloading from motor vehicles in accordance with the
specific and appropriate utilization of various parcels of land or structure.
B. Location.
1. Off-Street. All required loading berths shall be off-street and located on
the same lot as the building or use to be served.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Off-Street Parking and Loading
05-14
2. Distance from Intersection. All loading berth curb cuts shall be located at a
minimum sixty (60) feet from the intersection of two or more street rightsof-
way. This distance shall be measured from the property line.
3. Distance from Residential Use. No loading berth shall be located closer
than one hundred (100) feet from a residential district unless within a
structure.
4. Prohibited in Front Yards. Loading berths shall not occupy the required
front yard setbacks.
5. Conditional Use Permit Required. A conditional use permit shall be
required for new loading berths added to an existing structure and/or,
where the loading berth is located at the front or at the side of the building
on a corner lot.
a. Pedestrians. Loading berths shall not conflict with pedestrian
movement.
b. Visibility. Loading berths shall not obstruct the view of the public
right-of-way from off-street parking access.
c. General Compliance. Loading berths shall comply with all other
requirements of this Chapter.
6. Traffic Interference. Each loading berth shall be located with appropriate
means of vehicular access to a street or public alley in a manner which will
cause the least interference with traffic both on and off site.
C. Surfacing. Subject to exceptions established for the surfacing of parking areas
by this Section, all loading berths and accessways shall be improved with not
less than six (6) inch class five base and two (2) inch bituminous surfacing to
control the dust and drainage according to a plan submitted to and subject to the
approval of the City Engineer.
D. Accessory Use, Parking and Storage. Any space allocated as a required loading
berth or access drive so as to comply with the requirements of this Chapter shall
not be used for the storage of goods, inoperable vehicles, or snow, and shall not
be included as part of the space requirements to meet off-street parking
requirements.
7 E. Screening. Except in the case of multiple family dwellings, all loading areas shall
be completely screened from view of abutting residential uses and/or the public
right-of-way through the use of fences and or landscaping.
F. Size.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Off-Street Parking and Loading
05-15
1. Non-Residential Developments. Unless otherwise specified in these
zoning regulations, the first loading berth shall be not less than seventy
(70) feet in length and additional berths required shall be not less than
thirty (30) feet in length and all loading berths shall be not less than ten
(10) feet in width and fourteen (14) feet in height, exclusive of aisle and
maneuvering space.
2. Multiple Family Dwellings. The size and location of the required loading
berth shall be subject to the review and approval of the Zoning
Administrator.
G. Number of Loading Berths Required. The number of required off-street loading
berths shall be as follows:
1. Commercial and Industrial Uses. All buildings shall have at least one offstreet
loading berth. Buildings which are ten thousand (10,000) square
feet or more, shall have at a minimum two (2) loading berths.
2. Multiple Family Dwellings. One (1) off-street loading berth shall be
provided for each principal dwelling structure in excess of four (4) units.
3. Other Uses. Other uses not specifically mentioned herein or unique cases
shall be determined on an individual basis by the City Council. Factors to
be considered in such determination shall include (without limitation) size
of buildings, type of use, and expected frequency and number of delivery
or service vehicles.
4. Space Reductions. Subject to the review and processing of a conditional
use permit as regulated by Section 1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter, the
City may reduce the number of required off-street loading spaces when
the use can demonstrate in documented form a need which is less than
required. In such situations, the City may require land to be reserved for
loading space development should use or needs change.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Manufactured Homes
06-1
1001.06 MANUFACTURED HOMES
Subd. 1. Location of Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Home Parks.
A. Parking and Placement Prohibited. It shall be unlawful within the City for any
person to park any manufactured home on any street, alley or highway, or other
public place, or on any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or
unoccupied, except as provided in this section.
B. Emergency Parking Permitted. Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is
permitted on any street, alley or highway for not longer than three (3) hours
subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by
the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or highway.
C. Temporary Placement. Temporary special permits may be issued by the Council
for use of a trailer as an office or residence by persons directly connected with
new construction in the City, providing that such person has obtained a building
permit for said construction and is proceeding with said work. Such temporary
special permits shall be limited to periods of not more than ten (10) days
following completion of the project or for twelve (12) months, whichever is less.
D. Conditional Use Permit Required. No person shall construct, locate, operate or
maintain a manufactured home or manufactured home park within the City
without first obtaining a conditional use permit, and all such other permits and
licenses as shall be required and described herein.
E. Zoning and Sewage Requirements. No person shall construct, locate, operate, or
maintain a manufactured home park in the City unless the proposed area is
served by a public, municipal sanitary sewer, municipal water, and the property is
zoned for residential manufactured home park, R-M.
F. Placement Outside a Manufactured Home Park Prohibited. No person shall park
or occupy any manufactured home on either the premises of any dwelling or on
any lot which is situated outside an approved manufactured home park unless
such owner or person complies with applicable provisions of this Chapter,
including Housing Performance Standards. Manufactured homes within an
approved manufactured home park shall not be required to comply with Housing
Performance Standards but shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
Subd. 2. Conditional Use Permit Application. Required conditional use permits
may be applied for pursuant to the terms of this Chapter and shall be issued if all
requirements in this Chapter are met and all fees established in Section 212 of the City
Code have been paid.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Manufactured Homes
06-2
Subd. 3. Design Standards For Manufactured Home Parks.
A. Development Standards. All manufactured home parks shall conform to the
following minimum standards for development of the park except, and in addition,
those found in this Chapter.
1. Minimum Size. Every manufactured home park shall have a minimum of
ten (10) acres and a minimum width of five hundred (500) feet.
2. Surface Drainage. Every manufactured home park shall be located on a
well drained area and the premises shall be properly graded and equipped
with storm sewers if necessary so as to prevent the accumulation of storm
or other waters on the lots. However, runoff to adjacent properties shall
not be increased. Where there is water ponding on the site, provisions
shall be taken to retain the natural ponding features of the land and
provide for the same amount of water storage in some manner at the site.
3. Parks and Recreation. A park dedication will be required based on
dwelling units/acre. For parks with a density of less than five (5) units/acre,
a dedication of ten (10) percent of the total park area is required. Densities
of less than nine (9) units but greater than five (5), will require a dedication
of twelve (12) percent. Any greater densities will require a dedication of
fifteen (15) percent. The City may require park set asides to be furnished
with such amenities as: playground equipment; tennis courts;
shuffleboard, badminton or horseshoe courts; or other similar features.
4. Setbacks and Buffer Zones. There shall be a minimum setback of fifty (50)
feet from any highway and thirty (30) feet between the park outside
boundary line and any use within the manufactured home park. Such
setback area shall be landscaped and screened by a fence and/or screen
plantings of sufficient size and density to permit complete privacy for the
residents of both the manufactured home park and adjacent properties.
The City may, at its option, require fencing or other types of buffer in lieu
of the above requirements.
5. Landscaping. Every manufactured home park shall be landscaped and
maintained with seed or sod on the entire park except for areas used for
streets, sidewalks, patios, manufactured home parking areas, or vehicle
parking areas.
B. Lot Standards. All lots in the manufactured home park are subject to the following
regulations:
1. Size. Each lot in a manufactured home park intended as the location for
one unit shall contain not less than five thousand two hundred (5,200)
square feet and shall have a minimum width of fifty (50) feet except corner
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Manufactured Homes
06-3
lots which shall have a minimum width of sixty (60) feet and shall have a
minimum depth of eighty (80) feet measured from the curb face to the rear
lot line.
C. Additional Lot Regulations. All lots in the manufactured home park are subject to
the following regulations:
1. Guest Parking Required. Each manufactured home park shall maintain a
paved, off-street parking lot for guests of occupants in the amount of one
space for each ten (10) lots.
2. Overload Parking Required. Each manufactured home park shall have not
less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of area for every
twenty-five (25) lots set aside for overload parking and dead storage. This
area shall be completely enclosed with a security fence and screened
from view by dense shrubbery. The purpose of this area is for boats,
trailers and other recreational vehicles.
3. Concrete Patio Required. Each lot shall have a concrete patio adjacent to
each home in addition to the off-street parking area. Each patio shall be
not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet and a minimum of
twenty-four (24) inches in width and three (3) inches in diameter.
4. Individual Site Preparation. Every manufactured home lot shall have a
base of at least four (4) inches of compacted gravel or aggregate on the
site where the home is to be parked, in addition to whatever foundation
structures are necessary to secure the manufactured home anchors and
tie downs.
D. Emergency Shelters.
1. Shelter Required. Every manufactured home park shall provide one or
more tornado and wind storm emergency shelters with a capacity for thirty
(30) percent of the occupants of the park. Each shelter shall be
constructed so as to be dry, well ventilated, to have more than one exit,
and to be capable of withstanding the impact of a manufactured home
propelled by winds of tornado force. The entrance to the shelter shall be
plainly marked by a sign with the words “Emergency Shelter” in six (6)
inch letters.
2. Storm Warning Device Required. Every manufactured home park shall
have a warning device for providing tornado or serious wind storm warning
to its residents. This requirement may be waived if such device is located
outside the park but is found to be servicing the park area.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Manufactured Homes
06-4
E. Service Building and Service Facilities. Each manufactured home park shall have
one or more service buildings to provide space for the park office, laundry
facilities, sanitation facilities, and indoor community meeting and recreational
space.
1. Manager's Office Required. Every manufactured home park shall have a
central office for the manager or caretaker of the park.
2. Indoor Recreation Room Required. Indoor recreational or community
meeting space shall be provided at the minimum ratio of ten (10) square
feet of space for every four (4) lots in the manufactured home park, or
section thereof served by the building. Space provided for such
requirements as emergency shelters, laundry facilities, and other public
service facilities shall not be deemed to meet the requirements of this
section.
3. Setbacks Required. Setbacks from internal streets for all service buildings
shall conform to the City's residential setback requirements.
F. Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Systems.
1. Water Connection Required. All manufactured home parks and the lots
thereof shall be connected to the municipal water system.
2. Public Municipal Sanitary Sewer Required. All manufactured home parks
shall have a sanitary sewer system connection to either a public municipal
sewer system, or an appropriate public regional sewer system. The design
and specifications of the sewer system shall meet the approval of the City
Engineer and the Minnesota Department of Health.
3. Underground Utilities Required. All sewer and water system lines shall be
underground.
G. Utilities, Fuel Supply Storage, and Lighting.
1. Underground Utilities Required. All utility lines for electricity, telephone, TV
cable, gas or fuel oil must be underground. There shall be no overhead
wires or supporting poles except poles for street lights or other lighting
purposes.
2. Fuel Storage Regulated. All fuel supply and storage systems shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with applicable state codes and
regulations governing such systems.
3. General Illumination Required. The manufactured home park shall provide
overhead lights to adequately illuminate the streets and thoroughfare
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Manufactured Homes
06-5
sidewalks of the park and all service building parking areas and entrances.
Such lighting will be shielded to prevent any light to be directed at traffic,
nearby manufactured homes, or neighboring residential property in such
brilliance as to constitute a danger or a nuisance.
Subd. 4. Annual Inspection Fees.
A. Inspection.
1. Building Inspector. All manufactured home parks shall be inspected
annually by the City Building Inspector to ascertain that all provisions of
this Chapter, all other applicable City ordinances, and the provisions of
any conditional use permit are being observed.
2. Fire Inspection. All manufactured home parks shall be inspected annually
by the City Building Inspector to ascertain that no fire hazards are present,
to ascertain that fire hydrants and fire extinguishing equipment are in
working order, and to ascertain that all provisions of this Chapter and
other applicable codes and ordinances pertaining to fire protection and
prevention are being observed.
3. Water System Inspection. All manufactured home parks shall have the
water system inspected annually by a designated City inspector to insure
that all hydrants and other water facilities are in proper working order.
B. City inspectors may make more frequent inspections as they may deem
necessary.
Subd. 5. Operation Requirements.
A. General Operation and Maintenance:
1. Manager. Every manufactured home park shall have an adult manager or
caretaker on duty in or about the park at all times, to keep the park, its
facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, and to
be available in case of emergencies. The manager or caretaker shall be
answerable with said owner for the violations of any provisions of this
Chapter.
2. Office. Each manufactured home park shall maintain a central office for
the use of the owner or manager, distinctly marked OFFICE.
3. Map. A map of the park with all lots clearly numbered, shall be displayed
at the park office. The lots themselves shall also be numbered in a
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Manufactured Homes
06-6
manner visible from the frontage street. The park shall be open at
reasonable times to the visiting public and a directory shall be readily
available to visitors.
4. Lighting. The park grounds shall be lighted as approved by the City during
all hours of darkness.
5. Public Address Prohibited. No public address or loud speaker system shall
be permitted.
6. Rules. Each park shall adopt a set of rules and regulations for orderly
operation of the park in conformance with this Chapter, and these rules
shall be made available to the residents of the park.
7. Pets. No domestic animals or house pets of park occupants shall be
allowed to run at large, or commit any nuisances within the limits of the
park.
8. Clothes Drying. No exterior clothes drying shall be permitted upon any lot
or any other area of the park except in an area specifically provided.
9. Transient Occupancy. The use of any lot or other area within the park for
tent sites, camper trailers, pick up campers, or other transient occupancy
use is prohibited.
B. Lot Regulations.
1. Placement Restricted. No more than one unit shall be parked upon any
lot.
2. Occupancy Regulated. No home may be inhabited by a greater number of
occupants than that for which it was designated.
3. Skirts Required. The base of all manufactured homes shall be enclosed
with skirting, such skirting to be installed within ten (10) days from the date
of installation of the unit. Such enclosure must be accessible for inspection
and no obstruction shall be permitted that impedes the inspection of the
manufactured home, plumbing, electrical facilities, and related equipment.
No storage shall be permitted beneath the manufactured home.
4. Use Restrictions. All lots shall be used for residential purposes only. No
commercial activity or signage will be permitted unless otherwise
permitted by Zoning ordinances other than this section.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Manufactured Homes
06-7
C. Lot Display Regulations. No homeowner nor prospective homeowner shall be
required to purchase a home from the owner or operator of the park in which said
owner desires to locate, or from someone designated by said owner of the park.
This provision, however, shall not prevent the owner of the park from establishing
certain minimal standards and conditions of quality and design as to homes
permitted in a park owned by him.
D. Street Maintenance and Regulations.
1. Snow Removal. The park operator shall remove snow from the all streets,
guest parking areas and public sidewalk areas within the park after each
snowfall and these areas shall be kept sanded and/or free of ice and
snow.
2. Maintenance and Repair. All streets within the park shall be kept in good
repair, and kept clean and free of litter.
3. Speed Limit. A speed limit of ten (10) miles per hour shall be maintained
within the park limits and signs shall be posted accordingly. The operator
may use raised bumps or ridges across the road surfaces to assure
compliance with the posted limits.
E. Storage and Parking.
1. On-Site Parking Restricted. No more than two (2) vehicles may be parked
on any home lot.
2. On-Site Storage Prohibited. All boats, boat trailers, hauling trailers, and all
other equipment not stored within the home nor the utility enclosure that
may have been provided shall be stored in the overload parking area, and
not upon the lots occupied by homes, nor upon the streets within the park,
nor upon any other City streets.
F. Fire and Police Protection.
1. Fire Extinguisher Required. Every home occupied in the park shall be
equipped with a fire extinguisher in usable condition. The occupant of the
home shall be responsible for providing such extinguisher for his home.
2. Fire Extinguisher Required in Service Building(s). Portable fire
extinguishers rated for classes B and C fires, with a capacity of ten (10)
pounds dry powder, shall be kept visible in service buildings and at other
locations as approved or required by the Fire Chief, for convenient access
by all of the occupants of the park. Such fire extinguishers shall be
maintained in good operation condition.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Manufactured Homes
06-8
3. Open Burning Prohibited. No fire shall be kindled or maintained except in
a stove, fireplace, barbecue pit, incinerator, or other equipment intended
for such purpose. No such fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be
used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable
odors. Open burning is prohibited.
4. Storage of Flammable Liquids Prohibited. Storage of flammable liquids or
materials or gases within or under the home is forbidden.
5. Litter and Rubbish Storage Prohibited. All areas of the park shall be kept
free of litter, rubbish, and other flammable material.
6. Open to Police, Fire and Emergency Vehicles. The park shall be open to
fire, police and other emergency vehicles and personnel at all times, and
the law enforcement officers and the fire department shall be provided
with a current directory showing the lot numbers and addresses.
G. Storm Protection.
1. Storm Warning Device Required. The storm warning device required for
the park shall be kept in good operating condition and tested once a
month at a designated time in a manner approved by the City.
2. Weather Alerts Required. The park manager shall be responsible for
obtaining weather warning information from the appropriate media, and for
alerting residents to the hazards of a storm via the warning device when
any storm with damaging winds is imminent.
3. Emergency Shelter Maintained. The emergency shelter area or building
shall be available for appropriate use twenty-four (24) hours a day.
Entrances shall be illuminated during all hours of darkness. The manager
shall keep the shelter area clean and sanitary, and stocked with
emergency supplies and first aid equipment.
H. Refuse Handling.
1. Management Responsible. The park shall provide for the collection and
disposal of all refuse and garbage generated within the park. The park
may contract with private garbage haulers or provide the service itself. All
refuse handling must adhere to the following standards:
a. Nuisance Prohibited. The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse
in the park shall be so conducted so as to create no health hazards,
rodent harborage, insect breeding, accident or fire hazards, or air
pollution.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Manufactured Homes
06-9
b. Garbage Collection Required. Garbage and refuse shall be
collected and disposed of as frequently as may be necessary to
insure that garbage receptacles shall not overflow.
I. Sewer and Water.
1. Maintenance Required. All sewer and water systems within the park
shall be kept in good operating condition in conformance with regulations
of the Minnesota Department of Health and the City. Any maintenance
of water and sewer systems within the park shall be at the owner's
expense, but shall be under the supervision of an official designated by
the City, who shall have authority to initiate necessary repairs.
2. Water Pressure Maintained. If the City deems it necessary, auxiliary
pumps to boost water pressure shall be installed at the expense of the
park owner to maintain needed pressure for fire protection.
3. Service Charges. For sewer service and water service, when available,
the City will charge the service rates established in the appropriate district.
All charges will be computed on a per unit basis.
Subd. 6. Administration. Enforcement by the Building Inspector: Except as
otherwise provided herein, this Chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Building Inspector, who is hereby designated as enforcing officer. The Building
Inspector may institute in the name of the City any appropriate actions or proceedings
against a violator as provided by law.
Subd. 7. Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Home Parks and Placement
of Travel Trailers and Travel Vehicles.
A. New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing mobile manufactured
home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed within the subdivision
section of this chapter. The placement of new or replacement manufactured
homes in existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that
are located in flood plain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be
placed only if elevated on fill in accordance with this Chapter. If vehicular road
access for pre-existing manufactured home parks is not provided, an elevation
no lower than two (2) feet below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation, then
replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the property owner(s)
develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable to the Governing Body.
B. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Manufactured Homes
06-10
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
Travel trailers and travel vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria
specified shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
C. Exemption. Travel trailers and travel vehicles are exempt from the provisions of
this ordinance if they meet the following criteria:
1. Have current licenses required for highway use.
2. Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal lacking system, are
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used
in campgrounds and trailer parks and the travel trailer/travel vehicle has
no permanent structural type additions attached to it.
3. The travel trailer or travel vehicle and associated use must be permissible
in any pre-existing, underlying zoning use district.
D. Areas exempted for placement of travel/recreational vehicles are: individual lots
or parcels of record, existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds and existing condominium type associations.
E. Travel trailers and travel vehicles lose this exemption when development occurs
on the parcel exceeding $5,000 for a structural addition to the travel trailer/travel
vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a new
structure and shall be subject to the elevation/flood proofing requirements and
the use of land restriction specified in this section.
F. New commercial travel trailer or travel vehicle parks or campgrounds and new
residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the expansion of
any existing similar use exceeding five (5) units or dwelling sites shall be subject
to the following:
1. Any new or replacement travel trailer or travel vehicle will be allowed in
the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts provided said trailer or vehicle and
its contents are placed on fill above the Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation and proper elevated road access to the site exists, in
accordance, an elevation no lower than two (2) feet below the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation. Any fill placed in a floodway for the purpose of
elevating a travel trailer shall be subject to requirements of this section.
2. All new or replacement travel trailers or travel vehicles not meeting the
criteria of (a) above may, as an alternative, be allowed as a Conditional
Use if in accordance with the following provisions and the provisions of
this section. The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the safe
evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood. Said plan
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Manufactured Homes
06-11
shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual and
shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the
evacuation. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or
replacement travel trailers or other recreational vehicles must be protected
or constructed so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of
flooding in accordance with this section.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Accessory Buildings
07-1
1001.07 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
Subd. 1. Attached Accessory Buildings. In case an accessory building is
attached to the main building, it shall be made structurally a part of the main building
and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the
main building. An accessory building, unless attached to and made a part of the main
building, shall not be closer than five feet to the main building, except as otherwise
provided in this section.
Subd. 2. Building Type and Standards. Architectural details for accessory
buildings are to be the same or similar as for the principal building as determined by the
City Council, based upon (but not limited to) the following criteria:
A. Roof pitch orientation and slop.
B. Building material.
17 C. Exterior color.
Subd. 3. (reserved)
Subd. 4. Residential Accessory Buildings. Detached accessory buildings in
residential districts shall conform to the following additional regulations as to their
locations upon the lot.
A. Accessory building(s) shall not encroach on required front or side yards in any
district. In addition, no accessory building shall be placed in front of the front line
of principal buildings.
B. Accessory buildings may encroach on rear yards to a distance equal to ½ the
required rear yard setback, except when the rear lot line abuts a public street.
C. When a lot in a C-0, C-1, C-2, C-3, or I-1 district abuts a residential district, the
yard requirement for the lot on the abutting residential yards shall be modified as
follows: The size of the yard shall conform to the regulation of the abutting
districts which results in the largest yard.
D. Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public
street, or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be so
located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire
protection and required off-street parking.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Accessory Buildings
07-2
E. Building Size. A detached accessory building shall not occupy more than 25
percent of the area of any rear yard, nor may it be larger than 1,000 square feet,
whichever is less. The area regulations in this subdivision may be exceeded by
approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 1001.07, Subd.
04.G. of this Chapter.
F. Building Height. Detached accessory buildings shall not exceed one story or
fifteen (15) feet in height. The height limitations may be exceeded by approval of
a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 1001.07, Subd. 4.G. of this
Chapter. (Ordinance 15-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
G. Conditional Use Permits. Applications for a conditional use permit under this
Section shall be regulated by Section 1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter. Such
applications are subject to the following conditions:
1. The area of the accessory building is not larger than the gross floor area
of the principal building.
2. The height of the accessory building shall not exceed that of the principal
building.
3. There is a demonstrated need for the building area or height increase and
the accessory building has an evident re-use or function related to the
principal use.
17 4. The accessory is of a scale and design that is compatible with the
character of the property or neighborhood in which it is located.
7 Subd. 5. Other Uses. Except as otherwise noted, accessory buildings and uses for
all principal uses other than residential uses shall conform to the setback requirements
specified for the respective zoning district in which they are located.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Sign Regulations
08-1
1001.08 SIGN REGULATIONS 28
Subd 1. Findings, Purpose and Effect.
A. Findings: The City finds:
1. Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the character and quality of
the environment.
2. Signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey
a variety of messages.
3. Signs can create traffic hazards, aesthetic concerns and detriments to
property values, thereby threatening the public health, safety and welfare.
4. The City's zoning regulations have included the regulation of signs in an
effort to provide adequate means of expression and to promote the
economic viability of the business community, while protecting the City
and its citizens from a proliferation of signs of a type, size, location and
character that would adversely impact upon the aesthetics of the
community and threaten the health, safety and welfare of the community.
The regulation of the physical characteristics of signs within the City has
had a positive impact on traffic safety and the appearance of the
community.
B. Purpose and Intent: It is not the purpose or intent of this Section to regulate the
message displayed on any sign; nor is it the purpose or intent of this Section to
regulate any building design or any display not defined as a sign, or any sign
which cannot be viewed from outside a building. The purpose and intent of this
Section is to:
1. Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination and other physical
characteristics of signs within the City in order to promote the public
health, safety and welfare.
2. Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment of the City by
preventing visual clutter that is harmful to the appearance of the
community.
3. Improve the visual appearance of the City while providing for effective
means of communication, consistent with constitutional guarantees and
the City's goals of public safety and aesthetics.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Sign Regulations
08-2
4. Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations set for
herein under the zoning authority of the City.
C. Effect: A sign may be erected, mounted, displayed or maintained in the City if it
is in conformance with the provisions of this Section. The effect of this Section,
as more specifically set forth herein, is to:
1. Allow a wide variety of sign types in commercial zones, and a more limited
variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards set forth in this
sign ordinance.
2. Allow certain small, unobtrusive signs incidental to the principal use of a
site in all zones when in compliance with the requirements of this Section.
3. Prohibit signs whose location, size, type, illumination or other physical
characteristics negatively affect the environment and where the
communication can be accomplished by means having a lesser impact on
the environment and the public health, safety and welfare.
4. Provide for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
Section.
Subd. 2. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of
this Section is for any reason held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the
validity or enforceability of the remaining portions of this Section. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have adopted the Section, subsection, sentence, or
phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid.
Subd. 3. Permit Required. No sign shall be erected, altered, reconstructed,
maintained or moved in the City without first securing a permit from the City:
A. The content of the message or speech displayed on the sign shall not be
reviewed or considered in determining whether to approve or deny a sign permit.
B. Application for an administrative permit shall be filed by the property owner or
designated agent with the Zoning Administrator on forms to be provided by the
City.
C. Application for a permit shall contain the following information unless waived by
the City:
1. Names and addresses of the applicant, owners of the sign and lot.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Sign Regulations
08-3
2. The address at which any signs are to be erected.
3. The lot, block and addition at which the signs are to be erected and the
street on which they are to front.
4. Type and size of sign (e.g., wall sign, pylon sign).
5. A site plan to scale showing the location of lot lines, building structures,
parking areas, existing and proposed signs and any other physical
features.
6. Plans, location and specifications and method of construction and
attachment to the buildings or placement method of the ground.
7. Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure is
designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount
required by this and all other laws and ordinances of the City.
8. Written consent of the owner or lessee of any site on which the sign is to
be erected.
9. Any electrical permit required and issued for the sign.
10. Other information to demonstrate compliance with this and all other
ordinances of the City.
C. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by City Council
resolution. Applications for amending administrative permits shall be
accompanied by a fee as established by Ordinance.
D. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant, in writing, of an incomplete
application within fifteen (15) days of the date of submission.
E. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application and related materials and
shall determine whether the proposal is in compliance with all applicable
evaluation criteria, codes, ordinances, and applicable performance standards set
forth in this Chapter within sixty (60) days of submission of a complete
application.
Subd. 4. Permit Not Required. The following signs shall not require a permit and
are allowed in addition to those signs allowed by Sections 1001.08, Subd. 8 and Subd.
10 of this Chapter. These exemptions, however, shall not be construed as relieving the
owner of the sign from the responsibility of its erection and maintenance, and its
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Sign Regulations
08-4
compliance with the provisions of this Section or any other law or ordinance regulating
the same.
A. The changing of the display surface on a painted or printed sign only. This
exemption, however, shall apply only to poster replacement and/or on-site
changes involving sign painting elsewhere then directly on a building.
B. Two (2) signs per property not to exceed four (4) square feet.
C. One (1) sign not per property not to exceed nine (9) square feet.
33D. All noncommercial signs of any size posted in any number from forty six (46)
days before the state primary in a state general election year until ten (10) days
following the general election, and thirteen (13) weeks prior to any special
election until ten (10) days following the special election.
E. Signs of a public noncommercial nature including public notification signs, safety
signs, traffic signs, direction to public facilities when erected by or on behalf of a
public official or employee in the performance of official duty.
Subd. 5. Non-Conforming Signs and Uses:
A. Nonconforming Signs: A nonconforming sign lawfully existing upon the effective
date of this Section shall be regulated in accordance with Section 1001.04 of this
Chapter.
B. Nonconforming Uses: When the principal use of land is legally nonconforming
under Section 1001.04 of this Chapter, all existing or proposed signs in
conjunction with that land use shall be considered conforming if they are in
compliance with the sign provisions for the most restrictive zoning district in
which the principal use is allowed.
Subd. 6. Enforcement and Penalties:
A. Inspection. All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection
by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may order the removal of
any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the maintenance provisions of
this Section.
B. This Section shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator may institute in the name of the City appropriate
actions or proceedings against a violator.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Sign Regulations
08-5
C The City reserves the right to require the removal, at the owner’s expense, of any
sign when the requirements of this section are not completely followed and
adhered to, or if a sign is not properly maintained or falls into a state of disrepair.
The City shall not have any obligation or liability to replace any sign when
removed by the City.
D. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or
resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined or penalized not more than the maximum levels
established by the state for misdemeanor offenses.
Subd. 7. Substitution. The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this
Section may substitute non-commercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or noncommercial
copy. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional
approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent
favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any
particular non-commercial message over any other non-commercial message. This
provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary.
Subd. 8. General Regulations.
A. All signs are defined to be an accessory use.
B. All freestanding signs shall be setback ten (10) feet from any property line and no
sign may be located within a drainage and utility easement.
C. The design and construction standards as set forth in chapter 4 of the 1997
edition of the uniform sign code as may be amended, are hereby adopted.
D. The installation of electrical signs shall be subject to the state’s electrical code.
Electrical service to such sign shall be underground.
E. No sign shall be attached or be allowed to hang from any building until all
necessary wall and roof attachments have been approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
F. No signs, guys, stays or attachments shall be erected, placed or maintained on
trees nor interfere with any electric light, power, telephone or telegraph wires or
the supports thereof.
G. Illuminated signs shall be shielded to prevent lights from being directed at
oncoming traffic in such brilliance that it impairs the vision of the driver and may
not interfere with or obscure traffic signs or signals. Lighting may not illuminate
any adjacent properties, buildings, or streets.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Sign Regulations
08-6
H. The use of banners, pennants and similar devices shall be allowed subject to the
following provisions:
1. The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
2. The sign shall not be illuminated with any flashing device.
3. Not more than one banner, pennant or portable sign or similar device shall
be displayed upon a property at any one time and shall be affixed to the
principal building.
I. The use of a temporary sign shall be allowed subject to the following provisions:
1. Commercial Speech:
a. The sign shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet.
b. The sign shall not be illuminated or include any flashing device.
c. Not more than one (1) temporary sign shall be displayed upon a
property at any one time.
d. The sign shall not be defined as an off-premises sign as regulated
by this section.
e. Display of a temporary portable sign shall be limited to not more
than thirty (30) consecutive days and not more than one hundred
and twenty (120) days per calendar year.
2. Non-Commercial Speech:
a. The sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
b. The sign shall not be illuminated or include any flashing device.
c. Not more than one (1) temporary portable sign shall be displayed
upon a property at any one time.
d. Display of a temporary portable sign shall be limited to not more
than thirty (30) consecutive days and not more than ninety (90)
days per calendar year. (Ordinance 12-02, June 12, 2012)
J. The use of a temporary off-premises signs shall be allowed subject to the
following provisions:
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Sign Regulations
08-7
1. The sign must be located on a commercial or industrial zoned lot in a yard
abutting an arterial or major collector street as designated by the
Comprehensive Plan.
2. The sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet.
3. The sign shall not exceed a height of three (3) feet above grade.
4. The sign shall not be illuminated or include any flashing device.
5. Not more than one (1) temporary off-premises sign shall be displayed
upon a property at any one time and the sign may only be displayed
between the hours of 7:00 AM to 7:00 PM each day.
6. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator for the placement of a
temporary off-premises sign shall be valid for thirty (30) days and may be
renewed for successive thirty (30) day periods.
K. No sign or sign structure shall be erected or maintained that prevents free
ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign or sign
structure shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
L. A freestanding sign or sign structure constructed so that the faces are not back to
back, shall not have an angle separating the faces exceeding twenty (20)
degrees unless the total area of both sides added together does not exceed the
maximum allowable sign area for that district.
M. Except for farm buildings, at least one address sign identifying the correct
property number as assigned shall be required on each principal building in all
districts. The number shall be at least three (3) inches in height.
N. The area within the frame of a sign shall be used to calculate the square footage
except that the width of a frame exceeding twelve (12) inches shall constitute
sign face, and if such letters or graphics be mounted directly on a wall or fascia
or in such way as to be without a frame the dimensions for calculating the square
footage shall be the area extending six (6) inches beyond the periphery formed
around such letters or graphics in a plane figure bounded by straight lines
connecting the outermost points thereof. Each surface utilized to display a
message or to attract attention shall be measured as a separate sign and shall
be calculated in the overall square footage. Symbols, flags, pictures, wording,
figures or other forms of graphics painted on or attached to windows, walls,
awnings, free-standing structures, suspended by balloons, or kites or on persons,
animals, or vehicles are considered a sign and are included in calculating the
overall square footage.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Sign Regulations
08-8
O. The top of a sign, including its superstructure, if any, shall be no higher than the
roof of the building to which such sign may be attached.
P. The area around freestanding signs shall be landscaped with plantings and
maintained in such a manner to accent and enhance the sign while remaining
sensitive to the natural features of the site.
Q. Signs for motor fuel stations shall be regulated by the sign provisions for the
zoning district in which the station is located, except that one (1) additional sign
not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet shall be allowed to display electronic or
non-electronic text identifying current fuel prices in accordance with Minnesota
State Statutes Section 239.751.
R. Window signs shall not exceed twenty five (25) percent of the total area of the
window in which they are displayed.
S. Within the POC District and on commercial and industrial zoned properties with
frontage to TH 55, changeable copy signs or electronic reader board space may
be used separately or in combination on a sign shall not exceed fifty (50) percent
of the allowable sign area, whichever is less. The message displayed on
electronic reader board signs shall be depicted in one statement and not as
scrolling, flashing or other flow of information not to change more than once
every two (2) minutes.
T. Multiple Occupancy Commercial And Industrial Buildings: When a single principal
building is devoted to three (3) or more commercial or industrial uses, signs shall
be allowed subject to review and approval of the Zoning Administrator based
upon the following requirements:
1. The maximum individual sign sizes for multiple occupancy buildings and
individual businesses that may display a sign shall not exceed the
maximum provisions in the same zoning district in Section 1001.08, Subd.
10 of this Chapter.
2. Commercial retail, office, or mixed use multiple occupancy buildings may
display a freestanding sign consistent with the applicable zoning district
provisions in Section 1001.08, Subd. 10 of this Chapter.
3. Individual tenants of a multiple occupancy building within a commercial or
industrial zoning district shall not display separate wall, canopy, or
marquee signs unless the tenant's business has an exclusive exterior
entrance and subject to the following requirements:
a. The number of individual wall, canopy, or marquee signs shall be
limited to one (1) per tenant space, except that not more than two
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Sign Regulations
08-9
(2) signs may be displayed for the tenant of a corner suite or a suite
that extends through the building thus having two exterior walls.
b. Each wall, canopy or marquee sign shall be limited to an area not
to exceed sixty four (64) square feet.
c. The sign shall be located only on the exterior wall of the tenant
space to which the sign permit is issued, but are not required to
face a public street.
d. A comprehensive sign plan is submitted that includes all of the
following information:
(1) A site plan to scale showing the location of lot lines,
buildings, structures, parking areas, existing and proposed
signs, and any other physical features of the area included
within the proposed comprehensive sign plan.
(2) Elevations to scale of buildings included within the
comprehensive sign plan including the location of existing or
proposed wall, canopy, or marquee signs.
(3) To scale plans for all existing and proposed signs of any
type included within the comprehensive sign plan indicating
area, dimensions, height, materials, colors, and means of
illumination (if any).
f. No permit shall be issued for a new or replacement sign for an
individual tenant except upon a determination by the Zoning
Administrator that it is consistent with the approved comprehensive
sign plan.
33U. No sign shall be erected within the public right-of-way except for those signs for
such uses and of such area, height and construction at locations as may be
approved by the City Council as owner of said public right-of-way.
Subd. 9. Prohibited Signs. The following signs are prohibited:
A. Any sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or
resembles any official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or
emergency vehicle signs, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or
which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official trafficcontrol
device or any railroad sign or signal.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Sign Regulations
08-10
33B. All signs over one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area, except within the
POC District or as allowed by Section 1001.08, Subd. 8.U of this Chapter.
C. Off-premises signs, except those allowed by Section 1001.08, Subd. 8.J, I and U
of this Chapter. (Ordinance 02-12, adopted June 12, 2012)
D. Signs painted, attached or in any other manner affixed to trees, rocks, or similar
natural surfaces, or attached to public utility poles, bridges, towers, or similar
public structures.
E. Flashing signs.
F. Electronic changeable text, except as specifically allowed by this Chapter.
G. Rotating signs.
H. Shimmering signs.
I. Roof signs.
J. Balloon signs.
Subd. 10. District Regulations. In addition to the signs allowed by Sections
1001.04, Subd. 4 and 1001.08. Subd 6 of this Chapter, the following signs shall be
allowed within the specific Zoning Districts:
A. Within the A-R District, the following additional regulations apply:
1. One (1) sign shall be allowed provided that:
a. The area of the sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet.
b. Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of eight (8)
feet.
B. Within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts, the following additional regulations
apply:
1. One (1) sign shall be allowed provided that:
a. The area of the sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet.
b. Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of eight (8)
feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Sign Regulations
08-11
2. In addition to the sign allowed by Section 1001.08, Subd. 10.B.1 of this
Chapter, signs shall be allowed for a subdivision having not less than five
(5) lots or dwelling units at its entrance from a major collector or arterial
street defined by the Transportation Plan provided that:
a. Not more than one (1) sign shall be allowed at each entrance from
a major collector or arterial street.
b. The area of each sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet.
c. Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of eight (8)
feet.
d. For sign(s) requiring regular long-term maintenance, the sign(s)
shall be located on separate or common space outlots of sufficient
size and area to accommodate said structure:
1) An association or other form of deed restriction and
ownership deemed acceptable by the Zoning Administrator
and involving all the properties within the subdivision shall be
required, which shall own and be responsible for the upkeep,
perpetual maintenance, taxes, insurance, utilities and other
costs associated with the sign(s) and the outlot upon which it
is located.
2) The association rules or by-laws, or similar legal document,
shall specify how the aforementioned sign responsibilities
will be delegated and paid for.
3) Separate or common space outlots for signs shall be
considered and planned for at the time of preliminary plat
application and be included in the final plat. The subdivision
development contract between the City and the developer
shall specify the designated use of the outlot(s), its
ownership and the respective responsibilities regarding the
outlot.
f. The area around the sign shall be landscaped in such a manner to
accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the
natural features of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall
be included with each sign permit application and shall be subject
approval by the Zoning Administrator.
g. The design and construction of the sign shall be done with the
highest quality materials and workmanship to keep maintenance
and upkeep costs to a minimum and to minimize the potential for
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Sign Regulations
08-12
vandalism. The sign is to be aesthetically pleasing when designed
and constructed. The sign shall be compatible with nearby
structures in the area. Detailed construction plans and a materials
list shall be included with each sign permit application and shall be
subject approval by the Zoning Administrator.
3. Additional signs shall be allowed upon approval of a final plat for a
subdivision having not less than five (5) lots provided that:
a. One (1) sign shall be allowed per project or subdivision or one (1)
sign for each frontage to a major collector or arterial street,
whichever is greater.
b. The area of the sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet.
c. Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of eight (8)
feet.
d. The sign shall not be displayed for a period to exceed twenty four
(24) months from the date a permit is issued for the sign or until
building permits have been issued for eighty-five (85) percent of the
lots or dwelling units within the subdivision, whichever is less
restrictive.
C. Within the C-O and C-1 Districts, the following additional regulations shall apply:
1. The total area of all signs displayed on a lot shall not exceed ten (10)
percent of the total building façade fronting not more than two (2) public
streets.
2. Freestanding Sign. Except for lots with frontage to TH 55, no freestanding
signs shall be allowed within the C-O District. One (1) sign is allowed per
lot with frontage to TH 55 within the C-O District and all lots within the C-1
District. The area of a freestanding sign may not exceed sixty-four (64)
square feet each side with a maximum height of twenty (20) feet.
3. Wall, Canopy, or Marquee Signs. Not more than one (1) wall, canopy, or
marquee signs shall be permitted on one (1) facade fronting a public
street, except in the case of a corner lot or through lot where wall signs
may be installed on two (2) facades fronting a public street. The area of
individual signs shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet.
4. In addition to the sign area allowances established by Section 1001.08,
Subd. 10.C.1 of this Chapter, a sign shall be allowed for a subdivision
having not less than three (3) lots or principal buildings at its entrance
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Sign Regulations
08-13
from a major collector or arterial street defined by the Transportation Plan
provided that:
a. Not more than one (1) sign shall be allowed at each entrance from
a major collector or arterial street.
b. The area of each sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet.
c. Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of sixteen
(16) feet.
d. The sign(s) shall be located to accommodate said sign and related
landscaping to meet all setback requirements. If the sign(s) are to
be located on outlots, the outlots shall be designated on the
preliminary plat and detailed plans for the area identification signs
shall be submitted with the final plat.
e. The area around the sign(s) shall be landscaped in such a manner
to accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the
natural features of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall
be included with each sign permit application and shall be subject
to review and approval of the Zoning Administrator.
f. The design and construction of the sign(s) shall be done with the
highest quality materials and workmanship to keep maintenance
and upkeep costs to a minimum and to minimize the potential for
vandalism. The signs are to be aesthetically pleasing when
designed and constructed. The sign shall be compatible with
nearby structures in the area. Detailed construction plans and a
materials list shall be included with each sign permit application and
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Zoning
Administrator.
5. Additional signs shall be allowed upon approval of a final plat for a
subdivision having not less than three (3) lots or approval of site and
building plans for one (1) lot by the Zoning Administrator provided that:
a. One (1) sign shall be allowed per project or subdivision or one (1)
sign for each frontage to a major collector or arterial street,
whichever is greater.
b. The area of the sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet.
c. Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of eight (8)
feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Sign Regulations
08-14
d. The sign shall not be displayed for a period to exceed twenty four
months (24) months from the date a permit is issued for the sign or
until occupancy permits have been issued for eighty-five (85)
percent of the tenant spaces within the development, whichever is
less restrictive.
D. Within the C-2, C-3 and I-1 Districts the following additional regulations shall
apply:
1. The total area of all signs displayed on a lot shall not exceed fifteen (15)
percent of the total building façade fronting not more than two (2) public
streets.
2. Freestanding Sign. One (1) sign is allowed per lot. The area of a
freestanding sign may not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet
each side with a maximum height of twenty four (24) feet.
3. Wall, Canopy, or Marquee Signs. Not more than one (1) wall, canopy, or
marquee signs shall be permitted on one (1) facade fronting a public
street, except in the case of a corner lot or through lot where wall signs
may be installed on two (2) facades fronting a public street. The area of
individual signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
4. In addition to the sign area allowances established by Section 1001.08,
Subd. 10.D.1 of this Chapter, a sign shall be allowed for a subdivision
having not less than three (3) lots or principal buildings at its entrance
from a major collector or arterial street defined by the Transportation Plan
provided that:
a. Not more than one (1) sign shall be allowed at each entrance from
a major collector or arterial street.
b. The area of each sign shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet.
c. Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of twenty
four (24) feet.
d. The sign(s) shall be located to accommodate said sign and related
landscaping to meet all setback requirements. If the sign(s) are to
be located on outlots, the outlots shall be designated on the
preliminary plat and detailed plans for the area identification signs
shall be submitted with the final plat.
e. The area around the sign shall be landscaped in such a manner to
accent and enhance the sign while remaining sensitive to the
natural features of the site. Detailed site and landscape plans shall
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Sign Regulations
08-15
be included with each sign permit application and shall be subject
to review and approval of the Zoning Administrator.
f. The design and construction of the sign shall be done with the
highest quality materials and workmanship to keep maintenance
and upkeep costs to a minimum and to minimize the potential for
vandalism. The signs are to be aesthetically pleasing when
designed and constructed. The sign shall be compatible with
nearby structures in the area. Detailed construction plans and a
materials list shall be included with each sign permit application and
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Zoning
Administrator.
5. Additional signs shall be allowed upon approval of a final plat for a
subdivision having not less than three (3) lots or approval of site and
building plans for one (1) lot by the Zoning Administrator provided that:
a. One (1) sign shall be allowed per project or subdivision or one (1)
sign for each frontage to a major collector or arterial street,
whichever is greater.
b. The area of the sign shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet.
c. Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of eight (8)
feet.
d. The sign shall not be displayed for a period to exceed twenty four
months (24) months from the date a permit is issued for the sign or
until occupancy permits have been issued for eighty-five (85)
percent of the tenant spaces within the development, whichever is
less restrictive.
G. Within the POC District the following additional regulations shall apply:
1. Freestanding Sign. One (1) sign is allowed per lot. The area of a
freestanding sign may not exceed one hundred (100) square feet each
side with a maximum height of twenty four (24) feet.
2. Wall, Canopy, or Marquee Signs. Not more than one (1) wall, canopy, or
marquee signs shall be permitted on one (1) facade fronting a public
street, except in the case of a corner lot or through lot where wall signs
may be installed on two (2) facades fronting a public street. The area of
individual signs shall not be limited.
H. In a Planned Unit Development district, signing restrictions shall be based upon
the individual uses and structures contained in the complex. Signs shall be in
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Sign Regulations
08-16
compliance with the restrictions applied in the most restrictive zoning district in
which the use is allowed.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-1
1001.09 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS, EXCEPTIONS, AND MODIFICATIONS
Subd. 1. Height Regulations.
A. Where the average slope of a lot is greater than one foot rise or fall in seven feet
of horizontal distance from the established elevation or the property line, one
story in addition to the number permitted in the district in which the lot is located
shall be permitted on the downhill side of any building.
B. Height limitations set forth elsewhere in this chapter may be increased by one
hundred (100) percent when applied to the following:
1. Monuments.
2. Flagpoles.
3. Cooling towers. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
C. Height limitations set forth elsewhere in this Chapter may be increased when
applied to the following:
1. Church spires, belfries, or domes which do not contain usable space.
2. Water towers.
3. Chimneys or smokestacks.
4. WECS as regulated by this Chapter.
5. Satellite dishes, radio and television towers as regulated by this Chapter.
6. Personal wireless communication towers. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May
14, 2013)
D. Height limitations set forth in this chapter may be increased to a greater height
provided the following conditions are met:
1. No increase in height limitations shall be allowed, except by conditional
use permit, thereby required to meet the standards set forth for conditional
uses.
2. The building or portion thereof with increased height shall not be adjacent
to nor closer than two hundred feet to any adjacent structure.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-2
3. Where an increase in the height limitation is allowed under this
subdivision, the building or portion thereof shall be set back from all side
and rear lot lines an additional distance of one foot that the building
exceeds the height limitation of the district in which it is located.
4. A site plan for the proposed building shall be submitted along with the
application for conditional use permit. Such site plan shall show the
location and extent of the proposed building, parking, loading, access
drives, landscaping, and any other improvements. Upon consideration by
the Planning Commission and subsequent approval by the council, said
site plan shall be attached to and become a part of change to the site
plan shall require a resubmission to the Planning Commission and
subsequent approval by the council.
E. Satellite dishes, television receiving antennas, and radio receiving antennas shall
be a permitted use within all zoning districts, provided that they meet the
following conditions:
1. The dish or antenna shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
2. The dish or antenna shall not exceed twenty (20) feet above the roof line.
3. No dish or antenna shall be located within the required front yard setback
or required side yard setback abutting a street.
4. For ground mounted satellite dishes, television antennas or radio
antennas in the A-R district shall be setback from all adjoining lots a
distance equivalent to one-half (1/2) the height of the structure; shall be
located at least ten (10) feet away from any other building or structure and
shall not be located within a utility easement.
5 In all districts other than the A-R district, ground mounted satellite dishes,
television antennas, or radio antennas shall be setback from all adjoining
lots a distance equivalent to the height of the structure. Such structures
shall be located ten (10) feet or more from any other building or structure
and shall not be located within a utility easement.
6. Lighting Protection. Each satellite dish, television antenna or radio
antenna shall be grounded to protect against natural lightning strikes in
conformance with the National Electrical Code as adopted by the City of
Rockford.
7. Satellite dishes, television antennas or radio antennas which exceed
height limitations specified herein may be allowed by conditional use
permit as provided in Section 1001.03, Subd. 5 of this Chapter.
(Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-3
Subd. 2. Yard Regulations.
A. Measurements shall be taken from the nearest point of the wall of a building to
the lot line in question, subject to the following qualifications:
1. Cornices, canopies, or eaves may extend into the required front yard a
distance not exceeding four (4) feet, six (6) inches.
2. Fire escapes may extend into the required front yard a distance not
exceeding four (4) feet, six (6) inches.
3. A landing place or uncovered porch may extend into the required front
yard a distance not exceeding six feet, if the landing place or porch has its
floor no higher than the entrance floor of the building. An open railing may
be placed around such place.
4. The above listed architectural features may also extend into any side or
rear yard to the same extent.
5. When a future public street alignment and/or right-of-way width is known
based on the Transportation Plan, the front yard setbacks of a proposed
structure shall be measured from the known future right-of-way.
B. On double frontage lots, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.
D. Visibility from any street or driveway shall be unobstructed above a height of
three (3) feet, measured from where both street or driveway centerlines intersect
within the triangle described as beginning at the intersection of the projected curb
line (or edge of shoulders for rural sections) of two (2) intersecting streets or
drives, thence forty five (45) feet along one curb line, thence diagonally to a point
forty five (45) feet from the point of beginning along the other curb line.
E. The rear yard setback for any accessory building on a lot where the rear
yard opens into an alley may be reduced to not less than five (5) feet subject
to the following qualifications:
1. If the door of any attached or detached garage opens toward an alley the
minimum setback shall be fifteen (15) feet.
F. Required Buffer Yards.
1. Purpose. Buffer yards are required as to reduce the negative impacts that
result when incompatible uses abut one another.
2. The following table lists the minimum buffer yard requirements dependent
upon the intensity of the conflict of the abutting uses:
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-4
Intensity of
Conflict
Type Minimum
Building
Setback
Minimum
Landscape
Yard
No. Plant Units
Required 100 Feet
of Property Line
Minimal A 30 Feet 10 Feet 40
Moderate B 30 Feet 20 Feet 80
Significant C 40 Feet 30 Feet 120
Severe D 50 Feet 40 Feet 160
a. Minimum building setback measured from the abutting property
line.
b. Minimum landscaped yard measured as extending perpendicular
from the abutting property line and extending along length of
property line. Half of the required distance on each side of the
property line and extending the length of the property line.
c. Plant units are a quantitative measure of the required plantings for
the minimum landscaped yard.
1) Plant unit value shall be assigned as follows:
Vegetation Plant Unit Value
Evergreen Trees 15
Deciduous Trees 10
Evergreen/Coniferous Shrubs 5
Shrubs/Bushes 1
2) The number of plantings required shall equal or exceed the
number of required plant units based upon the values
assigned in Section 1001.02, Subd. F.2 of this Section.
3) The property owners on both sides of the abutting property
line for which the buffer yard overlays shall each be
responsible for fifty (50) percent of the required planting
required for the length of the abutting property line.
3. Minimum Required Buffer Yard. The following table represents the type as
specified by Section 1001.09, Subd. 2.F.2 of buffer yard required for
abutting incompatible uses:
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-5
MINIMUM REQUIRED BUFFER YARD
Use Low Density
Residential
High Density
Residential
Institutional Commercial Industrial
Low Density
Residential
None A B C D
High Density
Residential
A None A B D
Institutional B A None A C
Commercial C B A None B
Industrial D D C B None
4. The size and type of required plantings shall be according to Section
1001.09, Subd. 3B.2 of this Chapter.
5. Existing trees or vegetation within a required minimum landscape yard
preservation may substitute for required plants. The number of plant units
required shall be proportionately reduced according to the number of trees
or vegetation preserved.
6. The location of an opaque fence or earth berm of at least five (5) feet in
height within a required landscaped yard shall be considered credit toward
the plant unit requirement. The number of required plant units shall be
reduced by fifty (50) percent.
a. All fences shall be subject to the requirements of Section 1001.09,
Subd. 11 of this Chapter.
7. Development of Vacant Property.
a. The owner of a vacant property which would require a buffer yard
under the terms of this Ordinance shall be required to install onehalf
(1/2) of the width and intensity of the required buffer yard along
the entire length of the abutting property line in all cases except for
the following:
b. When a vacant property abuts property that has already developed
more than fifty (50) percent of the length of the abutting vacant
property line by footage, the owner/developer of the vacant parcel
will be required to install the entire width and intensity of buffer yard
as determined in this Ordinance.
8. Existing Development. Any existing development adjacent to property
developed in accordance with Section 1001.09, Subd. 2.F.7.a shall be
considered exempt from the provisions of said ordinance until such time
as the property or development is substantially altered, remodeled, or
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-6
expanded. At such time, the existing development shall provide the
remaining one-half (1/2) of the buffer yard improvement.
9. The criteria for the submission requirements and approval of a buffer yard
landscape plan shall be according to Section 1001.01, Subd. 3 of this
Chapter. (Amended by Ordinance No. 99-06, passed October 18, 1999).
(Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
Subd. 3. Yard Landscaping.
A. Landscaping, General Residential.
1. Except as may be otherwise provided by development contract or
approval by the City Council, the lot area remaining after providing for
off-street parking, off-street loading, sidewalks, driveways, building site
and/or other requirements shall be landscaped using ornamental grass,
shrubs, trees or other acceptable vegetation or treatment generally used
in landscaping prior to the date of building occupancy. Fences or trees
placed upon utility easements are subject to removal at the cost of the
property owner if required for the maintenance or improvement of the
utility. Trees on utility easements containing overhead wires shall not
exceed twenty (20) feet in height. (The planting of large trees is not
recommended under overhead wires.) The amount of hard surfacing
provided on a lot shall be limited to the size and area necessary to
accommodate ordinance requirements and allowances.
13 2. For all residential lots:
a. At least two (2) two-inch caliper trees per unit will be required to be
planted within one (1) year following the date of occupancy
following initial construction, unless more are required as part of the
development agreement.
b. The builder or developer shall provide evidence that required
planting will occur within the prescribed time prior to occupancy of
any structure. Such evidence may be a landscape guarantee
provided by a third party, such as the prior owner or developer, or a
contract for landscaping held by the owner.
c. If two (2) or more existing significant trees are preserved in the front
yard of the lot, the landscape plan requirement of two 2) 2-inch
caliper trees is waived.
B. Landscaping, New Residential Subdivision, Semi-Public, and All Income
Producing Property Uses. (Excluding residential structures containing less than
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-7
four (4) dwelling units.) Prior to approval of a building permit, all above
referenced uses shall be subject to mandatory landscape plan and specification
requirements.
1. Said landscape plan shall be developed with an emphasis upon the
following areas:
a. The boundary or perimeter of the proposed site at points adjoining
other property.
b. The immediate perimeter of the structure.
c. The perimeter of parking and loading areas.
7 2. All landscaping incorporated in said plan shall conform to the following
standards and criteria:
a. All plants must at least equal the following minimum size:
Potted/Bare Root or
Balled & Burlapped
Shade Trees* 2-inch diameter
Half Trees (Flowering
Crab, Russian Olive,
Hawthorn, etc.) 1-1/2 inch diameter
Evergreen Trees 6 feet high
Tall Shrubs & Hedge Material
(Evergreen or Deciduous) 6 feet high
Low Shrubs – Deciduous 24 - 30 inches
- Evergreen 24 - 30 inches
- Spreading Evergreens 18 - 24 inches
* Type and mode are dependent upon time of Planting season,
availability, and site Conditions (soils, climate, ground water,
man-made irrigation, grading, etc.)
b. Spacing.
1) Plant material centers shall not be located closer than three
(3) feet from the fence line or property line and shall not be
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-8
planted to conflict with public plantings based on the
judgment of the Zoning Administrator.
2) Where plant materials are planted in two (2) or more rows,
plantings shall be staggered in rows unless otherwise
approved by the Zoning Administrator.
3) Where massing of plants or screening is intended, large
deciduous shrubs shall not be planted more than four (4)
feet on center, and/or evergreen shrubs shall not be planted
more than three (3) feet on center.
c. Types of New Trees. Plantings, suitable trees include:
Botanical Name Common Name
Quercus (varieties) Oak
Acer platanoides (and Norway Maple (and varieties)
Schwedler, Emerald Queen, etc.)
Acersaccharum Sugar Maple
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry
Betula (varieties) Birch
Gleditsia Triacanthos Honeylocust (Imperial, Majestic,
Skyline, Sunburst & Thornless)
Tilia cordata (and Little Leaf Linden
varieties) and Redmond, Greenspire, etc.
Tilia americana Basswood (American Linden)
Fraxinus Pennsylvania Green Ash (and
Lanceolata Summit, Marshall's)
Ginkgo biloba (male Ginkgo
tree only)
Gymnocladus dioicus Kentucky Coffee Tree
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-9
d. Design.
1) The landscape plan must show some form of designed site
amenities (i.e., composition of plant materials, and/or
creative grading, decorative lighting, exterior sculpture, etc.,
which are largely intended for aesthetic purposes).
2) All areas within the property lines (or beyond, if side grading
extends beyond) shall be treated. All exterior areas not
paved or designated as drives, parking or storage, must be
planted into ornamental vegetation (lawns, ground covers or
shrubs) unless otherwise approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
3) Turf slopes in excess of 2:1 are prohibited unless approved
by the Zoning Administrator. (Ordinance 13-02
4) All ground areas under the building roof overhang must be
treated with a decorative mulch and/or foundation planting.
5) All buildings must have an exterior water spigot to ensure
that landscape maintenance can be accomplished.
e. Landscape Guarantee: All new plants shall be guaranteed for two
(2) full years from the time planting has been completed. All plants
shall be alive and in satisfactory growth at the end of the guarantee
period or be replaced.
f. Existing Trees:
1) With respect to existing trees in new developments, all trees
on the site are to be saved which do not have to be removed
for street, buildings, utilities, drainage or active recreational
purposes.
13 2) Protection of significant trees to be saved shall include, but
are not limited to the following methods:
a) Installation of snow fencing or polythylene laminar
safety netting at the drip line before any grading or
construction begins and remaining in place until all
grading and construction is terminated.
b) No grade change, construction activity, or storage of
fill, materials, or equipment shall occur within the
fenced area.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-10
c) Installation of erosion control measures is required.
d) Prevention of change in soil chemistry due to
concrete washout and leakage or spillage of toxic
materials such as fuels or paints is required.
e) Pruning of oak trees must not take place from April 15
through July 1. If wounding of oak trees occurs, a
nontoxic tree wound sealant must be applied
immediately.
Subd. 4. Storage and Display of Materials.
A. In all classes of commercial and industrial districts, open storage or display of
materials in any required front, side, or rear yard shall be prohibited. Any other
outside storage shall be located or screened with an adequate buffer so as not to
be visible from any of the residential districts, adjoining property, or public
streets.
B. No boat, boat trailer, travel trailer, pick-up camper or coach designed to be
mounted on a motor vehicle, motorized dwelling, tent trailer, or similar
recreational equipment, and no case or box used for transporting such
equipment shall be parked or stored for more than thirty days on any lot in a
residential district except in a car port or enclosed building or in a side or rear
yard. No point of any such equipment shall be located within three feet of
the rear or side lot line except when parked in an established driveway and in no
case shall any such point be closer than ten feet from the living quarters of a
residence on adjoining property. No such equipment shall be used for living,
sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot,
or in any location not approved for such use.
Subd. 5. Seventy Percent (70%) Lot Provision.
A. Intent. The City recognizes that many existing platted residential lots within the
City are not able to meet the City's present requirements with respect to lot area,
depth, area, width, coverage and setbacks. Land owners initiating plans to make
improvements to, or to develop or redevelop these lots often create the need for
the City to grant variances to the Zoning Ordinance to relieve some hardship
caused by the strict enforcement of the City's Zoning Ordinance when applied to
these lots.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-11
B. Criteria. A lot or parcel of land which has been platted on, or prior to, June 1,
1989, shall be deemed a buildable lot and may be used for single family
detached dwelling purposes provided:
1. The lot has frontage on a public right-of-way;
2. The lot is within the current R-1 district and does not meet the
requirements of the city zoning ordinance, Section 1001.12, Subd. 6 and
7, as to lot area, depth, width, coverage and setbacks;
3. It can be demonstrated that City sewer and water has been or shall be
properly installed;
4. The measurements of the lot's area, depth, width, coverage and setbacks
are all within seventy percent (70%) of the requirements of of the
respective Zoning District in which the lot is located. (Ordinance 13-02,
adopted May 14, 2013)
Subd. 6. Platted and Unplatted Property.
14A. Any person desiring to improve property shall submit to the Building Official a
Certificate of Survey of said premises and information on the location and
dimensions of existing and proposed buildings, location of easements crossing
the property, encroachments, and any other information which may be necessary
to ensure conformance to City Code provisions.
B. All buildings shall be so placed so that they will not obstruct future streets which
may be constructed by the City in conformity with existing streets and according
to the Comprehensive Plan and to the system and standards employed by the
City. Furthermore, all buildings shall be placed so that they will not obstruct
future utility routes or the potential resubdivision of the property.
C. Except in the case of a PUD, Planned Unit Development District, not more than
one principal building shall be located on a lot. The words "principal building"
shall be given their common, ordinary meaning as defined in Section 1001.02. In
case of doubt or on any questions or interpretation, the decision of the Zoning
Administrator shall be final, subject to the right of appeal.
14D. On a through lot, both street lot lines shall be front yards for applying the yard
and parking setback regulations of this Chapter.
Subd. 7. Reserved. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-12
Subd. 8. Swimming Pools - Single & Two Family Dwelling.
A. Construction or installation of any pool, tank, depression or excavation in or
above ground, including swimming pools, spas and hot tubs but not including
stormwater facilities, which causes or has the capacity to retain more than five
thousand (5,000) gallons water and a depth greater than thirty (30) inches that is
intended to be used by individuals for swimming, wading or immersion purposes
shall be subject to review and approval by the Zoning Administrator and Building
Official
B. An application to construct or install a swimming pool as listed above requires a
building permit and shall show:
1. The type, size of pool, and volume of water.
2. A site plan indicating the following: location of pool, location of house,
garage, fencing, and other improvements on the lot, location of filter unit,
pump, and wiring indicating the type of such units, location of back flush
and drainage outlets, grading of back flush and drainage outlets, grading
plan, finished elevations and final treatment (decking, landscaping, etc.)
around the pool, location of existing overhead or underground wiring,
utility easements, trees, and similar features, and location of any water
heating unit.
3. The swimming pool is subjected to an annual review by the Zoning
Administrator.
C. Construction:
1. All access for construction shall be over the owner’s land and due care
shall be taken to avoid damage to public streets and adjacent private or
public property.
2. All wiring, installation of heating units, grading, installation of pipes, and all
other installations and construction shall be subject to inspection by the
Building Official.
3. All pools must be inspected prior to initial use or filling.
4. Electrical installation shall meet State requirements.
D. Location:
1. Pools shall not be located within any required front yard and shall not be
located within ten (10) feet of any side or rear lot line or within six (6) feet
of any principal structure or frost footing.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-13
2. Pools shall not be located beneath overhead lines nor over underground
utility lines of any type.
3. Pools shall not be located within any private or public utility, walkway,
drainage or other easement.
4. The filler unit, pump, heating unit, and any other noise making mechanical
equipment shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from any adjacent or
nearby residential structure and not closer than ten (10) feet to any lot line.
5. Lighting for the pool shall be directed toward the pool and not toward
adjacent property.
E. Water Source and Drainage:
1. The swimming pool shall be filled only through the property owner's water
meter or at the owner’s expense. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14,
2013)
2. Back-flush water or water from pool drainage shall be directed toward the
sanitary sewer. Water shall not drain onto adjacent or nearby private land.
3. Violations of this subsection will result in doubling the water and sewer bill
for the amount of water used to fill the pool.
F. Access restrictions:
1. A structure or safety fence at least four (4) feet in height shall completely
enclose the pool at all times and any opening in the fence must include a
lockable gate; or,
2. A safety pool cover that meets the American Society of Testing and
Materials, as approved by the Building Official, shall be required.
3. For all above-ground swimming pools utilizing a ladder for pool access,
ladders shall be removed from the pool area when not in use to prevent
uncontrolled access. (Ordinance #11-08, adopted November 8, 2011)
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-14
Subd. 9. Swimming Pools - Multiple Family Dwelling Areas.
A. Private swimming pools which are intended for and used by the occupants of a
multiple family dwelling and the guests of the occupants of said dwelling, shall
adhere to the following regulations:
1. No part of the water surface of the swimming pool shall be less than fifty
(50) feet from any lot line.
2. No pumps, filter or other apparatus used in connection with or to service a
swimming pool shall be located less than forty (40) feet from any lot line.
3. The pool area shall be adequately fenced to prevent uncontrolled access
from the street or adjacent property. Adequate screening, including, but
not limited to, landscaping shall be placed between the pool area adjacent
single family lines district lot lines.
4. All deck areas, adjacent patios, or other similar areas used in conjunction
with the swimming pools shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from any
lot in an adjacent single family district.
5. Approval by the State Health Inspector must be obtained prior to
construction and a copy retained at city hall.
6. All pools within the city shall be subject to all rules and statutes of the
State of Minnesota.
Subd. 10. Swimming Pools - All Zoning Districts.
A. Required structure or safety fencing shall be completely installed within one (1)
week following the installation of the pool.
B. Nuisances such as undue noise, lighting of adjacent property, health and safety
hazards, damage to nearby vegetation, and the like, shall not be permitted.
C. Drainage of pools into public streets or other drainage ways shall not be allowed
without the sewer treatment superintendent's supervision.
Subd. 11. Fences and Walls.
A. Approval Required. No person shall hereafter construct or cause to be
constructed or erected within the City any fence without first making an
application for and securing approval by the Zoning Administrator.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-15
B. Location. All boundary line fences shall be located entirely within the private
property of the person, firm or corporation constructing or causing the
construction of such fence.
C. Installation and Maintenance.
1. Every fence shall be constructed in a professional and substantial manner
and of substantial material limited to maintenance free material or weather
resistant wood, such as pressure treated lumber, cedar or redwood,
reasonably suitable for the purpose for which the fence is proposed to be
used. The materials and design shall also be compatible with other
structures in the area in which the fence is located and shall not cause
blight or a negative impact.
2. Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and
shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair or
danger, or constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any such fence which
is or has become dangerous to the public safety, health or welfare is a
public nuisance, and the City shall commence proper proceedings for the
abatement thereof.
3. All posts or similar supporting instruments used in the construction of
fences shall be faced inward toward the property being fenced.
4. All fences require approval from the Zoning Administrator prior to
installation and construction.
D. Access. All fences shall be provided with a gate which affords reasonable and
convenient access for public safety.
E. Fences Prohibited. Barbed wire fences and electric fences shall be prohibited
within the City except, within the A-R district when related to farming, and hobby
farms.
E. Drainage and Utility Easements. Fences may be constructed within public and
private utility and drainage easements provided that:
1. The fence and its design is subject to the approval of the Public Works
Supervisor.
2. Removal of the fence or a portion thereof for the purpose of utilizing the
easement shall be at the property owner's expense.
G. Residential District Fences. All residential district fences shall be placed within
the property being fenced.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-16
1. Front Yards.
a. Within front yards or side yards of a corner lot abutting a public right
of way the fence shall not exceed forty eight (48) inches in height
and shall be at least seventy five (75) percent open space for the
passage of air and light except as provided for by Section 1001.09,
Subd. 11.F.1.b of this Chapter.
b. A fence with a height greater than forty-eight (48) inches and/or
less than seventy-five (75) percent open space may be constructed
within the required rear yards and side yard of a corner lot abutting
collector or arterial street by administrative permit, provided that:
(1) The fence does not exceed six (6) feet in height.
(2) The fence is setback ten (10) feet from the lot line abutting a
collector or arterial street right-of-way.
(3) For interior lots, a gate or other opening is to be provided in
the fence to allow for maintenance of the street side
boulevard.
(4) The fence along a side lot line abutting a collector or arterial
street right-of-way shall not extend into a required front yard
and be no closer to the front lot line than a point intersecting
the front line of the principal building.
2. Residential Districts - Side Yard. No fence or wall, other than a retaining
wall, along a side lot line in a residence district, shall be higher than six (6)
feet unless the adjoining lot is not in a residential district.
3. Residential Districts - Rear Yard. Fences having a height of six (6) feet or
less may be located within the required rear yards in any residence
district.
H. Non-Residence Districts - Fences and Walls.
1. Fences extending across a required front yard or a required side yard
which abuts a street on a corner lot shall be at least seventy-five (75)
percent open for the passage of air and light and shall maintain the traffic
visibility requirements of Section 20-16-8 of this Chapter.
2. Business and industrial fences may be erected up to eight (8) feet in
height. Fences in excess of eight (8) feet shall require a conditional use
permit.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-17
3. Fences which are primarily erected as a security measure may have arms
projecting into the property on which barbed wire can be fastened
commencing at a point at least seven (7) feet above the ground.
4. Required walls or fences used as screens between a residence district
and a non-residence district shall be of not less than 90% opacity and not
less than five, nor more than seven feet in height above the level of the
residential district boundary. The height regulations shall not apply to
screens of parking and loading areas.
I. Plantings. Screen plantings may be substituted for walls or fences, provided such
plantings are of such type as to permit a minimum of 90% opacity during all
months of the year.
J. Exceptions. Walls or fences of lesser or greater heights or planting screens of
lesser opacity or otherwise not conforming with the subdivision may be permitted
by the Board of Zoning Appeals and Adjustments if there is a finding that the
nature of the use being screened is such that a lesser or greater degree of
screening will as adequately promote and protect the use and enjoyment of the
properties within the adjacent residential district, or there is a finding that the
screening of the type required by this chapter would interfere with the provisions
of adequate amounts of light and air to same said properties. (Ordinance 13-02,
adopted May 14, 2013)
Subd. 12. Architectural Review.
A. Elevations, Architectural Design, Exterior Facing. The application for a building
permit, in addition to other information required, shall include an exterior
elevation of the proposed structure that will adequately and accurately indicate
the height, size and design and the appearance of all elevations of the proposed
building and a description of the construction and indicate that the exterior
architectural design, when erected, will not be so at variance with, nor so similar
to, the exterior architectural design of any structure or structures already
constructed or in the course of construction in the immediate neighborhood, nor
so at variance with the character of the applicable district as established by the
code of the City as to cause a substantial depreciation in the property values of
said neighborhood within said applicable district or elsewhere or adversely affect
the public health, safety, morals or general welfare.
B. Useable Materials.
1. All Zoning Districts. Exterior building materials shall consist of materials
compatible in grade and quality to the following:
a. Brick.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-18
b. Natural stone.
c. Decorative concrete block.
d. Cast in place concrete or pre-cast concrete panels.
e. Wood, provided that the surfaces are finished for exterior use and
wood of proven exterior durability is used, such as cedar, redwood
or cypress.
f. Glass curtain wall panels.
g. Stucco.
h. Vinyl.
i. Curtain wall panels of steel, fiberglass and aluminum (nonstructural,
non-load bearing) provided that such panels are
factory fabricated and finished with a durable non-fade surface
and their fasteners are of a corrosion resistant design.
j. Other materials determined by the City Building Official, not
including galvanized or unfinished metal.
2. All buildings in the C-2, C-3, C-O, I-1 and POS District shall be
constructed of solid wall masonry, pre-cast concrete, aggregate panels, or
wood frame masonry veneer (excluding stucco). Wood and metal exterior
may be allowed as part of window and door frames or fascia treatment of
the exterior wall facing design. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
3. In the I-1 District, the following materials, in conjunction with the materials
in Section 1001.09, Subd. 12.B.2, may be used to a maximum of twentyfive
(25) percent of the proposed area if it is coordinated into the
architectural design of the structure:
a. Wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use and wood
of proven, exterior durability is used, such as cedar, redwood or
cypress.
b. Curtain wall panels of steel, fiberglass, aluminum, (non-structural;
non-load bearing) and finished with a durable non-fade surface and
their fasteners are of a corrosion resistant design.
c. Glass curtain wall panels.
d. Stucco.
7C. Exceptions to the provisions of Section 1001.09, Subd. 12.B of this Chapter may
be granted as a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 1001.03, Subd. 5 of
this Chapter, provided that:
1. The proposed building materials maintain the quality and value intended
by this Section.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-19
2. The proposed building is compatible and in harmony with other existing
structures within the District and immediate geographic area.
3. The provisions of Section 1001.03, Subd. 5.C of this Chapter are
considered and determined to be satisfied.
D. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the building inspector regarding
the use of certain materials or regarding questions of architectural design shall
be entitled to appeal the building inspector's decision to the council.
Subd. 13. Essential Services.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide for the installation of essential
services such as telephone lines, pipelines, electric transmission lines,
substations, and related structures in such a manner that the health, safety and
welfare of the City will not be adversely affected. Essential services should also
be installed in cognizance of existing and projected demands for such services.
B. Administrative Approval Required. All telephone lines, pipelines for local
distribution, underground electric transmission lines, and overhead electric
transmission lines and substations less than 33kV, and related structures, when
installed in any public right-of-way in any zoning district, shall require by the
Zoning Administrator with recommendation from the City Engineer. (Ordinance
13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
C. Procedural Requirements. All telephone lines, pipelines for local distribution,
underground transmission lines, overhead electric transmission lines less than
33kV, and related structures, which are extended to serve more than one (1)
parcel and are proposed to be installed at locations other than in public right-ofway,
shall require approval by the Zoning Administrator with recommendation by
the City Engineer based upon the information required to be furnished as
outlined in Section 1001.09, Subd. 13.D of this Section. (Ordinance 13-02,
adopted May 14, 2013)
D. Installation Requirements.
1. Prior to the installation of any of the previous essential services, the owner
of such service shall file with the Zoning Administrator, all maps and other
pertinent information as deemed necessary for the City to review the
proposed project and agree to pay all costs incurred by the City in review
of the application. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
2. The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the map and accompanying
information to the City Engineer and/or other staff for review and
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-20
recommendation regarding the project's relationship to the
Comprehensive Plan and/or Ordinances and parts thereof.
3. City Staff shall report in writing to the Zoning Administrator their findings
as to the compliance of the proposed project with the Comprehensive Plan
and Ordinances of the City.
4. In considering applications for the placement of essential services, as
regulated in this Section, the aforesaid City staff shall consider the effects
of the proposed project upon the health, safety and general welfare of the
City, as existing and as anticipated; and the effect of the proposed project
upon the Comprehensive Plan. In addition, the following specific
performance standards shall be reviewed as they may apply to the
application:
a. Lot Requirements. All lots must meet the dimensional standards of
the zoning district with respect to width, area, and structure
setbacks from property lines.
b. Parking. The site must provide for required off-street parking in
conformance with Section 1001.05 of this Chapter.
c. Building Materials. The essential service buildings must be
constructed with exterior building facades that maintain a high
standard of architectural and aesthetic compatibility with
surrounding properties and in compliance with standards of this
Chapter.
d. Screening and Landscaping. Adequate screening and landscaping
from neighboring property is provided in accordance with Sections
1001.09, Subd. 19 of this Chapter.
e. Site Access. Direct lot access from major collector or arterial streets
shall be discouraged and where possible, be provided access
through shared access arrangement from an existing curb cut and
driveway or a neighboring use. Direct lot access from a minor
collector or local street may be allowed, provided the curb cut
access complies with the standards outlined in Section 1001.04 of
this Chapter.
f. Unless otherwise approved by the City Council, all equipment shall
be completely enclosed in a permanent structure with no outside
storage.
5. Upon receiving the recommendations of the staff, the City Council may
issue a special permit for the installation and operation of the
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-21
applicant's essential services. If the staff reports regarding said permit
cause the City Council to deny its issuance, the applicant may appeal said
decision to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments under the rules and
procedures as set forth in Section 1001.03, Subd. 03 of this Chapter.
E. Conditional Use Permit Required.
1. All receiving or transmission facilities (i.e., facilities not required for local
distributing network) and overhead transmission and substation lines in
excess of 33kV and up to 100kV shall be a conditional use in all districts
subject to the following requirements:
a. Adherence to all applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
and State performance standards.
b. The performance standards as specified in subsection 3 of this
Section are adhered to.
c. The procedural and review standards for conditional use permits
are followed as specified in Section 1001.03, Subd. 5 of this
Chapter.
d. Any alteration of an existing use (i.e., building expansion,
change/intensification in use, etc.) involving items not identified
upon initial approved plans shall require a conditional use permit
amendment.
2. Lots reserved specifically for essential services, whether of record, or
newly subdivided, may be less than the specified dimensions of the
applicable zoning district, both in area and width as a conditional use,
under the following stipulations:
a. The lot is of sufficient dimensions to allow the setbacks from all
property lines to be equal to height of the various structures on the
parcel or the setback requirements of the district, whichever are
greater. Lesser structure setbacks may be allowed by the City
Council upon demonstration that the facility's design is such that
the collapse of said structure will not endanger surrounding
property. In no case shall the setbacks be reduced to less than that
required by the individual districts.
b. Applications for subdivision of new lots under this provision are
accompanied by the appropriate conditional use permit
applications.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-22
c. A restrictive covenant, removable by the City, is recorded against a
parcel which prohibits any sale, transfer, or use other than for an
essential service as defined in the City ordinances so long as the
parcel is substandard in size, according to the applicable zoning
districts.
d. In the event of abandonment of the essential service for any reason
on the substandard lot, all equipment, structures, cables, buildings
or any other improvements to the property shall be removed from
said property within a period of three (3) months. At the end of
three (3) months, if the above listed items have not been
completely removed, the City may enter said property and remove
any of the above listed items and improvements and charge said
costs to the owners) of the property, and any such unpaid charge
shall be a lien against the affected property, including any and all
administrative, legal and other fees expended by the City in
enforcing this provision.
e. The procedural and review standards for conditional use permits
are followed as specified in Section 1001.03, Subd. 5 of this
Chapter.
f. Any alteration of an existing use (i.e., building expansion,
change/intensification in use, etc.) involving items not identified
upon approved initial plans shall require a conditional use permit
amendment.
3. This Section shall not apply to overhead electric transmission lines and
substations greater than 100kV. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
Subd. 14. Home Occupations.
A. Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to maintain the character and integrity of
residential areas, to prevent competition with commercial districts, to encourage
telecommuting, and to provide a means through the establishment of specific
standards and procedures by which home occupations can be conducted in
residential neighborhoods without jeopardizing the health, safety and general
welfare of the surrounding neighborhood.
B. Application: All occupations conducted in the home shall comply with the
provisions of this section. This section shall not be construed, however, to apply
to home occupations accessory to farming, nor home offices as defined by this
Chapter.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-23
C. Procedures:
1. Administrative Permit:
a. Except as required by this section, home occupations shall require
approval from the Zoning Administrator issued subject to the
conditions of this Chapter, other applicable City ordinances and
State law.
b. The permit shall remain in full force and effect until such time as
there has been a change in conditions or until such time as the
provisions of this Section have been breached.
2. Declaration Of Conditions: The Zoning Administrator may impose such
conditions on the granting of an administrative permit as may be
necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of this Section.
3. Effect Of Permit: An administrative permit may be issued for a period of
one (1) year, after which the permit may be reissued for periods of up to
three (3) years each.
4. Transferability: Administrative permits shall not run with the land and shall
not be transferable.
5. Lapse Of Administrative Permit By Non-use:
a. Whenever within one (1) year after granting an administrative
permit, the use as permitted by the permit shall not have been
initiated, then such permit shall become null and void unless a
petition for extension of time in which to complete the work has
been granted by the Zoning Administrator.
b. Such extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the
Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30) days before the expiration
of the original permit. There shall be no charge for the filing of such
petition. The request for extension shall state facts showing a good
faith attempt to initiate the use.
6. Renewal Of Permits:
a. An applicant shall not have a vested right to renewal of an
administrative permit by reason of having obtained a previous
permit.
b. In applying for and accepting a permit, the permit holder agrees
that their monetary investment in the home occupation will be fully
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-24
amortized over the life of the permit and that a permit renewal will
not be needed to amortize the investment.
c. Each application for the renewal of a permit will be considered de
novo without taking into consideration that a previous permit has
been granted. The previous granting or renewal of a permit shall
not constitute a precedent or basis for the renewal of a permit.
D. General Provisions: All home occupations shall comply with the following
general provisions and according to definition, the applicable requirement
provisions.
1. No home occupation shall produce light, glare, noise, odor or vibration that
will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or nearby
property.
2. No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will create
electrical interference to surrounding properties.
3. Any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the premises, should not change the residential
character thereof, and shall result in no incompatibility or disturbance to
the surrounding residential uses.
4. No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or involve
construction features not customarily found in dwellings except where
required to comply with local and State fire and police recommendations.
5. All home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the living quarters
of the principal dwelling and may not be conducted in any portion of an
attached private garage or within accessory buildings.
6. There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in the
home occupation, except personal automobiles used in the home
occupation may be parked on the site.
7. The home occupation shall meet all applicable fire and building codes.
8. There shall be no exterior display or exterior signs or interior display or
interior signs which are visible from outside the dwelling with the exception
of one (1) sign not to exceed four (4) square feet in area.
9. All home occupations shall comply with the provisions of the City Code
regarding nuisances.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-25
10. No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
11. No person other than those who customarily reside on the premises shall
be employed by the home occupation.
12. Home occupations shall not create a parking demand in excess of that
which can be accommodated in an existing driveway or guest parking
area for multiple-family dwellings, where no vehicle is parked so as to
obstruct a public street, sidewalk or trail or private driveway.
13. Allowed home occupations:
a. Home occupations include and are limited to:
1. Business consulting service.
2. Hair salon.
3. Instructional classes with not more than one (1) pupil at a
time. Additional students receiving instruction at one time
may be allowed for single family uses subject to approval of
an interim use permit.
4. Massage therapy.
5. Photography studio.
6. Small appliance repair.
7. Tailoring, sewing and alternations.
b. Home occupations shall not involve any of the following:
1. Repair service or manufacturing which requires equipment
other than found in a dwelling.
2. Services which consists of more than one pupil, client, or
customer at a time.
3. Over-the-counter retail sale of merchandise produced off the
premises.
E. Inspection: The City hereby reserves the right upon issuing any home
occupation permit to inspect the premises in which the occupation is being
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-26
conducted to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter or any
conditions additionally imposed. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14, 2013)
Subd. 15. Day Care Facilities.
A. Purpose. The regulation of day care nursery facilities in these zoning regulations
is to establish standards and procedures by which day care facilities can be
conducted within the City without jeopardizing the health, safety and general
welfare of the day care participants and/or the surrounding neighborhood. This
Section establishes the city's minimum requirements for the establishment of a
day care facility which are not defined as permitted uses by state Statute or
which are operated in uses other than single family homes. Day care facilities
defined as permitted uses by State Statutes which operate in a single family
dwelling as an accessory use shall be subject to Subd. 15 of this Chapter and
processed as a home occupation.
B. Application. Day care facilities shall be considered an allowed conditional use
within all business zoning districts and the Industrial District of the City and shall
be subject to the regulations and requirements of Section 3 of this Chapter. In
addition to the City regulation, all day care facility operations shall comply with
the minimum requirements of the Minnesota Department of Health and Human
Services regulations, as may be amended.
C. Declaration of Conditions. The Planning Commission may recommend and the
City Council may impose such conditions on the granting of a day care facility
conditional use permit as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and
provisions of this Section.
D. Site Plan -Drawing Necessary. All applications for a day care facility conditional
use permit shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and dimension,
displaying the information required by Section 1001.05, Subd. 3 of this Chapter.
E. General Provisions. Day care facilities shall be allowed as a principal or as an
accessory use, provided that the day care facilities meet all the applicable
provisions of this Section.
1. Lot Requirements and Setbacks - Principal Use. The proposed site for a
day care facility must have a minimum lot area as required by the
applicable zoning district in which it is located and as determined by the
Minnesota Department of Health and Human Services. The City Council
may increase the required lot area in those cases where such an increase
is considered necessary to ensure compatibility of activities and maintain
the public health, safety and general welfare. The day care facility must
meet the minimum setback requirements of the respective zoning district.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-27
The City Council may increase setback requirements if considered
necessary to ensure compatibility.
2. Lot Requirements and Setbacks; Accessory Use. The site of the proposed
day care facility as an accessory use shall meet all area and setback
provisions of the respective zoning district in which the facility is to be
located. The City Council may increase such standards if considered
necessary to maintain compatibility.
3. Sewer and Water. All day care facilities shall have access to municipal
sewer and water or have adequate private sewer and water to protect the
health and safety of all persons who occupy the facility.
4. Screening. A day care facility shall provide screening along shared
property boundaries. Such required fencing and screening shall comply
with the required fencing and screening provisions of Section 1001.09,
Subd. 19 of this Chapter.
5. Parking.
a. For day care facilities as a principal use, there shall be adequate
off-street parking which shall be located separately from any
outdoor play area and shall be in compliance with Section 1001.05
of this Chapter. Parking areas shall be screened from view of
surrounding and abutting residential uses in compliance with
Section 1001.09, Subd. 19 of this Chapter.
b. When a day care facility is an accessory use within a
structure containing another principal use, each use shall be
calculated separately for determining the total off-street parking
spaces required.
6. Loading. For day care facilities as a principal use, two (2) off-street loading
spaces in compliance with Section 1001.05 of this Chapter shall be
provided.
7. Signage. All signing and informational or visual communication devices
shall be in compliance with the provisions of Section 1001.08 of this
Chapter.
8. Compliance with State Requirements. The structure and operation shall
be in full compliance with State of Minnesota, Department of Health and
Human Services regulations and be licensed accordingly.
F. Non-Conforming Use. Existing day care facilities lawfully existing on the effective
date of this Chapter may continue as non-conforming uses. They shall, however,
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-28
be required to obtain permits for their continued operation. Any existing day care
facility that is discontinued for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180)
days, or is in violation of the provisions of the ordinance under which it was
initially established, shall be brought into conformity with the provisions of this
Section.
G. Inspection. At any and all reasonable hours, with or without notice, the City
hereby reserves the right upon issuing any day care facility conditional use
permit to inspect the premises in which the occupation is being conducted to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this Section, Chapter, or any conditions
additionally imposed.
Subd. 16. Model Homes.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide for the erection of model
homes in new subdivisions without adversely affecting the character of
surrounding residential neighborhoods or creating a general nuisance. As model
homes represent a unique temporary commercial use, special consideration
must be given to the peculiar problems associated with them and special
standards must be applied to ensure reasonable compatibility with their
surrounding environment.
23B. Procedure. The erection of a model home(s) shall require approval of the Zoning
Administrator subject to compliance with the provisions of this Section.
C. Special Requirements.
1. Temporary parking facilities equal to four (4) spaces per model home
dwelling unit shall be provided. The overall location, design, drainage, and
surfacing of the temporary parking facility shall be subject to the approval
of the City Engineer and zoning Administrator.
2. Traffic generated by the model home shall be directed away from
residential neighborhoods to the greatest extent possible.
3. No model home shall incorporate outside lighting which creates a
nuisance due to glare or intensity.
4. All model home signage shall comply with the sign regulations as
contained in the provisions of this Chapter relating to signs.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-29
Subd. 17. Standards for Residence Districts.
A. Site Plan. For all permitted developments in the residence districts, except those
containing only permitted single family detached dwellings, a site plan must be
reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the Council as set forth
in this Chapter.
B. Projecting Air Conditioning and Heating Units Multiple Dwellings. Air conditioning
or heating units projecting through exterior walls or windows shall be located and
designed so that they neither unnecessarily generate or transmit sound nor
disrupt the architectural amenities of the building. Units projecting more than
twelve inches beyond the exterior finish of a building wall shall be permitted only
with the written consent of the building official, which shall be given only if
structural systems prevent compliance.
7C. Trash and Refuse Disposal - Multiple Dwellings.
1. Except for residences with private entrances, one trash receptacle for
each apartment structure shall be required.
2. The storage of trash shall be pursuant to the provisions of Section
1001.09, Subd. 19.B of this Chapter.
D. Elevators. Except for residences with private entrances, multiple residence
buildings of three stories or more shall be equipped with at least one public
elevator and lobby for each structure.
E. Accessory Buildings - Multiple Dwellings. Accessory buildings shall observe the
same setback requirements established for the residence building except that
accessory buildings located within the rear yard of the multiple residence building
may be located to within five feet of the rear or interior side property line. The
council may require common walls for accessory buildings where common walls
will eliminate unsightly and hazardous areas. Exteriors of accessory buildings to
multiple dwellings shall have the same exterior finish as the main structure.
Additional regulations applicable to main structures shall apply to accessory
buildings.
F. Housing-Performance Standards. Except for mobile or manufactured homes
located in an approved mobile home park, all dwelling within the city shall:
1. Be firmly anchored to a permanent foundation consisting of poured
concrete, concrete block or treated wood, the latter as defined in the
Minnesota Building Code. All such permanent foundations shall be built in
accordance with standards set forth in the Minnesota Building Code.
2. Be at least twenty-two (22) feet in width.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-30
G. Manufactured Home. No manufactured home may be placed on any lot, whether
within or without an approved mobile home park, within the city unless such
manufactured home is built in conformance with Minnesota Statutes 327.31 to
327.35 as in effect on the date of the passage of this code, and any successor
provisions to those statutes and any superseding statutes.
H. Secondary Living Quarters and Accessory Apartments.
1. Secondary Living Quarters. Secondary living quarters that include kitchen
facilities for housing multiple generations may be allowed an accessory
use within a single family dwelling provided that:
a. The design and construction of the principal building is not a twofamily
dwelling as defined by this Chapter.
b. There shall be an interior connection between the main living area
and accessory living quarters that is able to be unlocked from each
side of the connection and that is not secured by a deadbolt or
keyed lockset.
2. Accessory Apartments. Accessory apartments constitutes a small renters
apartment in a single family home which is subordinate to the principal
residential use and requires approval of a conditional use permit. The
purpose of permitting temporary accessory apartments is to:
a. Provide older homeowners with a means of obtaining, through
tenants, in accessory apartments, rental income, companionship,
security, and services, and thereby to enable them to stay more
comfortably in homes and neighborhoods they might otherwise be
forced to leave.
b. Add inexpensive rental units to the housing stock to meet the needs
of smaller households, both young and old.
c. Make housing units available to moderated income households
who might otherwise have difficulty finding homes within the town.
d. Develop housing units and single family neighborhoods that are
appropriate for households at a variety of stages in the life cycle,
thereby lessening fluctuations in the neighborhood demand for
particular services such as education.
e. Protect stability, property values, in the single family residential
character of the neighborhood by ensuring that temporary
accessory apartments are installed only in a owner-occupied house
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-31
and under such additional conditions as may be appropriate to
further the purposes of this ordinance.
3. Performance Standards. Secondary living quarters and accessory
apartments shall comply with the following requirements:
a. The principal building shall be served by single municipal water,
sanitary sewer, gas and/or electric utility service lines each with a
single meter for the respective utility where applicable.
b. The principal building shall have one (1) heating and air
conditioning system.
c. There shall be three (3) garage stalls having directed exterior access (not
in a tandem arrangement) attached to the principal building with a
driveway access in front of each stall so as to allow direct vehicle
maneuvering to each of the stalls. (Ordinance 13-02, adopted May 14,
2013)
I. The City opts-out of the requirements of Minnesota Statute §462.3593, which
defines and regulates Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings, pursuant to
authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593, Subdivision 9.
(Ordinance 16-03, adopted August 23, 2016)
Subd. 18. Sexually Oriented Uses.
A. Intent. The purpose of this section is to establish provisions for the opportunity as
well as controls of Sexually oriented uses within the City of Rockford.
B. Sexually Oriented Use - General. Sexually oriented uses, as defined in this
Chapter, shall be subject to the following general provisions:
1. Activities classified as obscene under Minnesota State Law are not
permitted and are strictly prohibited.
2. Sexually oriented uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited
from locating in any building which is also utilized for residential purposes.
3. Sexually oriented uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited
from locating in any place which is also used to dispense or consume
alcoholic beverages.
4. Sexually oriented uses-principal as defined in this Chapter which deal
solely in the retail sales of Sexually oriented materials only for offRockford
Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-32
premises consumption shall be exempt from the requirements of Section
1001.09, Subd. 18.C of this Chapter.
5. A Sexually oriented use which does not qualify as an accessory use shall
be classified as a Sexually oriented use-principal.
C. Sexually Oriented Uses - Principal.
1. Sexually oriented use-principal shall be located at least three hundred
(300) feet from the property line of any zoning district in which residential
uses are allowed, either as permitted or conditional uses, and at least
three hundred (300) feet as measured in a straight line from the closest
point of the property line of the building upon which the sexually oriented
use-principal is located from any sensitive use provided below:
a. Public or private school facility.
b. Public park.
c. Licensed day care facility.
d. On-sale or off-sale liquor facilities.
e. Places of religious worship and cemeteries.
f. Another existing Sexually oriented use-principal.
2. Sexually oriented use-principal activities, as defined by this Chapter, shall
be classified as one use. No two (2) Sexually oriented uses-principal shall
be located in the same building or upon the same property and each use
shall be subject to Section 1001.09, Subd. 18.C.1.
D. Sexually Oriented Uses - Accessory.
1. Sexually oriented uses-accessory shall:
a. Comprise no more than ten (10) percent of the floor area of the
establishment in which they are located; and
b. Comprise no more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor
area in total; and
c. Comprise no more than twenty (20) percent of the gross receipts of
the entire business operation; and
d. Not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of
merchandise.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-33
2. Sexually oriented business-accessory shall be restricted from and prohibit
access to minors by the physical separation of such items from areas of
general public access:
a. Movie Rentals. Display areas shall be restricted from general view
and shall be located within a separate room, the access of which is
in clear view and under the control of the persons responsible for
the operation or shall be in catalogs under the direct control and
distribution of the operator.
b. Magazines. Publications classified or qualifying as Sexually
oriented shall not be physically accessible to minors and shall be
covered with a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any
material other than the publication title.
3. Sexually oriented business-accessory activities shall be prohibited at any
public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical or other
performance or exhibition presented to the general public where minors
are admitted.
5E. Violation. Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be punished
as prescribed in Section 1001.03, Subd. 09 of the Rockford Zoning Code.
Subd. 19. Required Screening.
A. Mechanical Equipment: All mechanical equipment, such as heating and air
conditioning units, erected on the roof of any structure shall be screened so as
not to be visible.
B. Refuse and Recyclable Material:
1. For all residential, commercial, and industrial land uses except for Single
Family, Two Family, and Three Family Residential structures, all refuse,
recyclable materials and necessary handling equipment, including but not
limited to, garbage cans, recycling bins and dumpsters shall be stored
within the principal structure, within an accessory structure or totally
screened from eye-level view from all neighboring uses and the public
right-of-way.
2. For all residential, commercial, and industrial land uses except for Single
Family, Two Family, and Three Family Residential structures, exterior
storage of garbage cans, recycling bins, dumpsters and other refuse
containers shall require the following:
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-34
a. Exterior wall or fence treatment shall be similar and/or complement
the principal building.
b. The enclosed trash and/or recycling receptacle area shall be
located in the rear or side yard and shall observe all applicable
setback requirements and easements.
c. The trash and/or recycling enclosure must be accessible for trash
hauling vehicles.
d. The trash and/or recycling receptacles must be fully screened from
view of adjacent properties and the public right-of-way by a fence or
wall of at least six (6) feet in height and a minimum opaqueness of
eighty (80) percent.
e. All dumpsters, recycling bins, garbage cans, handling equipment
and enclosures shall be kept in a good state of repair with tightfitting
lids to prevent spilling and spread of debris.
f. The construction of trash and recycling enclosures shall be per
standards established by the City Building Official and all designs
and construction of such enclosures shall be subject to the Building
official's approval.
Subd. 20. Wetlands.
A. Purpose. Work in and around wetlands must be guided by the following
principles in descending order of priority:
1. Avoid both the direct and indirect impact of the activity that may destroy or
diminish the wetland.
2. Minimize the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the wetland
related activity and its implementation.
3. Rectify the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected
wetland environment with one of at least equal public value.
4. Reduce or eliminate the adverse impact over time by preservation and
maintenance operations during the life of the activity.
5. Compensate for the impact by replacing or providing approved substitute
wetland resources or environments.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-35
B. Stormwater Drainage. Runoff must not be discharged directly into wetlands
without appropriate quality and quantity runoff control, depending on the
individual wetland’s vegetation sensitivity, subject to approval of the City
Engineer.
C. Wetland Impacts. Wetlands must not be drained or filled, wholly or partially,
unless replaced by either restoring or creating wetland areas of at least equal
public value. Compensation, including the replacement ratio and quality of
replacement should be consistent with the requirements outlined in the rules
adopted by the Board of Water and Soil Resources to implement the Wetland
Conservation Act of 1991, as may be amended.
D. Vegetated Buffer Protection.
1. Except for wetland areas impacted and mitigated in accordance with
Section 1001.09 Subd. 20C. A protective buffer of natural vegetation at
least twenty (20) feet wide from the delineated edge at the time of
development shall surround all wetlands within parcels preliminary platted,
developed, or redeveloped after October 14, 2003. The City Engineer may
require a larger buffer than the minimum based upon site specific design
issues. The design criteria should follow common principles and the
example of nearby natural areas. The site should be examined for existing
buffer zones and mimic the slope structure and vegetation as much as
possible.
Wetland Size Width of Buffer Area From
Delineated Wetland Boundary
0-3 acres 20 feet
Great than 3 acres 25 feet
DNR protected water 35 feet
2. A principal building setback of fifty (50) feet from the delineated
edge of all wetlands or twenty (20) feet from the edge of a buffer
easement, whichever is greater, shall be provided within parcels
preliminary platted, developed, or redeveloped after October 14,
2003. Open and uncovered decks attached to the principal building
may encroach within the setback from a buffer easement but shall
not be closer than ten (10) feet from the easement line. (Ordinance
2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
3. Grading, construction, or vegetation alteration/disturbance within this
buffer is prohibited. Buffer design and protection during construction shall
accomplish any or all of the following:
a. Slow water runoff.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-36
b. Enhance water infiltration.
c. Trap sediment, fertilizers, pathogens, heavy metals, blowing snow
and soil, and act as corridors for wildlife.
d. All drain tiles shall be identified on the subject property and
adjacent properties if they extend across property boundaries.
Drain tile lines must be rendered inoperable unless the applicant
determines it and is approved by the City engineer that properties
located outside the subject property may experience inundation
where it did not previously occur. It is the responsibility of the
applicants engineer to show how rendering drain tiles inoperable
will impact the existing site and adjacent properties.
4. The buffer shall be overlaid by a perpetual conservation easement and
maintained by the property owner and marked by permanent signs to
prevent encroachment.
5. Ponding areas established for storm water drainage purposes are
exempt from the provisions of this section.
E. Wetland Buffer Acceptance.
1. Buffer area vegetation shall be considered adequate when the buffer has
a continuous, dense layer of perennial grasses, flowers, trees and/or
shrubs that have been undisturbed for at least 10 consecutive years.
Based on information provided by the applicant the City will determine if
the Wetland Buffer is acceptable or if it needs to be replaced or reestablished.
The City will utilize the following guidelines to determine if
vegetation shall be considered unacceptable:
a. It has 30% or more of its vegetation composed of grass, common
buckthorn, purple loosestrife, leafy spurge, bull thistle, and other
noxious weeds). or
b. Has bare or disturbed soil that is greater than 10% of the area. or
c. Contain Turf grass (Kentucky bluegrass) that is greater than 10% of
the area.
2. The following shall be part of the required submittal to the City.
a. A wetland buffer landscaping plan will need to be submitted to the
Local Government Unit WCA Agent for approval. At a minimum,
this plan shall include the following:
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-37
b. A plan sheet that shows the location of the buffers within the
subdivision. This sheet should also show buffers that are
considered acceptable in their current state and identify them as
areas that shall not be disturbed during grading.
c. For buffer areas that are not acceptable, a plan shall be developed
that provides species and planting and/or seeding locations.
Planting plans shall include native shrub and/or trees and/or
grasses and/or forbs found within this part of the state.
d. The following maintenance will be required for seeded areas.
Establishment (spring seeding):
1) Prepare site – Late April – May.
2) Seed – May 1 – July 1.
Maintenance:
1) Mow - 6-10 inches (can not be less then 6”) July 15 – August
15.
2) Mow – September 1 (optional)
3) Weed Control – mowing should keep annual weeds down. Spot
spray thistles, etc.
Establishment (fall seeding):
1) Prepare site – Late August –early September
2) Seed – late September to freeze
Maintenance (following season):
1) Mow (6-10) inches – June 15 – August 15
2) Mow – September 1 (optional)
3) Weed Control – mowing should keep annual weeds down. Spot
spray thistles, etc.
e. Applicants may obtain from the City a set of standard seeding and
planting specifications for buffer areas that meet all the City
requirements.
F. Wetland buffer Mitigation and Averaging:
1. If an authorized regulatory authority (DNR, city) approves a wetland permit
that impacts wetlands the applicant will be required to replace the buffer
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-38
on the fill slope. The applicant will not be allowed to increase the
proposed fill to accommodate the required buffer.
2. In instances where the required buffer width is greater than 20 feet the
City may allow averaging. When allowed by the City the applicant will be
able to reduce the width along a portion of the buffer below the required
width if:
a. The width of the buffer is expanded along another portion of the
wetland, and
b. The total acres of the required buffer width are met, and
c. The buffer width is not less than 20 feet along any portion of the
wetland.
3. When a wetland is completely filled under an approved permit, the buffer
area requirement associated with the size of the wetland that was filled will
be required for the replacement wetlands unless replacement is occurring
adjacent to a larger wetland. A landscaping plan for the buffer
replacement site will need to be provided to meet the requirements of
Section E.2 of this ordinance.
37 Subd. 21. Alternative Energy Systems.
A. Wind Energy Conversion Systems.
1. Purpose. This ordinance is established to regulate the installation and
operation of Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) within the City of
Rockford not otherwise subject to siting and oversight by the State of
Minnesota under the Minnesota Power Plant Siting Act (MS 116C.51 –
116C.697).
2. Application. Wind conversion systems may be allowed as an interim use
within certain zoning districts of the City, subject to the regulations and
requirements of this Section, provided the property upon which the system
is to be located is agricultural, commercial or industrial and is constructed
and maintained on any parcel of land of at least five (5) acres in size.
3. Declaration of Conditions. The City Council may impose such conditions
on the granting of WECS conditional use permit as may be necessary to
carry out the purpose and provisions of this Section and to maintain
compatibility.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-39
4. Site Plan Drawings. In addition to the information required by Section
1001.03 of this Chapter, an application for all WECS shall include the
following information:
a. A description of the project including: Number, type, name plate,
generating capacity, tower height, rotor diameter, and total height of
all wind turbines and means of interconnecting with the electrical
grid.
b. Detailed site plans drawn to scale and dimensioned including:
(1) Lot lines and dimensions.
(2) Location and height of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, above ground utilities, guy wires anchors,
electrical wires, interconnection points with the electrical
grid, and trees.
(3) Locations and height of all adjacent buildings, structures,
above ground utilities and trees located within three hundred
(350) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property.
(4) Existing and proposed setbacks of all structures located on
the property.
(5) Sketch elevation of the premises accurately depicting the
proposed WECS and its relationship to structures on
adjacent lots.
(6) Location of wetlands, scenic, and natural areas and bluffs
within one (1) mile of the proposed WECS.
(7) The location of any other WECS within ten (10) rotor
distances of the proposed WECS.
c. Engineer’s certification of site plans.
d. A Noise Profile.
e. FAA Permit Application.
f. Location of all known Communications Towers within five (5) miles
of the proposed WECS.
g. Decommissioning Plan.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-40
h. Description of potential impacts on nearby WECS and wind
resources on adjacent properties.
5. Compliance with State Building Code. Standard drawings of the structural
components of the wind energy conversion system and support structures,
including base and footings shall be provided along with the engineering
data and calculations to demonstrate compliance with the structural
design provisions of the State Building Code especially with regards to
wind and icing loads. Drawings and engineering calculations shall be
certified by a registered engineer.
6. Compliance with National Electrical Code. WECS electrical equipment
and connections shall be designed and installed in adherence to the
National Electrical Code as adopted by the City.
7. Manufacturer Warranty. The applicant shall provide documentation or
other evidence from the dealer or manufacturer that the WECS has been
successfully operated in atmospheric conditions similar to the conditions
within the City. The WECS shall be warranted against any system failures
reasonably expected in severe weather operation conditions.
8. Design Standards.
a. Height. The permitted maximum height of a WECS shall be
determined in one of two ways. In determining the height of the
WECS, the total height of the system shall be included. System
height shall be measured from the base of the tower to the highest
possible extension of the rotor. The shortest height of the two
following methods shall be used in determining the maximum
allowable height of a WECS system. The height of a WECS must
also comply with FAA Regulation Part 77 “Objects Affecting
Navigable Air Space” and/or Mn/DOT Rule 14, MCAR 1.3015
“Criteria for Determining Obstruction to Air Navigation.”
(1) A ratio of one (1) foot to one (1) foot between the distance of
the closest property line to the base of WECS to the height
of the system.
(2) A maximum system height of one hundred fifty (150) feet.
b. Setbacks. No part of a WECS (including guy wire anchors) shall be
located within or above any required front, side or rear yard setback
and no part of the system shall be within ten (10) feet of any
property line, whichever is greater. WECS towers shall be setback
from the closest property line one foot for every one foot of system
height, unless a structural engineer specifies in writing that the
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-41
collapse of the tower will occur within a lesser distance under all
foreseeable circumstances and the property abuts land zoned for
industrial or commercial use. WECS shall not be located within fifty
(50) feet of an above ground utility line.
c. Rotors.
(1) All WECS rotors shall not have rotor dimensions greater
than thirty (30) feet.
(2) Blade-arcs created by the WECS shall have a minimum of
thirty (30) feet of clearance over any structure or tree within
a two hundred (200) foot radius.
(3) Each WECS shall be equipped with both a manual and
automatic braking device capable of stopping WECS
operation in high wind (forty (40) miles per hour or greater)
or in conditions of imbalance.
d. Lightning Protection. Each WECS shall be grounded to protect
against natural lightning strikes in conformance with the National
Electrical Code as adopted by the City.
e. Tower Access. To prevent unauthorized climbing, WECS towers
must comply with one of the following provision:
(1) Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located within twelve
(12) feet of the ground.
(2) A locked anti-climb device shall be installed on the tower.
(3) Tower capable of being climbed shall be enclosed by a
locked, protective fence at least eight (8) feet high.
f. Signs: For all WECS, a sign or signs shall be posted on the tower,
transformer and substation warning of shall contain the following
information:
(1) Warning high voltage.
(2) Manufacturer’s name.
(3) Emergency phone number.
(4) Emergency shutdown procedures.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-42
g. Safety. For all guyed towers, visible and reflective objects, such as
plastic sleeves, reflectors or tape shall be placed on the guy wire
anchor points and along the outer and innermost guy wires up to a
height of eight (8) feet above the ground. Visible fencing shall be
installed around anchor points or guy wires.
h. Color and Finish. All wind turbines and towers shall be white, grey
or another non-obtrusive color. Finishes shall be matte or nonreflective.
i. Lighting: WECS shall not have affixed or attached any lights,
reflectors, flashers or any other illumination, except for illumination
devices required by FAA Regulations Part 77 “Objectives Affecting
Navigable Air Space” and Lighting.”
j. Electromagnetic Interference: WECS shall be designed and
constructed so as not to cause radio and television interference.
k. Noise Emissions: Noises emanating from the operation of WECS
shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota
Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Regulations NPC 1 and 2,
as amended.
l. Utility Company Interconnection: No WECS shall be
interconnected with the local electrical utility company until the
utility company and the City Engineer have commented upon such
proposal. The interconnection of the WECS with the utility
company shall adhere to the National Electrical Code as adopted
by the City.
9. Building Permit Required. A building permit shall be required for the
installation of a WECS in the City.
10. Inspection. The City hereby reserves the right upon issuing any interim
use permit to inspect the premises on which the WECS is located. If a
WECS is not maintained in operational condition and poses a potential
safety hazard, the owner shall upon written notice from the City, take
expeditious action to correct the situation.
11. Decommissioning: Each Commercial WECS shall have a
Decommissioning Plan outlining the anticipated means and cost of
removing WECS at the end of their serviceable life or upon becoming a
discontinued use. The cost estimates shall be made by a competent party;
such as a Professional Engineer, a contractor capable of
decommissioning or a person with suitable expertise or experience with
decommissioning. The plan shall also identify the financial resources that
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-43
will be available to pay for the decommissioning and removal of the WECS
and accessory facilities.
12. Discontinuation: A WECS shall be considered a discontinued use and the
interim use permit void after one (1) year without energy production,
unless a plan is developed and submitted to the Zoning Administrator
outlining the steps and schedule for returning the WECS to service. All
WECS and accessory facilities shall be removed to four feet below ground
level within ninety (90) days of the discontinuation of use.
B. Solar Energy Systems:
1. Accessory Use.
a. Solar energy systems shall be allowed as accessory in all zoning
districts in accordance with the standards in this Section.
b. The following systems shall be exempt from the requirements of
this section and shall be regulated as any other building element:
(1) Building integrated solar energy systems that are an integral
part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a
separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an
architectural element or structural component including, but
not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water solar energy systems
contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights and
awnings.
(2) Passive solar energy systems that capture solar light or heat
without transforming it into another form of energy or
transferring the heat via a heat exchanger.
2. System Standards:
a. Electrical:
(1) All utilities shall be installed underground.
(2) An exterior utility disconnect switch shall be installed at the
electric meter serving the property.
(3) Solar energy systems shall be grounded to protect against
natural lightning strikes in conformance with the National
Electrical Code as adopted by the City.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-44
(4) No solar energy system shall be interconnected with a local
electrical utility company until the utility company has
reviewed and commented upon it. The interconnection of the
solar energy system with the utility company shall adhere to
the National Electrical Code as adopted by the City.
b. Maximum Area: Ground mounted solar energy systems shall be
limited to a maximum area of:
(1) Residential Uses: 120 square feet.
(2) Non-Residential Uses: Five (5) Percent of Lot Area
c. Color: All roof-mounted solar energy systems shall use colors that
are the same or similar with the color of the roof material of the
building on which the system is mounted.
3. Location and Height Standards:
a. Roof mounting of solar energy systems shall be a permitted
accessory use subject to the following:
(1) The solar energy system shall comply with the maximum
height requirements of the applicable zoning district.
(2) The solar energy system shall not extend beyond the
perimeter of the exterior walls of the building on which it is
mounted.
b. Ground mounting of accessory solar energy systems shall be a
conditional use subject to the following:
(1) No solar energy system within the C-O District shall be
ground mounted.
(2) Yards:
(a) The solar energy system shall only be located in the
rear yard within residential districts.
(b) Within all other zoning districts, the solar energy
system may be located in any yard.
(3) Setbacks: All components of the solar energy system shall
comply with the following minimum setbacks from property
lines:
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-45
(a) Front Yard: Applicable principal building setback of
the respective zoning district.
(b) Side Yard: Ten (10) feet
(c) Rear Yard: Ten (10) feet
(4) Solar energy systems shall not encroach upon drainage and
utility easements.
(5) The solar energy system shall comply with the maximum
height requirements for accessory buildings for the
applicable zoning district.
4. Screening: Solar energy systems shall be screened from view of adjacent
residential zoning districts to the extent possible without affecting their
function.
5. Certification. The solar energy system shall be certified by Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc. and comply to the requirements of the International
Building Code.
6. Abandonment: Any solar energy system which is inoperable for twelve
(12) successive months shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall be
deemed a public nuisance. The owner shall remove the abandoned
system at their expense after obtaining a demolition permit.
7. Building Permit. A building permit as may be required by the Building
Code shall be obtained for any solar energy system prior to installation.
Subd. 22. Temporary Sales. Temporary, outdoor sales events may be allowed in
the C-1 and C-3 Districts by approval of the Zoning Administrator provided that:
A. Such activity is directed towards the general public and includes grand openings,
warehouse sales, sidewalk sales, inventory reduction or liquidation sales,
distressed merchandise sales, and seasonal merchandise sales, sales of
produce or other licensed transient sales and displays of materials that are
typically not sold or serviced on the site.
B. The following specific standards shall apply to all proposed temporary outdoor
sales activities allowed by this subsection and by city code business licensing
provisions in addition to other applicable building and safety code requirements
as determined by the zoning administrator:
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-46
1. The maximum total time for temporary outdoor sales activities shall be the
period specified in the administrative permit and, in no case, shall be
limited to no more than ninety (90) days per calendar year.
2. There shall be no more sales activities than those specified in the
administrative permit and, in no case, and no more than one outdoor sales
activity shall occur at any one time.
3. Sales activities may be conducted within a required yard provided the area
is paved and the activity does not interfere with parking, traffic circulation
or emergency vehicle access. Temporary sales on unpaved landscaped
areas is prohibited.
C. Tents, stands, and other similar temporary structures may be utilized, provided
they are clearly identified on the submitted plan and provided that it is determined
by the zoning administrator that they will not impair the parking capacity,
emergency access, or the safe and efficient movement of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic on or off the site.
D. The submitted plan shall clearly demonstrate that adequate off street parking for
the proposed event can and will be provided for the duration of the event.
Determination of compliance with this requirement shall be made by the zoning
Administrator who shall consider the nature of the event and the applicable
parking requirements of this Chapter. Consideration shall be given to the parking
needs and requirements of other occupants in the case of multiple-tenant
buildings. Parking on public right of way and streets is prohibited; except that
parking on local streets may be allowed on Saturday and Sunday only, provided
that the petitioner arranges for traffic control by authorized enforcement officers,
as approved in writing by the Hennepin or Wright County Sheriff’s office, at the
petitioner's expense.
E. Signage related to the event shall be in compliance with the temporary sign
standards of this Ordinance and shall be allowed for the duration of the event.
Special signage for purposes of traffic direction and control may be authorized by
the zoning administrator; the erection and removal of such signage shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
F. The approved permit shall be displayed on the premises for the duration of the
event.
G. Subject to compliance with the requirements of this section, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue the permit for the temporary sales within not more than
(60) days of a complete application being submitted including payment of fees as
established by Section 212 of the City Code. (Ordinance 12-02, adopted June
12, 2012)
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-47
Subd. 23. Antennas.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish predictable and balanced
regulations for the siting and screening of wireless communications equipment,
including technology associated with amateur radio service, satellite dishes,
personal wireless service, radio or television transmitting antennas, public safety
communication, and public utility microwave equipment, in order to
accommodate the growth of wireless communication systems within the City
while protecting the public against any adverse impacts on the City's aesthetic
resources and the public welfare. The provisions of this Section are intended to
maximize the use of existing towers, structures, buildings, and collocations to
accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to minimize the
number of towers needed to serve the community.
B. General Provisions: The following standards shall apply to all cellular telephone,
public utility, microwave, radio and television broadcast transmitting, radio and
television receiving, satellite dish and shortwave radio transmitting and receiving
antennas:
1. All obsolete and unused antennas shall be removed by the property owner
within twelve (12) months of cessation of operation at the site, unless an
exemption is granted by the Zoning Administrator.
2. All antennas shall be in compliance with all building and electrical code
requirements and as applicable shall require related permits.
3. Structural design, mounting and installation of the antenna shall be in
compliance with manufacturer's specifications, and as may be necessary
as determined by the zoning administrator and building official, shall be
verified and approved by a structural engineer.
4. When applicable, written authorization for antenna erection shall be
provided by the property owner.
5. No advertising message shall be affixed to the antenna structure or tower.
6. The height of the antenna shall be the minimum necessary to function
satisfactorily, as verified by an engineer or other qualified professional.
7. Antennas shall not be artificially illuminated unless required by law or by a
governmental agency to protect the public's health and safety.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-48
8. When applicable, proposals to erect new antennas shall be accompanied
by any required federal, state, or local agency licenses or permits.
9. If a new tower is to be constructed, it shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the applicant's
antennas and comparable antennas for at least one additional use,
including, but not limited to, other cellular communication companies, local
police, fire and ambulance companies. Towers must be designed to allow
for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept
antennas mounted at varying heights.
10. Towers under two hundred (200) feet in height shall be painted a noncontrasting
color consistent with the surrounding area such as: blue, gray,
brown, or silver, or have a galvanized or oxidized finish to reduce visual
impact.
11. Provide documentation or studies utilized to determine the necessary
location and height of the antenna, including the following analysis:
a. Existing service area of the provider.
b. Service area of the provider including the area at the height limits
for an antenna established by this Section.
c. Location, height and ability to collocate on other existing antenna
support structures owned by the applicant or other provider capable
of providing service to all or a portion of the proposed service area.
12. Tower Design:
a. Wireless communication towers shall be of a monopole design
unless the City Council determines that an alternative design
requested by the applicant would better blend into the surrounding
environment. This provision does not apply to amateur radio towers
or commercial and public radio or television towers.
b. Except for amateur radio towers, a proposal for a new tower shall
not be approved unless the zoning administrator finds that the
antennas cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved
tower, building, or structure within one mile search radius (1/2 mile
search radius for towers under one hundred (100) feet in height) of
the proposed tower due to one or more of the following reasons:
(1) The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity
of the existing or approved tower, building, or structure as
documented by a structural engineer, and the existing or
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-49
approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced
to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a
reasonable cost.
(2) The planned equipment would cause interference materially
impacting the usability of other existing or planned
equipment at the tower or building as documented by a
qualified engineer and interference cannot be prevented at a
reasonable cost.
(3) Existing or approved towers, buildings, or structures within
the search radius cannot accommodate the planned
equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as
documented by a qualified engineer.
(4) Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate
the antennas upon an existing or approved tower or
structure.
(5) Existing or approved towers, buildings, or other structures do
not exist in the service area, or do not meet the needs of the
user. Documentation shall be provided at the time of
application clearly demonstrating why existing structures do
not meet the needs of the users.
(6) The applicant shall demonstrate in writing that a good faith
effort to collocate on existing towers or structures was made,
but an agreement could not be reached.
13. Setbacks. All towers shall comply with each of the minimum setback
requirements:
a. Towers shall meet the principal structure setbacks of the underlying
zoning district with the exception of industrial zoning districts, where
the tower may encroach into the rear setback area, provided that
the rear property line abuts another industrial use and zoning
district and the tower does not encroach upon any easements.
b. Setback requirements for all personal wireless service or
commercial and public radio and television transmitting antennas,
public safety communication antennas, and public utility towers,
may be reduced or its location in relation to a public street modified
at the discretion of the City Council, to allow the integration of the
structure into an existing or proposed structure, such as a light
standard, power line support device, or similar structure.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-50
C. Accessory and Secondary Use Antennas: The following standards shall apply to
all accessory and secondary use antennas including radio and television
receiving antennas, satellite dishes, TVROs (television receive only) two meters
(2 m) or less in diameter, shortwave radio dispatching antennas, or those
necessary for the operation of electronic equipment including radio and television
receivers, but not including antennas used in the amateur radio service regulated
by this Section.
1. Single satellite TVROs accessory to a residential use shall not exceed one
meter (1 m) in diameter.
2. Accessory or secondary use antennas shall not be erected in any required
yard (except a rear yard) or within public or private utility and drainage
easements, or buffer yard, and shall be set back a minimum of ten (10)
feet from all lot lines.
3. Guywires or guywire anchors shall not be erected within public or private
utility and drainage easements, and shall be set back a minimum of five
(5) feet from all lot lines.
4. Height:
a. The height of accessory or secondary use antennas and necessary
support structures or towers, whether freestanding or mounted on
another structure, may extend a maximum of fifteen (15) feet above
the height restriction for the affected zoning district.
b. A height greater than fifteen (15) feet above the height restriction
for the affected zoning district may be allowed by approval of an
interim use permit provided that the additional height is the
minimum required for the antenna to function properly.
D. Amateur Radio Service Antennas. The following standards shall apply to all
accessory use antennas and towers used in the amateur radio service:
1. Exempt Provisions: Antennas and support structures for federally licensed
amateur radio stations and used in the amateur radio service shall be
exempt from the requirement of subsections Subd. 23.C.3, 6, 9 and 11 of
this chapter.
2. Installation Requirements: Antennas and towers used in the amateur radio
service shall be installed in accordance with the instructions furnished by
the manufacturer of the antenna or tower. Because of the experimental
nature of the amateur radio service, antennas mounted on such towers
may be modified or changed at any time so long as the published
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-51
allowable load on the tower is not exceeded and the structure of the tower
remains in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
3. Location:
a. Amateur radio service antennas and towers shall not be erected in
any required yard (except a rear yard) or within a public or private
utility and drainage easement, and shall be set back a minimum of
ten (10) feet from all lot lines.
b. Guywires or guywire anchors shall not be erected within public or
private utility and drainage easements or required buffer yard, and
shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from all lot lines.
4. Tower Design:
a. Height:
(1) Except as provided for in subsection 4.a(2) of this section,
antennas and towers used in the amateur radio service may
extend a maximum of two (2) times the maximum height
restriction for the specific zoning district when in use. When
not in use, such equipment shall be restricted to a height not
greater than the height of the principal structure or thirty five
(35) feet, whichever is higher.
(2) Vertical pole antennas not exceeding three (3) inches in
diameter that are utilized in the amateur radio service may
extend to a maximum height of forty five (45) feet.
b. Fail Points: Amateur radio towers shall have fail points so as to
assure that the structure will collapse on the subject site and not
extend to and jeopardize life or adjacent property.
5. More Than One Tower: The installation of more than one tower or support
structure per property shall require approval of an interim use permit.
E. Personal Wireless Service Antennas.
1. Antennas Located Upon A Public Or Quasi-Public Structure Or Existing
Tower: Personal wireless service antennas located upon public structures
or existing towers shall require approval of the Zoning Administrator and
shall comply with the following standards:
a. The applicant shall demonstrate by providing a
coverage/interference analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-52
qualified engineer that location of the antennas as proposed is
necessary to meet the frequency reuse and spacing needs of the
personal wireless service system and to provide adequate wireless
coverage and capacity to areas not currently served.
b. Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed
within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment
building is necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching
equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal use
and shall be screened from view by landscaping where appropriate.
c. The antennas shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Antennas mounted on public structures shall not extend
more than fifteen (15) feet above the structural height of the
structure to which they are attached.
(2) Roof mounted antennas shall not extend more than ten (10)
feet above the roof, and shall be set back at least the height
of the antenna structure from the roof edge.
(3) Wall or facade mounted antennas may not exceed more
than five (5) feet above the roof line and must be constructed
of a material or color which matches the exterior of the
building.
(4) Antennas may be mounted to quasi-public structures that
are allowed to exceed the maximum height requirements of
the base district pursuant to subsection Subd. 23.C.12.b of
this Section. The location of antennas on such structures
may not exceed the height of the structure and must be
architecturally compatible in form and color.
2. Antennas Not Located Upon A Public Structure Or Existing Tower:
Personal wireless service antenna not located upon a public or quasipublic
structure or existing tower shall require the processing of an interim
use permit and shall comply with the following standards:
a. The applicant shall demonstrate by providing a
coverage/interference analysis and capacity analysis prepared by a
qualified engineer that location of the antennas as proposed is
necessary to meet the frequency reuse and spacing needs of the
wireless system and to provide adequate portable coverage and
capacity to areas not currently adequately served.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-53
b. If no existing structure which meets the height requirements for the
antennas is available for mounting purposes, the antennas may be
mounted on a single ground mounted pole provided that:
(1) The pole does not exceed seventy five (75) feet in height,
except as may be allowed by approval of an interim use
permit.
(2) The setback of the pole from the nearest residential property
line is not less than the height of the antenna. Exceptions to
such setback may be granted if a qualified engineer
specifies in writing that any collapse of the pole will occur
within a lesser distance under all foreseeable circumstances.
c. Transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed
within an existing structure whenever possible. If a new equipment
building is necessary for transmitting, receiving and switching
equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal use
and shall be screened from view by landscaping where appropriate.
d. At the discretion of the City, a security fence not greater than eight
(8) feet in height with a maximum opacity of fifty (50) percent shall
be provided around the support structure.
F. Radio, Television and Utility Microwave Antennas: Commercial and public radio
and television transmitting and public utility microwave antennas shall comply
with the following standards:
1. Such antennas shall be considered an allowed interim use within the
industrial districts.
2. The antennas, transmitting towers, or array of towers shall be located on a
continuous parcel having a setback equal to the height of the antenna,
transmitting tower, or array of towers measured between the base of the
antenna or tower located nearest a property line and said property line,
unless a qualified structural engineer specifies in writing that the collapse
of any antenna or tower will occur within a lesser distance under all
foreseeable circumstances.
3. Unless the antenna is mounted on an existing structure, at the discretion
of the City, a fence not greater than eight (8) feet in height with a
maximum opacity of fifty (50) percent shall be provided around the support
structure and other equipment.
4. Towers in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet may be of a lattice
design.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Additional Requirements
9-54
G. Additional Submittal Requirement: In addition to the information required
elsewhere in this Chapter, development applications for towers, excluding
amateur radio towers, shall include the following supplemental information:
1. A letter of intent committing the tower owner and their successors to allow
the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet
reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
2. A copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease which requires the
applicant to remove the tower and associated facilities when they are
abandoned, unused or become hazardous shall be submitted to the City.
H. Processing: Applications required by this Section to locate a personal wireless
service antenna shall be processed in accordance with FCC rules where more
restrictive than Minnesota statutes 15.99:
1. The City Council shall act on wireless facility requests within a period not
longer than ninety (90) days from submission of the request for
collocations of a personal wireless service antenna upon an existing tower
or structure.
2. The time frames for action by the City Council may be extended by mutual
consent of the applicant and Zoning Administrator.
3. An application under this chapter shall not be denied solely on the basis
that service is available from another provider..(Ordinacne 13-02, adopted
May 14, 2013)
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Classification of Use Districts
10-1
1001.10 CLASSIFICATION OF USE DISTRICTS
Subd. 1. Establishment of Districts. For the purpose of this chapter, the City is
hereby divided into the classes of districts which shall be designated as follows:
2 A. Residential Districts.
1. “A-R”, Agricultural Residential
2. “R-1”, Single Family Residential
3. “R-2”, Medium Density Residential
4. “R-3”, Multiple Family Residential
5. “R-4”, Senior Residential
6. “R-6”, Residential Manufactured Home Park
B. Non-Residential Districts.
1. “C-O”, Downtown Commercial
2. “C-1”, Commercial Service
3. “C-2”, Commercial Shopping Center
4. “C-3”, Commercial Highway
5. “I-1”, Industrial
C. Special Districts.
1. “PUD”, Planned Unit Development
2. “FP”, Floodplain District
3 3. “POC”, Public/Open/Conservation District
Subd. 2. Zoning Map. The location and boundaries of the districts established by
this text are hereby set forth on the “Rockford, Minnesota Zoning Map”; said map and all
notations, references, and data shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference
into this chapter and shall be as much a part of it as if all were fully described herein. It
shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator to maintain said map, and
amendments thereto shall be recorded on said zoning map within thirty days after
official publication of amendments. The official zoning map shall be kept on file in the
City Hall.
Reference in this chapter to “A-R”, “POC”, “R”, “C”, and “I” Districts shall refer to the use
district groups set forth above, and reference to specific use districts shall be by
reference to the individual districts listed above as “R-1”, “C-1”, etc. The Planned Unit
Development (PUD), created in this chapter and the “Floodway Overlay District”, “Flood
Fringe Overlay District”, and “Floodplain Overlay District” created in other portions of the
code, contain specific zoning regulations superimposed upon the other zoning districts
and supersede the underlying zoning district regulations only to the extent expressed in
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Classification of Use Districts
10-2
the provisions of the overlay zoning district regulations. In all other respects, the
regulations in the underlying zoning use districts are applicable.
Subd. 3. Zoning District Boundaries. The boundaries between districts are,
unless otherwise indicated, either the center line of streets, alleys, or railroad rights-ofway,
or lot lines, or section lines or such center lines or lot lines extended or lines
parallel or perpendicular thereto.
Subd. 4. Future Annexations. Any land annexed to the City in the future shall be
placed in the “AR”, Agricultural Single Family Residential District until another zoning
district is approved by action of the City Council after receipt of the recommendation of
the Planning Commission.
Subd. 5. Residence Districts. Residence districts are established to accomplish
the general purposes of this chapter and for the following specific purposes:
A. To preserve the existing living qualities of residential neighborhoods.
B. To insure future high quality amenities, including, but not limited to, the provision
of adequate light, air, privacy, freedom from noise, and convenience of access to
property.
C. To insure that new developments and residences are provided with the required
public services and facilities without placing any undue financial burden upon
existing city residents and taxpayers.
D. To increase convenience and comfort by providing usable open space and
recreation space on the same lot as the housing units or within close proximity in
a neighborhood park.
E. To prevent additions or alterations of structures which would damage the
character or desirability of existing residential areas.
F. To protect residential areas to the extent possible and appropriate in each area
against unduly heavy traffic volumes.
G. To encourage a variety of dwelling types and wide range of population densities
consistent with the comprehensive plan.
H. To preserve and enhance the natural environment as land becomes urbanized.
I. To preserve, maintain, and increase the value of real property.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Classification of Use Districts
10-3
Subd. 6. Conditions. A conditional use permit will be granted for use to be known
as Temporary Accessory Apartment Rental and Owner Occupied Single-Family
dwellings, provided that the following standards and criteria are met:
A. The apartment will be a complete, separate housekeeping unit, including kitchen
and bathroom facilities that can be isolated from the original unit.
B. Only one apartment will be created within a single-family house.
C. The owners of the residence in which the accessory unit is created shall occupy
at least one of the dwelling units on the premises, except for bona fide temporary
absences.
D. The accessory apartment shall be designed so that, to the degree reasonably
feasible the appearance of the building remains that of a single-family residence.
In general, any new entrances shall be located on the side or in the rear of the
building, and any additions in relationship to the accessory apartment shall not
increase the square footage of the original house by more than ten percent
(10%).
E. The design inside and size of the apartment shall conform with all applicable
standards in the zoning, health, building, and other applicable ordinances.
F. At least three off-street parking spaces are available and sufficiently screened for
use by the owner-occupants) and tenants (s) and additional parking may be
required by the planning commission per ordinance requirements.
G. Any appropriate or more stringent conditions deemed necessary by the City
Council, Planning Commission, and/or Zoning Board of Appeals to protect health,
safety and welfare, and the single-family character of the neighborhood.
H. The conditional use permit shall be reviewed annually and/or be subject to
complaints.
Subd. 7. Commercial Districts. Commercial districts are established to
accomplish the general purpose of this chapter and the comprehensive plan and for the
following specific reasons:
A. To group compatible uses which will tend to draw trade that is naturally
interchangeable and so promotes the business prosperity and public
convenience.
B. To provide an adequate supply of businesses and professional services to meet
the needs of the residents.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Classification of Use Districts
10-4
C. To promote a high quality of total commercial design and development that
produces a positive visual image and minimizes the effects of traffic congestion,
noise, odor, glare, and similar safety problems.
Subd. 8. Industrial Districts. The planned industrial district is established to
accomplish the general purpose of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan and for the
following specific reasons:
A. Develop major centers of complexes in separate areas to allow for distribution of
peak period traffic, efficient access, effective distribution of primary water and
sewage facilities, and proper utilization of land suited for industrial development.
B. Present expansion of scattered industrial operations.
C. Allow mining and extraction operations by conditional use permits to assure
planning for maintenance of the land for subsequent use.
D. Limit most industrial uses to planned industrial parks where uniform performance
standards and land use regulations can be applied.
E. Protect industrial areas from encroachment by non-industrial uses.
F. Allow a limited amount of service/business uses, by conditional use permit, which
are essential to the operation of the planned industrial district and which provide
essential services to employees within the district.
G. To preserve, maintain, and increase the value of real property.
Subd. 9. Administrative Procedure For Development Of Non-residence
Districts.
A. A complete general development plan as herein required shall be filed with
petitions for rezoning to establish or expand a non-residence district as set forth
in this Chapter.
B. Upon finding that the proposed zoning district will constitute a district of sustained
desirability, will be consistent with long range comprehensive plans for the City
and meet the requirements of the district, the council may establish such district.
The general development plan, together with such covenants, deed restrictions,
controls, or special conditions, or conditional use permits as may be attached to
it, shall be filed and recorded by the owner or developer in the office of the
Hennepin/Wright County Register of Deeds and shall become a part of this
chapter establishing the zoning change. Any substantial change to the general
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Classification of Use Districts
10-5
development plan will require re-submission to the Planning Commission for
review and the council for approval.
C. The final platting of such land shall be subject to such requirements for approval,
recording, and the installation of improvements as required by this and other city
regulations.
D. Prior to obtaining a building permit or constructing any building improvements on
an individual lot or site within any non-residence district, a site plan as herein
required shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Planning Commission and
approved by the council.
E. If a zoning change is approved, the first phase of construction must begin and
reasonable progress made within two years after approval of the general
development plan and zoning change by ordinance or the district maybe zoned
back to its original zoning district classification or other appropriate zoning district
classification.
Subd. 10. Performance Standards.
A. Intent. It is the intent of this subdivision to provide that all non-residential uses
and related activities shall be established and maintained with proper
appearance from streets and adjoining properties and to provide that each such
use shall not interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of adjoining properties by
the control of the following items.
B. Standards.
7 1. Landscaping. All yards shall either be open landscaped and green areas
or be left in a natural state, in compliance with Section 1001.09, Subd. 3.
Yards to be landscaped shall be landscaped attractively with lawn, trees,
shrubs, etc. Any areas left in a natural state shall be kept free of litter,
debris and noxious weeds. Buffer yards shall be provided where required
per Section 1001.09, Subd. 2. (
2. Glare. Glare, whether direct or reflected, such as from floodlights or high
temperature processes, and as differentiated from general illumination,
shall not be visible at any property line.
3. Exterior Lighting. Any lights used for exterior illumination shall not be
visible at any property line.
4. Vibration. Vibration shall not be discernible at any property line to
the human sense of feeling for three minutes or more duration in any
one hour. Vibration of any kind shall not produce at any time an
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Classification of Use Districts
10-6
acceleration of more than 0.1 gravities nor shall result in any combination
of amplitudes and frequencies beyond the "safe" range of Table VII United
States Bureau of Mines Bulletin No. 422, “Seismic Effects of Quarry
Blasting,” on any structure. The methods and equations of said Bulletin
No. 422 shall be used to compute all values for the enforcement of this
provision. Said Bulletin is incorporated herein by reference.
5. Noise Odors, Smoke, Dust, Fumes, Water and Waste.
a. The design, construction and performance of all non-residential
uses shall be in conformance with city, county, and State of
Minnesota standards and regulations.
b. The storage of trash shall be within the principal buildings or
otherwise shall be within an accessory enclosure complete with
roof and walls of the same exterior finish as the main structure and
screened from all residence districts with an adequate buffer.
6. Compliance. In order to insure compliance with the performance
standards set forth above, the council may require the owner or operator
of any use to have made such investigations and/or tests as may be
required to show adherence to the performance standards. Such
investigation and/or tests as are required to be made shall be carried out
by an independent testing organization as may be selected by the city.
The costs incurred in such investigation or testing shall be ordered by the
owner or operator and shared equally by the owner or operator and the
city unless the investigation and tests disclose noncompliance with the
performance standards, in which case the investigation or testing shall be
paid by the owner or operator.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance AR District
11-1
1001.11. “A-R”, AGRICULTURAL RESIDENTIAL
Subd. 1. Purpose. The A-R, Agricultural Residential is for annexed land and is the
first zoning designation preliminary to a rezoning. It is intended for agricultural and
single family uses.
Subd. 2. Permitted Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are permitted uses in an A-R District:
A. Agriculture, the keeping of livestock and poultry, nurseries, greenhouses for
growing only, landscape gardening and tree farms, including sale of products
grown on premises.
B. Golf courses (except club houses, miniature courses and driving tees operated
for commercial purposes.
C. Residential care facilities licensed by the state and regulated, located and
operated per state statutes.
D. Single family detached dwellings.
23Subd. 3. Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in the A-R District and are governed by Section 1001.03,
Subd. 6 of this Chapter.
A. Non-farm related seasonal produce sales as a principal use provided that:
1. Retail produce sales may only be conducted on the subject site between
April 1st and October 31st of any given year.
2. The sales area devoted to produce not grown on the subject site shall be
limited to not more than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the
principal use.
3. The area devoted to retail sales of non-produce good shall be limited to
not more than five (5) percent of the gross floor area of the principal use.
4. Municipal sanitary sewer and water services is not presently available to
the subject site.
5. The use has frontage to an arterial or collector street and direct access
from a paved City street.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance AR District
11-2
6. Adequate off-street parking space and surface is provided and no parking
related to such sales occurs on the public right-of-way.
7. Signs.
a. Are located only on the subject site and are not more than one
hundred (100) feet from the point of sale.
b. Are limited to no more than two (2) structures totally not more than
sixteen (16) square feet.
c. Are erected and removed daily and are not to be displayed at times
when the sales operation is closed.
B. Dog kennels provided that:
1. No person shall maintain or operate any kennel or shelter without a
license as regulated by the City Code.
2. A minimum lot size of one (1) acre is required to be licensed for operation
of a kennel or shelter.
3. Every kennel or shelter shall be enclosed or fenced in such manner as to
prevent the running at large or escape of animals confined therein.
4. Both dog kennels and cat shelters shall be open for inspection by the City
authorities at any time.
5. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep three (3) or more dogs
and/or cats over six (6) months of age on his/her premises in the City
without obtaining a kennel license pursuant to this Section and the City
Code.
C. Home occupations provided that the following general provisions are met:
1. No home occupation shall produce light, glare, noise, fumes, odor, or
vibration that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or
nearby property.
2. No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will create
electrical interference to surrounding properties. No equipment shall be
use which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television
receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in the voltage off the
premises.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance AR District
11-3
3. Any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the premises, not more than ten (10) percent of the floor
area of the dwelling unit shall be permanently set aside to be used in the
conduct of the home occupation. It shall not change the residential
character thereof, and shall result in no incompatibility or disturbance to
the surrounding residential uses.
4. No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or involve
construction features not customarily found in dwellings except where
required to comply with local and state fire and police recommendations.
5. There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in the
home occupation, except personal vehicles used in the home occupation
which comply with applicable provisions of this Chapter may be parked on
the site.
6. The home occupation shall meet all applicable fire and building codes.
7. There shall be no exterior display or exterior signs or interior display or
interior signs which are visible from outside the dwelling with the exception
of directional and identification/business signs to the extent authorized by
the provisions of Section 1001.08 of this Chapter.
8. All home occupations shall comply with the provisions of the City Code.
9. No home occupations hall be conducted between the hours of 10:00 PM
and 7:00 AM unless approved by the City Council and said occupation is
contained entirely within the principal building and will not require any onstreet
parking facilities.
10. Home occupations shall not create a parking demand in excess of that
which can be accommodated in an existing driveway, where no vehicle is
parked closer than fifteen (15) feet from the curb line or edge of paved
surface.
11. No person other than those who customarily reside on the premises shall
be employed as part of the home occupation.
12. All permitted home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the
principal building and may not be conducted in an accessory building.
13. Permitted home occupations include and are limited to: art studio,
dressmaking, secretarial services, family day care, foster care, offices,
teaching with musical, dancing and other instructions which consist of no
more than one pupil at a time, and similar uses.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance AR District
11-4
14. The home occupation shall not involve any of the following: repair service
or manufacturing which requires equipment other than found in a home;
teaching which customarily consists of more than one (1) pupil at a time;
over-the-counter sale of merchandise produced off the premises.
D. Farms, farmsteads and farming.
Subd. 4. Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are permitted accessory uses in the “A-R” District:
A. Barns, stables, silos, other agricultural buildings.
B. Fences as herein regulated.
C. Keeping of not more than two (2) boarders or roomers by a resident family.
D. Living quarters of persons employed on the premises.
E. Parking as herein regulated.
F. Private garage.
G. Secondary uses customarily incident to the permitted or conditional uses allowed
in the district.
H. Signs as herein regulated.
23Subd. 5. Conditional Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are conditional uses allowed in an A-R District: (Requires a conditional use
permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Section 1001.03, Subd. 5 of
this Chapter.)
A. Cemeteries, provided that:
1. The site accesses on a major collector.
2. The site is landscaped in accordance with Section 1001.09 of this
Chapter.
3. The provisions of this Chapter are considered and determined to be
satisfied.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance AR District
11-5
B. Municipal, administrative or service buildings or uses including public and semipublic
institutions, libraries, museums, post offices, etc., except industrial type
uses provided that:
1. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 1001.09 of this
Chapter.
2. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
C. Private recreation including golf club house, country club, swimming or tennis
club provided that:
1. The principal use, function or activity is open, outdoor in character.
2 Not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the site shall be covered
by buildings or structures.
3. When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped for the protection of the abutting use, according
to the provisions of Section 1001.09 of this Chapter.
4. The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the
minimum established for the district.
5. The use will not negatively impact the natural setting intended for this
district or neighboring residential uses.
6. The traffic generated by the use can be adequately accommodated
(volume and weight) upon City streets serving the use.
7. An adequate septic system and well can be established on the site.
D. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community
centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior
high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches,
chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
1. Side yards shall be double that required for the district.
2. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section 1001.09 of this Chapter.
3. Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site in
compliance with section 1001.05 of this chapter and that such parking is
Rockford Zoning Ordinance AR District
11-6
adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding and abutting
residential uses in compliance with Section 1001.09 of this Chapter.
4. Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by section 1001.05 of this Chapter.
5. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
Subd. 6. Lot Area and Setback Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an A-R District, subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
A. Lot Area Requirements.
1. Lot area: Not less than five (5) acres.
2. Lot width: Not less than three hundred (300) feet.
3. Lot depth: Not less than three hundred (300) feet.
B. Principal Structure Setback Requirements.
1. Front Yard:
a. One or Two Family: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
b. Other Uses: Not less than one hundred (100) feet.
2. Side Yard:
a. One or Two Family: Not less than fifteen (15) feet, nor less than fifty
(50) feet abutting a street.
b. Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
c. Other Uses: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
d. Detached access uses: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
e. Attached access uses: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance AR District
11-7
3. Rear Yard:
a. One or Two Family: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet, nor less
than fifty (50) feet abutting a street.
b. Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
c. Other Uses: Not less than forty (40) feet.
d. Detached access uses: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
e. Abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
Subd. 7. Other Requirements.
A. Any development in the A-R district shall be required to submit a plan indicating
further subdivision of the property to include public sanitary sewer and water.
B. All unsewered development in the A-R must meet state and local on-site sewer
requirements.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-1 District
12-1
1001.12 “R-1” SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
Subd 1. Purpose. The purpose of the R-1, Single Family Residence District is for
low density single family dwelling development as an extension of existing residential
areas and to allow low density development at about two or three dwelling units per
acre within the areas indicated as low density residential in the comprehensive plan. A
full range of public services and facilities must be made available to these
developments.
Subd. 2. Permitted Use. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are permitted uses in an R-1 District:
33A. Day care serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons in a single-family detached
dwelling.
B. Essential services.
C. Golf courses (except club houses, miniature courses and driving tees operated
for commercial purposes).
D. Public parks, playgrounds, recreational uses, wildlife areas, and game refuges.
33E. Residential care facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons in a single-family
detached dwelling.
F. Single family detached dwellings.
23Subd. 3. Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in the R-1 District and are governed by Section 1001.03,
Subd. 6 of this Chapter.
A. Keeping of horses as regulated by Section 502 of this Ordinance.
B. Dog kennels provided that:
1. No person shall maintain or operate any kennel or shelter without a
license as regulated by the City Code.
2. A minimum lot size of one (1) acre is required to be licensed for operation
of a kennel or shelter.
3. Every kennel or shelter shall be enclosed or fenced in such manner as to
prevent the running at large or escape of animals confined therein.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-1 District
12-2
4. Both dog kennels and cat shelters shall be open for inspection by the City
authorities at any time.
5. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep three (3) or more dogs
and/or cats over six (6) months of age on his/her premises in the City
without obtaining a kennel license pursuant to this Section and the City
Code.
C. Home occupations provided that the following general provisions are met:
1. No home occupation shall produce light, glare, noise, fumes, odor, or
vibration that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or
nearby property.
2. No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will create
electrical interference to surrounding properties. No equipment shall be
use which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television
receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in the voltage off the
premises.
3. Any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the premises, not more than ten (10) percent of the floor
area of the dwelling unit shall be permanently set aside to be used in the
conduct of the home occupation. It shall not change the residential
character thereof, and shall result in no incompatibility or disturbance to
the surrounding residential uses.
4. No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or involve
construction features not customarily found in dwellings except where
required to comply with local and state fire and police recommendations.
5. There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in the
home occupation, except personal vehicles used in the home occupation
which comply with applicable provisions of this Chapter may be parked on
the site.
6. The home occupation shall meet all applicable fire and building codes.
7. There shall be no exterior display or exterior signs or interior display or
interior signs which are visible from outside the dwelling with the exception
of directional and identification/business signs to the extent authorized by
the provisions of Section 1001.08 of this Chapter.
8. All home occupations shall comply with the provisions of the City Code.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-1 District
12-3
9. No home occupations hall be conducted between the hours of 10:00 PM
and 7:00 AM unless approved by the City Council and said occupation is
contained entirely within the principal building and will not require any onstreet
parking facilities.
10. Home occupations shall not create a parking demand in excess of that
which can be accommodated in an existing driveway, where no vehicle is
parked closer than fifteen (15) feet from the curb line or edge of paved
surface.
11. No person other than those who customarily reside on the premises shall
be employed as part of the home occupation.
12. All permitted home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the
principal building and may not be conducted in an accessory building.
13. Permitted home occupations include and are limited to: art studio,
dressmaking, secretarial services, family day care, foster care, offices,
teaching with musical, dancing and other instructions which consist of no
more than one pupil at a time, and similar uses.
14. The home occupation shall not involve any of the following: repair service
or manufacturing which requires equipment other than found in a home;
teaching which customarily consists of more than one (1) pupil at a time;
over-the-counter sale of merchandise produced off the premises.
D. Farms, farmsteads and farming.
Subd. 4. Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are permitted accessory uses in the R-1 District:
A. Private garages and off-street parking.
B. Fences as herein regulated.
C. Living quarters within the principal structure of persons employed on the
premises.
D. Keeping of not more than 2 boarders or roomers by a resident family.
E. Signs as herein regulated.
33F. Day care center and nursery school when operated in churches or public or
private schools.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-1 District
12-4
23Subd. 5. Conditional Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are conditional uses in an R-1 District. (Requires a conditional use permit
based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Section 1001.03, Subd. 5 of this
Chapter.)
A. Accessory temporary apartments provided that:
1. All provision within Section 1001.09 Subd. 17 are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
2. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
B. Municipal, administrative or service buildings or uses including public and semipublic
institutions, libraries, museums, post offices, etc., except industrial type
uses provided that:
1. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 1001.09 of this
Chapter.
2. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
C. Private recreation including golf club house, country club, swimming or tennis
club provided that:
1. The principal use, function or activity is open, outdoor in character.
2. Not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the site shall be covered
by buildings or structures.
3. When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped for the protection of the abutting use, according
to the provisions of Section 1001.09 of this Chapter.
4. The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the
minimum established for the district.
5. The use will not negatively impact the natural setting intended for this
district or neighboring residential uses.
6. The traffic generated by the use can be adequately accommodated
(volume and weight) upon City streets serving the use.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-1 District
12-5
7. An adequate septic system and well can be established on the site.
D. (Reserved)
(Amended by Ordinance 01-04, passed June 26, 2001.)
E. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community
centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior
high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches,
chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
1. Side yards shall be double that required for the district.
2. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section 1001.09 of this Chapter.
3. Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site in
compliance with section 1001.05 of this Chapter and that such parking is
adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding and abutting
residential uses in compliance with Section 1001.09 of this Chapter.
4. Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by Section 1001.05 of this Chapter.
5. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
Subd. 6. Lot Area and Setback Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an “R-1” District, subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
A. Lot Area Requirements.
1. Lot Area.
a. Single Family: Not less than 14,500 square feet.
b. Other Uses: Not less than three (3) acres.
2. Lot Width:
24 a. Single Family: Not less than ninety (90) feet for interior lots and not
less than one hundred ten (110) feet for corner lots.
b. Other Uses: Not less than two hundred (200) feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-1 District
12-6
3. Lot depth:
a. Single Family: Not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet.
b. Other Uses: Not less than two hundred (200) feet.
B. Principal Structure Setback Requirements:
1. Front Yard:
a. Dwellings abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
24 b. One or Two Family: Not less than thirty (30) feet for the principal
building, except that the door of an attached garage facing a public
right-of-way shall be set back not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
c. Other Uses: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
2. Side Yard:
a. One or Two Family: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
b. Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
c. Other Uses: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
d. Detached accessory uses: Not less than eight (8) feet.
e. Attached accessory uses: Not less than ten (10) feet.
3. Rear Yard:
a. One or Two Family: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
c. Other Uses: Not less than forty (40) feet.
d. Detached accessory uses: Not less than eight (8) feet.
e. Abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-1 District
12-7
Subd. 7. Lot Coverage and Height. The following lot coverage and height
requirements shall be observed in an R-1 District.
31 A. Maximum impervious surface coverage on a lot shall not exceed thirty (30)
percent.
B. All principal structures shall be limited to a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet.
C. All accessory structures shall be limited to a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-2 District
13-1
1001.13 R-2, MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
24 Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of the R-2, Medium Density Residence District is
for medium density of four (4) to eight (8) units per acre to provide a variety of housing
types and ownership/rental options while keeping the low densities associated with
single family districts.
Subd. 2. Permitted Use. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are permitted uses in an R-2 District:
33A. Day care serving fourteen (14) or fewer persons in a single-family detached
dwelling.
B. Essential services.
C. Golf courses (except club houses, miniature courses and driving tees operated
for commercial purposes.
33D. Residential care facilities serving sixteen (6) or fewer persons.
E. Single family detached dwellings.
F. Two family dwellings.
G. Townhouses (not to exceed four (4) units per building).
23Subd. 3. Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in the R-2 District and are governed by Section 1001.03,
Subd. 6 of this Chapter.
A. Dog kennels provided that:
1. No person shall maintain or operate any kennel or shelter without a
license as regulated by the City Code.
2. A minimum lot size of one (1) acre is required to be licensed for operation
of a kennel or shelter.
3. Every kennel or shelter shall be enclosed or fenced in such manner as to
prevent the running at large or escape of animals confined therein.
4. Both dog kennels and cat shelters shall be open for inspection by the City
authorities at any time.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-2 District
13-2
5. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep three (3) or more dogs
and/or cats over six (6) months of age on his/her premises in the City
without obtaining a kennel license pursuant to this Section and the City
Code.
B. Home occupations provided that the following general provisions are met:
1. No home occupation shall produce light, glare, noise, fumes, odor, or
vibration that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or
nearby property.
2. No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will create
electrical interference to surrounding properties. No equipment shall be
use which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television
receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in the voltage off the
premises.
3. Any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the premises, not more than ten (10) percent of the floor
area of the dwelling unit shall be permanently set aside to be used in the
conduct of the home occupation. It shall not change the residential
character thereof, and shall result in no incompatibility or disturbance to
the surrounding residential uses.
4. No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or involve
construction features not customarily found in dwellings except where
required to comply with local and state fire and police recommendations.
5. There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in the
home occupation, except personal vehicles used in the home occupation
which comply with applicable provisions of this Chapter may be parked on
the site.
6. The home occupation shall meet all applicable fire and building codes.
7. There shall be no exterior display or exterior signs or interior display or
interior signs which are visible from outside the dwelling with the exception
of directional and identification/business signs to the extent authorized by
the provisions of Section 1001.08 of this Chapter.
8. All home occupations shall comply with the provisions of the City Code.
9. No home occupations hall be conducted between the hours of 10:00 PM
and 7:00 AM unless approved by the City Council and said occupation is
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-2 District
13-3
contained entirely within the principal building and will not require any onstreet
parking facilities.
10. Home occupations shall not create a parking demand in excess of that
which can be accommodated in an existing driveway, where no vehicle is
parked closer than fifteen (15) feet from the curb line or edge of paved
surface.
11. No person other than those who customarily reside on the premises shall
be employed as part of the home occupation.
12. All permitted home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the
principal building and may not be conducted in an accessory building.
13. Permitted home occupations include and are limited to: art studio,
dressmaking, secretarial services, family day care, foster care, offices,
teaching with musical, dancing and other instructions which consist of no
more than one pupil at a time, and similar uses.
14. The home occupation shall not involve any of the following: repair service
or manufacturing which requires equipment other than found in a home;
teaching which customarily consists of more than one (1) pupil at a time;
over-the-counter sale of merchandise produced off the premises.
C. Farms, farmsteads and farming.
Subd. 4. Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are permitted accessory uses in the R-2 District:
A. All accessory uses allowed in an R-1 District.
23Subd. 5. Conditional Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are conditional uses in an R-2 District. (Requires a conditional use permit
based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Section 1001.03, Subd. 5 of this
Chapter.)
A. Municipal, administrative or service buildings or uses including public and semipublic
institutions, libraries, museums, post offices, etc., except industrial type
uses provided that:
1. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 1001.09 of this
Chapter.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-2 District
13-4
2. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
B. Private recreation including golf club house, country club, swimming or tennis
club provided that:
1. The principal use, function or activity is open, outdoor in character.
2. Not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the site shall be covered
by buildings or structures.
3. When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped for the protection of the abutting use, according
to the provisions of Section 1001.09 of this Chapter.
4. The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the
minimum established for the district.
5. The use will not negatively impact the natural setting intended for this
district or neighboring residential uses.
6. The traffic generated by the use can be adequately accommodated
(volume and weight) upon City streets serving the use.
7. An adequate septic system and well can be established on the site.
14 C. (reserved)
D. Public or semi-public recreational buildings and neighborhood or community
centers; public and private educational institutions limited to elementary, junior
high and senior high schools; and religious institutions such as churches,
chapels, temples and synagogues provided that:
1. Side yards shall be double that required for the district.
2. Adequate screening from abutting residential uses and landscaping is
provided in compliance with Section 1001.09 of this Chapter.
3. Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site in
compliance with section 1001.05 of this Chapter and that such parking is
adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding and abutting
residential uses in compliance with Section 1001.09 of this Chapter.
4. Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided and
regulated where applicable by Section 1001.05 of this Chapter.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-2 District
13-5
5. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
E. Townhouses (five to eight units) provided that:
1. When abutting a single family residential use or a single family residential
district, the property is screened and landscaped in compliance with
Section 1001.09 of this Chapter.
2. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
Subd. 6. Lot Area and Setback Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an R-2 District subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
A. Lot Area Requirements:
1. Lot area:
a. Single Family: Not less than ten thousand eight hundred (10,800)
square feet.
b. Two Family: Not less than six thousand two hundred (6,200) square
feet.
c. Other Uses: Not less than three (3) acres.
2. Lot Width:
24 a. Single Family: Not less than eighty (80) feet for interior lots and not
less than one hundred five (105) feet for corner lots.
24 b. Two Family: Not less than one hundred (100) feet for interior lots
and not less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet for corner lots.
c. Other Uses: Not less than two hundred (200) feet.
3. Lot depth:
a. Single-Family: Not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet.
b. Two Family: Not less than one hundred thirty (130) feet.
c. Other Uses: Not less than two hundred (200) feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-2 District
13-6
B. Principal Structure Setback Requirements:
1. Front Yard:
a. Dwellings Abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
24 b. One or Two Family: Not less than thirty (30) feet for the principal
building, except that the door of an attached garage facing a public
right-of-way shall be set back not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
c. Other Uses: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
2. Side Yard:
a. One or Two Family: Not less than ten (10) feet.
b. Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
c. Other Uses: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
d. Detached accessory uses: Not less than eight (8) feet.
e. Attached accessory uses: Not less than ten (10) feet.
3. Rear Yard:
a. One or Two Family: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
c. Other Uses: Not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
d. Detached accessory uses: Not less than eight (8) feet.
e. Abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
Subd. 7. Lot Coverage and Height. The following lot coverage and height
requirements shall be observed in an R-2 District.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-2 District
13-7
31 A. Maximum impervious surface coverage on a lot shall not exceed thirty-five (35)
percent.
B. All principal structures shall be limited to a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet.
C. All accessory structures shall be limited to a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-3 District
14-1
1001.14 R-3, MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of the R-3, Multiple Family Residence District is to
provide for multi-family use at higher densities up to fifteen (15) dwelling units per acre
for both permanent and more transient families. It is intended to allow for townhouses,
apartment buildings, condominiums, and other types of mufti-family residential dwelling
units to be individually owned or rented.
Subd. 2. Permitted Use. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are permitted uses in the R-3 District:
A. Townhomes and quadraminiums not to exceed four (4) units per building.
B. Multiple Family (five to eight units).
33C. Residential care facilities serving six (16) or fewer persons.
Subd. 3. Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in the R-3 District and are governed by Section 1001.03,
Subd. 6 of this Chapter.
23A. None.
Subd. 4. Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this chapter, the
following are permitted accessory uses in the R-3 District:
A. All accessory uses allowed within an R-2 District.
Subd. 5. Conditional Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are conditional uses in an R-3 District. (Requires a conditional use permit
based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by this Chapter.)
A. All conditionally permitted uses within an R-2 District, not expressly permitted in
the R-3 District.
B. Single Family detached dwelling provided that:
1. The lot is of inadequate area to allow a more intensive residential land
use.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-3 District
14-2
2. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
C. Multiple Family Dwelling (nine units or more) provided that:
1. When abutting a single family residential district, the property is screened
and landscaped in compliance with Section 1001.09 of this Chapter.
2. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
Subd. 6. Lot Area and Setback Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an R-3 District subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
A. Lot Area Requirements.
1. Lot Area:
a. Single Family: Not less than eight thousand seven hundred (8,700)
square feet.
b. Two Family: Not less than six thousand two hundred (6,200) square
feet.
c. Over Two Family: Not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet.
d. Other Uses: Not less than three (3) acres.
e. Minimum total lot area for more than two (2) units per structure: Not
less than one (1) acre.
2. Lot Width:
a. Single Family: Not less than ninety (90) feet.
b. Two Family: Not less than one hundred (100) feet.
c. Over Two Family: Not less than one hundred thirty (130) feet.
d. Other Uses: Not less than two hundred (200) feet.
3. Lot Depth:
a. Single Family: Not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-3 District
14-3
b. Two Family: Not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet.
c. Over Two Family: Not less than one hundred thirty (130) feet.
d. Other Uses: Not less than two hundred (200) feet.
B. Principal Structure Setback Requirements.
1. Front Yard:
a. Dwellings abutting, an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
b. One or Two Family: Not less than thirty five (35) feet.
c. Over Two Family: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
d. Other Uses: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
2. Side Yard:
a. One or Two Family: Not less than ten (10) feet.
b. Over Two Family: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
c. Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
d. Other Uses: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
e. Detached accessory uses: Not less than ten (10) feet.
f. Attached accessory uses: Not less than ten (10) feet.
3. Rear Yard:
a. One or Two Family: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
b. Over Two Family: Not less than twenty (20) feet.
c. Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
d. Other Uses: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
e. Detached accessory uses: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
f. Abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-3 District
14-4
Subd. 7. Lot Coverage and Height. The following lot coverage and height
requirements shall be observed in an R-3 District.
31 A. Maximum impervious surface coverage on a base lot shall not exceed fifty (50)
percent.
B. All principal structures shall be limited to a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet.
C. All accessory structures shall be limited to a maximum height of twenty-five (25)
feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-6 District
15-1
1001.15 R-6, RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOME PARK
Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of the R-6, Residential Manufactured Home Park
is to create, preserve, and enhance areas for manufactured home park development at
densities of six to nine dwelling units per acre for both permanent and more transient
families. No other structures of a residential type are allowed, except as provided for in
the manufactured home section. It is appropriate only in areas served by public utilities,
with good accessibility to thoroughfares, and where such development is within the
manufactured home residential areas in the comprehensive plan.
Subd. 2. Permitted Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are permitted uses in the R-6 District:
A. Convalescent and nursing homes.
B. Day care center and nursery school when operated in churches or public or
private schools.
C. Golf courses (except club houses, miniature courses and driving tees operated
for commercial purposes).
D. Manufactured home parks.
E. Two family dwellings.
Subd. 3. Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in the R-6 District and are governed by Section 1001.03,
Subd. 6 of this Chapter.
23A. None.
Subd. 4. Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are permitted accessory uses in the R-6 District:
A. All accessory uses allowed in an R-3 District.
Subd. 5. Conditional Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are conditional uses in an R-6 District. (Requires a conditional use permit
based upon procedures set forth and regulated by this Chapter.)
A. All conditionally permitted uses within an R-3 District.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-6 District
15-2
33 B. Outdoor sales and display of manufactured homes on manufactured home lots
provided that:
1. The number of manufactured home lots used for outdoor sales area shall
not exceed five (5) percent of the total manufactured home lots within the
manufactured home park. This does not include private homeowners.
2. The manufactured homes offered for sale shall be located upon
manufactured home lots and shall comply with applicable minimum lot
area requirements.
3. The manufactured homes offered for sale shall comply with all setback
requirements.
4. The manufactured homes offered for sale shall comply with all applicable
building codes.
5. No additional signage other than that allowed by Section 1001.08 of this
Chapter.
6. Provision shall be made for off-street parking of customer parking so as
not to affect access and circulation within the site or on the public street.
Subd. 6. Lot Area and Setback Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in an R-6 District subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
A. Lot Area Requirements:
1. Lot Area:
a. Single Family: Not less than five thousand two hundred (5,200)
square feet.
b. Other Uses: Not less than three (3) acres.
2. Lot Width:
a. Single Family: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
b. Other Uses: Not less than two hundred (200) feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-6 District
15-3
3. Lot Depth:
a. Single Family: Not less than one hundred (100) feet.
b. Other Uses: Not less than two hundred (200) feet.
B. Principal Structure Setback Requirements.
1. Front Yard:
a. Dwellings abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
b One or Two Family: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
c. Over Two Family: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
d. Other Uses: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
2. Side Yard:
a. One or Two Family: Not less than ten (10) feet.
b. Over Two Family: Not less than twenty (20) feet.
c. Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
d. Other Uses: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
e. Detached accessory uses: Not less than ten (10) feet.
f. Attached accessory uses: Not less than ten (10) feet.
3. Rear Yard:
a. One or Two Family: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
b. Over Two Family: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
c. Other Uses abutting residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
d. Other Uses: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
e. Detached accessory uses: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
f. Abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance R-6 District
15-4
Subd. 7. Lot Coverage and Height. The following lot coverage and height
requirements shall be observed in an R-6 District.
A. Maximum lot coverage of all structures shall not exceed thirty (30) percent.
B. All principal structures shall be limited to a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet.
C. All accessory structures shall be limited to a maximum height of twenty-five (25)
feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance C-0 District
16-1
1001.16 C-0, DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of the C-0, Downtown Commercial District is to
provide a district which will allow for the preservation of the unique historic character of
the City's downtown commercial area, and will accommodate commercial development
and growth within the confined spaces of the area. The uses allowed in the district shall
be offices and service businesses in which there is contact with the public, and retail
sales of merchandise to the general public. Such district will be located within the area
indicated for such use in the comprehensive plan and shall be developed in accordance
with the general development plan for the downtown area, as contained in the
comprehensive plan.
Subd. 2. Permitted Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are permitted uses in a C-0 District:
A. Appliance showrooms
B. Business, commercial or trade schools
C. Clinics, medical offices
D. Commercial recreational uses (indoor)
E. Daycare and nursery school
F. Dry cleaning and laundry establishments with no more than four (4) employees
for cleaning or pressing.
15aG. Dry cleaning and laundry collection stations, and self service.
H. Essential service and essential service buildings.
I. Financial institutions.
J. Funeral home, mortuary and monument sales.
K. Government office or services.
L. Laboratories - medical, dental.
M. Municipal, administrative or service buildings, or uses including public and semipublic
institutions, libraries, museums, post offices, etc. except industrial type
uses.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance C-0 District
16-2
N. Off-sale liquor stores.
O. On-Sale liquor establishments
P. Offices, administrative executive, professional, medical, research.
Q. Personal service and repair establishments such as barber and beauty shops,
shoe repair, etc.
R. Pet and animal shops, taxidermists
S. Plumbing and heating showrooms and shops.
T. Printing services, publishing and related distribution agencies.
U. Private clubs and lodges.
V. Restaurants (Class I).
W. Repair and service uses when secondary to the allowable use.
X. Retail shops and stores (excluding autos, boats, machinery, etc.) such as
apparel, appliance, beverage, book, carpet, drugs, furniture, grocer, hardware,
jewelry, paint, pawn, tobacco, sporting goods.
Y. Schools and studios - artist, music, photo, decorating, dancing, health, etc.
5,18Z. Sexually oriented use - accessory.
AA. Video arcade and accessory uses such as pool, pinball, etc.
BB. Brew on premises. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
CC. Brewpub. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
Subd. 3. Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in the C-0 District and are governed by this Chapter.
A. None.
Subd. 4. Accessory Uses. The following are permitted uses in a C-0 District:
A. Off-street parking and loading as herein regulated.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance C-0 District
16-3
B. Signs as herein regulated.
C. Secondary uses customarily incident to the permitted or conditional uses allowed
in the district.
37D. Accessory solar energy systems (roof mounted) as provided for by Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
Subd. 5. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses in a C-0 District.
(Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by
this Chapter.)
A. Nursing homes, residential care facilities, continuing care retirement communities
and senior housing with services establishments licensed by the Minnesota
department of health. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
10B. Mixed Uses (commercial/residential) buildings provided that:
1. Residential uses shall be limited and may be permitted only where they do
not create conflicts, present or future, between non-residential and
residential uses and activities, both on and off the subject property.
2. Residential and non-residential uses shall not be located on the same
floor and no residential use shall be located on the first or street-level
floor.
3. Residential and non-residential uses shall be provided separate
entrances.
4. Residential uses shall provide adequate off-street parking in conformance
with that required of multifamily uses by Section 1001.06, Subd. 09 of this
Chapter.
5. Open and outside storage associated with the residential use shall be
prohibited.
6. Residential uses shall be governed by all applicable provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance. Building Code, Housing Code and Fire Code.
7. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
C. Multiple principal uses on one lot.
D. Open or Outdoor Commercial Recreation (not including activities which are
temporary in nature), provided that:
Rockford Zoning Ordinance C-0 District
16-4
1. The activity is accessory to a permitted or conditionally permitted principal
use, and located on the same parcel thereof.
2. The activity is fully screened from surrounding residential uses to a
minimum height of six (6) feet above the highest ground elevation of the
outdoor use.
3. The activity is fully screened from adjacent public streets.
4. Additional parking demand generated by the outdoor use is properly
accounted for in the entire property's parking supply.
5. Lights required for the outdoor use are hooded and directed away from
adjacent streets and properties so as to avoid any view of the light source.
6. Noise generated by the outdoor use does not become a nuisance as
defined by the City's nuisance and noise ordinances.
7. No signage, beyond that which is permitted for the principal use and
building, is allowed as a result of the outdoor activity.
8. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
9. The proposed use complies with the performance standards outlined in
Section 1001.09 and all other applicable provisions of this Chapter.
10. Other conditions are met which are reasonably related to the assurance
that the use will not be, or become, a nuisance to surrounding public or
private property, including, but not limited to, hours of operation, access,
and scope of activities.
18E. Veterinary clinics
F. Microdistilleries with tasting rooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24,
2015)
G. Small breweries with tap rooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24,
2015)
Subd. 6. Lot Requirements And Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in a C-0 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Chapter.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance C-0 District
16-5
A. Lot Area Requirements:
1. Lot Area: None
2. Lot Width: None
3. Lot Depth: None
B. Principal Structure Setback Requirements:
1. Front Yard:
a. To other commercial district: Zero (0) feet.
b. To any residence district: Not less than ten (10) feet.
2. Side Yard:
a. To other commercial district: Zero (0) feet.
b. To any residence district: Not less than ten (10) feet.
3. Rear Yard:
a. To other commercial district: Zero (0) feet.
b. To any residence district: Not less than ten (10) feet.
Subd. 7. Lot Coverage and Height. The following lot coverage and height
requirements shall be observed in a C-0 District.
A. Maximum Lot Coverage by All Structures: One hundred (100) percent.
B. All principal structures shall be limited to a maximum height of three (3) stories or
thirty-five (35) feet.
29 Subd. 8. Design Standards. All new development or expansion, remodeling,
rehabilitation or redevelopment of existing uses, buildings and parcels within the C-O
District shall comply with the design guidelines adopted by the City Council.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance C-1 District
17-1
1001.17 RESERVED
(Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
Rockford Zoning Ordinance C-3 District
19-1
1001.19 C-3, Highway Commercial District
22Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of the C-3 Highway Commercial District is to
provide for the establishment of a broad mix of commercial retail and service
businesses and activities that attract and serve patrons from the City of Rockford or
region based upon access to and visibility of the Minnesota Trunk Highway 55 corridor.
18Subd. 2. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses in the C-3 District:
A. Appliance showrooms.
B. Banks.
C. Business or trade school.
D. Bus/transit station or terminal.
E. Commercial recreation (indoor).
F. Conference store with gas sales.
G. Convalescent and nursing homes.
H. Convenience store with gas sales.
I. Day care center and nursery school.
J. Dry clean or laundry.
K. Essential services.
L. Government office or services.
M. Greenhouse or nurseries w/retail sales.
N. Medical offices.
O. Mortuaries, Funeral Homes and monument sales.
P. Motel, hotel.
Q. Municipal, administrative or service buildings, or uses including public and semipublic
institutions, libraries, museums, post offices, etc. except industrial type
uses.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance C-3 District
19-2
R. Off sale liquor stores.
S. On sale liquor stores. (Ordinance 18-03, adopted January 23, 2018)
T. Offices, administrative executive, professional, governmental, government,
medical, research, without merchandising services.
U. Offices (as above) with merchandising services.
V. Personal service and repair establishments (barber, beauty shop, shoes report),
(excludes auto repair).
W. Plumbing and heating showrooms.
X. Printing services.
Y. Private clubs and lodges.
Z. Repair and service shops (includes small appliance and personal service repair;
excludes automotive repair.
AA. Restaurants (Class I and Class II).
BB. Retail stores.
CC. Sexually oriented use – accessory and principal (subject to area analysis).
DD. Studio – art, music, dance, photo, etc.
EE. Theaters (indoor).
FF. Veterinary clinics.
GG. Video arcade accessory uses such as pool, pinball, etc.
HH. Wholesale showrooms.
II. Brew on premises.(Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
II. Brewpub. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
Subd. 3. Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in the C-3 District and are governed by Section 1001.03,
Subd. 6 of this Chapter.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance C-3 District
19-3
30 A. Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) as regulated by Section 1001.09,
Subd. 21 of this Chapter.
B. Single family dwellings existing as of February 13, 2018 shall be
designated as interim uses provided that:
1. Not more than one (1) principal use shall be allowed upon the
property.
2. Commercial uses as provided for within this District shall not be
allowed until such time as the interim residential use ceases and the
property complies with all requirements of this Chapter applicable to
commercial uses; once converted to an allowed commercial use in
conformance with the requirements of this Chapter, the residential
use shall not be re-established. (Ordinance 18-04, adopted February
13, 2018)
Subd. 4. Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are permitted accessory uses within the C-3, Highway Commercial District:
18A. All accessory uses allowed within a C-1 District.
22Subd. 5. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses in a C-3, Highway
Commercial District. (Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set
forth in and regulated by this Chapter.)
A. Nursing homes, residential care facilities, continuing care retirement communities
and senior housing with services establishments licensed by the Minnesota
department of health. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
B. Auto, marine, RV, trailer or other vehicle sales.
C. Auto repair – major and minor.
D. Commercial recreation (outdoor).
E. Hospitals.
F. Laboratories.
G. Medical laboratories.
H. Multiple principal uses on one lot.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance C-3 District
19-4
26I. Outdoor sales and display (maximum of five percent gross land area).
37J. Accessory solar energy systems (ground mounted) as provided for by Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
K. Microdistilleries with tasting rooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24,
2015)
L. Small breweries with tap rooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24,
2015)
N. Animal kennels, provided that:
1. The number of animals boarded shall be twenty (20) unless otherwise
approved by the City Council.
2. All areas in which animals are confined are located indoors and are
properly soundproofed from adjacent properties.
3. There shall be adequate physical separation within a multiple occupancy
building between the animal kennel and other individual tenant spaces to
protect public health and safety.
4. Outdoor exercise areas:
a. Use of an outdoor exercise area shall be limited to the hours of
6:00AM to 10:00PM each day.
b. Staff shall be present at all times to control barking so as not to
cause a public nuisance.
c. The outdoor exercise area shall be screened from view of adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way by a minimum six (6) foot tall
privacy fence enclosure.
d. Animal waste shall be removed from the area not less than once (1)
per day or as necessary so as protect public health, safety, and
welfare.
5. A ventilation system shall be designed so that no odors or organisms will
spread between kennels or to the outside air and will be capable of
completely exchanging internal air at a rate of at least twice per hour.
6. Air temperature must be maintained between sixty degrees (60°) and
eighty degrees Fahrenheit (80°F).
Rockford Zoning Ordinance C-3 District
19-5
7. A room separate from the kennel area shall be provided of sufficient size
to adequately separate animals that are sick or injured from healthy
animals.
8. Indoor animal kennel floors and walls shall be made of nonporous
materials or sealed to make it nonporous.
9. Animal wastes shall be flushed down an existing sanitary sewer system or
enclosed in a container of sufficient construction to eliminate odors and
organisms and shall be properly disposed of at least once (1) per day.
10. All State requirements, rules, and laws for such facilities are met.
(Ordinannce 18-02, adopted January 23, 2018)
Subd. 6. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in a C-3 Highway Commercial District, subject to additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
9A. Lot Area Requirements:
1. Lot area: Not less than one (1) acre for newly annexed parcels after the
effective date of the Ordinance.
2. Lot Width: Not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
3. Lot Depth: Not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
B. Principal Structure Setback Requirements:
1. Front Yard: Not less than thirty-five (35) feet. (Ordinance 2015-01,
adopted February 24, 2015)
2. Side Yard:
a. To other commercial district: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
b. To any residence district: Not less than forty (40) feet.
3. Rear Yard:
a. To other commercial district: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
b. To any residential district: Not less than forty (40) feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance C-3 District
19-6
Subd. 7. Lot Coverage and Height. The following lot coverage and height
requirements shall be observed in a C-3 District.
A. Maximum Lot Coverage by All Structures: Thirty-five (35) percent.
18B. All principal structures shall be limited to a maximum height of three (3) stories or
thirty-five (35) feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance I-1 District
20-1
1001.20 I-1, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Subd. 1. Purpose. It is the intent of the I-1, Industrial District to allow for industrial
operations with high standards for site development and use performance. Permitted
and conditional uses shall be compatible with the character of development in proximate
areas. The development types and locational criteria of the I-1 District shall be as set
forth in the comprehensive plan.
18Subd. 2. Permitted Uses. The following are permitted uses within an I-1 District:
A. Commercial recreation (indoor)
B. Any manufacturing, production, processing, cleaning, storage, servicing, repair or
testing of materials, goods, or products that is wholly contained within the
building and which meets and maintains all environmental standards established
by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
C. Printing services.
D. Sexually Oriented Uses – accessory.
E. Warehousing.
F. Microdistilleries with tasting rooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24,
2015)
G. Small breweries with tap rooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24,
2015)
Subd. 3. Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in an I-1 District and are governed by this Chapter.
18,30 A. Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) as regulated by Section 1001.09,
Subd. 21 of this Chapter.
Subd. 4. Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses within an I-
1 District:
A. All secondary uses customarily incident to the permitted or conditional uses
listed.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance I-1 District
20-2
B. Off-street parking and loading as herein regulated.
C. Signs as herein regulated.
37D. Accessory solar energy systems (roof mounted) as provided for by Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
Subd. 5. Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses in an I-1 District.
(Requires a conditional use permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by
this Chapter.)
A. Any permitted or accessory industrial use not conducted within a building
including storage of materials, products and vehicles provided that:
1. The storage area is landscaped, fenced, and screened from view of
neighboring uses and abutting Residential Districts.
2. Storage is landscaped and screened from view from the public right-ofway.
3. Storage area is blacktopped or concrete surfaced.
4. All lighting shall be hooded and so directed that the light source shall not
be visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring residences.
5. The storage area does not take up parking space or loading space as
required for conformity to this Chapter.
6. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
B. Multiple principal use buildings on one lot.
C. Outdoor sales and display (maximum of five (5) percent gross land area).
D. Public garages.
E. Retail and service establishments accessory to a permitted or conditionally
permitted principal use, and providing goods and services which are primarily for
the use of persons employed in the district provided that:
1. Such use is allowed as a permitted use in a Commercial District.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance I-1 District
20-3
2. Such use does not constitute more than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor
area of the principal building.
3. Adequate off-street parking and off-street loading in compliance with
Section 1001.05 of this Chapter is provided.
4. All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in
conformance with the provisions of Section 1001.08 of this Chapter.
5. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
6. Residential structures and related residential uses necessary for security
and safety reasons in relation to a principal use.
7. The proposed use complies with the performance standards outlined in
Section 1001.09 and all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
8. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
18F. Recycling processing center.
37G. Accessory solar energy systems (ground mounted) as provided for by Section
1001.09, Subd. 21.B of this Chapter.
H. Breweries with or without taprooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24,
2015)
I. Distilleries with or without tasting rooms. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February
24, 2015)
Subd. 6. Lot Requirements and Setbacks. The following minimum requirements
shall be observed in an I-1 District, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this Chapter.
A. Lot Area Requirements:
1. Lot Area: Not less than two (2) acres.
2. Lot Width: Not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
3. Lot Depth: Not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance I-1 District
20-4
B. Principal Structure Setback Requirements:
1. Front Yard: Not less than thirty-five (35)feet. (Ordinance 2015-01,
adopted February 24, 2015)
2. Side Yard:
a. To other commercial district: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
b. To any residence district: Not less than seventy-five (75) feet.
3. Rear Yard:
a. To other commercial district: Not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
b. To any residence district: Not less than seventy-five (75) feet.
7Subd. 7. Lot Coverage and Height. The following lot coverage and height
requirements shall be observed in an I-1 District.
A. Maximum Lot Coverage by All Structures: Fifty (50) percent.
B. Landscaping. All lots in the I-1 District shall have not less than twenty-five (25)
percent of the lot area dedicated to landscaped green area in compliance with
Section 1001.09, Subd. 3 of this Chapter.
C. All principal structures shall be limited to a maximum height of four (4) stories or
forty-eight (48) feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance PUD District
21-1
1001.21 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) REGULATIONS
Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of the PUD, Planned Unit Development
District is to provide comprehensive procedures and standards intended to allow
flexibility in the development of residential neighborhoods and/or nonresidential areas
than would be possible under a conventional zoning district. The decision to zone
property to PUD is a public policy decision for the City Council to make in its legislative
capacity. The intent of this Chapter is to:
A. Provide for the establishment of PUD (planned unit development) zoning districts
in appropriate settings and situations to create or maintain a development pattern
that complies with the City's Comprehensive Plan.
B. Allow for the mixing of land uses within a development when such mixing of land
uses could not otherwise be accomplished under this Chapter.
C. Provide for variations to the strict application of the land use regulations in this
Chapter in order to improve site design and operation, while at the same time
incorporating design elements (e.g., construction materials, landscaping, lighting,
etc.) that exceed the City's standards to offset the effect of any variations.
D. Promote a more creative and efficient approach to land use within the City, while
at the same time protecting and promoting the health, safety, comfort, aesthetics,
economic viability, and general welfare of the City.
E. Preserve and enhance natural features and open spaces.
F. Maintain or improve the efficiency of public streets and utilities.
G. Ensure the establishment of appropriate transitions between differing land uses.
(Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
Subd. 2. Allowed Uses. All permitted uses, permitted accessory uses,
conditional uses, interim uses, and uses allowed by administrative permit contained in
the various zoning districts defined in Chapter shall be treated as potentially allowable
uses within a PUD District, provided they would be allowable on the site under the
Comprehensive Plan. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
Subd. 3. Setbacks and Building Height. The various setback and height
regulations of the most closely related conventional zoning district shall be considered
presumptively appropriate, but may be departed from to accomplish the purposes
described in Section 1001.21, Subd 1 of this Chapter. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted
February 24, 2015)
Rockford Zoning Ordinance PUD District
21-2
Subd. 4. Integrated Design. A PUD shall consist of a harmonious
arrangement and selection of land uses in groupings of buildings that are planned and
designed as an integrated unit. The integrated design shall include elements such as
building orientation and materials, utilities, parking areas, traffic and pedestrian
circulation, landscaping, and open spaces. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24,
2015)
Subd. 5. Development Stage Plan. Development stage submissions shall
depict and outline the proposed implementation of the proposed development for the
PUD. The development stage submissions shall include, but not be limited to, the
submission requirements stipulated in Section 1001.03 of this Chapter. (Ordinance
2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
Subd. 6. Final Plan. After approval of the development stage plan, the
applicant may apply for final plan approval for all or a portion of the PUD. The applicant
shall submit the following material for review by and approval of the Zoning
Administrator prior to issuance of any building permit(s):
A. If the PUD will be developed in different phases, the applicant shall submit a
phasing plan for construction of the various elements of the entire PUD.
B. Development plans in final form based on the approved development stage plan,
covering that portion of the PUD where building permits will be requested under
the phasing plan.
C. Proof of recording any easements and restrictive covenants prior to the sale of
any land or dwelling unit within the PUD and of the establishment and activation
of any entity that is to be responsible for the management and maintenance of
any public or common open space or service facility.
D. All certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of land and
recordation of documents.
E. Final architectural working drawings of all structures.
F. A final plat and final engineering plans and specifications for streets, utilities and
other public improvements, together with a development contract agreement for
the installation of such improvements and financial guarantees for the completion
of such improvements.
G. Any other plan, agreements, or specifications necessary for the Zoning
Administrator to review the proposed final plan. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted
February 24, 2015)
Rockford Zoning Ordinance PUD District
21-3
Subd. 7. Process.
A. Preapplication Conference: Prior to the filing of an application for PUD, the
applicant of the proposed PUD is encouraged to arrange for and attend a
conference with the Zoning Administrator. The primary purpose of the conference
shall be to provide the applicant with an opportunity to gather information and
obtain guidance as to the general suitability of his proposal for the area for which
it is proposed and its conformity to the provisions of this Title before incurring
substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys and other data.
B. Development Stage:
1. Application Procedure: PUD zoning applications shall be processed
according to the evaluation criteria and procedures outlined in Section
1001.03 of this Chapter.
2. Zoning Enactment: A rezoning of a parcel of land to PUD shall not
become effective until such time as the City Council approves an
ordinance reflecting said amendment, which shall take place at the time
the City Council approves the development stage plan.
C. Final Stage Plan: After approval of a development stage plan for all or a portion
of the proposed PUD, the applicant shall submit the materials outlined in Section
1001.21 Subd 6 of this Chapter for review by the Zoning Administrator prior to
issuance of a building permit(s). (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24,
2015)
Subd. 8. Amendment of a PUD. The same review procedure shall be
allowed for an amendment of a PUD as was followed with respect to the development
stage plan. (Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
Subd. 9. General Requirements:
A. Records: The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all PUD zones
approved by the City, including information on a project's allowed uses, all
pertinent project plans, any conditions imposed on a project by the City Council,
and such other information as the Zoning Administrator may deem appropriate.
B. Withdrawal Of An Application: Any application under this Chapter may be
withdrawn by an applicant without prejudice at any time prior to final City Council
action thereon.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance PUD District
21-4
C. Platting Of A PUD: In the event that a PUD is to be subdivided into lots or parcels
for the purpose of separate ownership, such PUD shall be platted under the
platting procedures of the Subdivision Ordinance and the related requirements of
Wright County. The preliminary plat shall be processed in conjunction with the
development stage plan. A separate action on the final plat shall be processed
before the City Council prior to or in conjunction with the final stage of the PUD.
D. Conveyance Of Property Within A PUD: In the event that any real property within
an approved PUD is conveyed in total or in part, the buyer(s) thereof shall be
bound by all provisions of the PUD and the general plan for that project.
However, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as to make such conveyed
property nonconforming with regard to normal zoning standards as long as the
conveyed property conforms with the approved PUD and the development plan
for a project.
E. Agreement/Financial Guarantee: Following the approval of the development plan
but prior to final plan approval, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with
the City relating to the terms of the PUD, and shall also provide such financial
guarantees as the City requires or deems necessary. Such agreement may take
the form of:
1. A development contract; and/or
2. Site improvement performance agreement; and/or
3. Another form of legally binding instrument as may be required by the City.
(Ordinance 2015-01, adopted February 24, 2015)
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-1
1001.22 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
Subd. 1. Statutory Authorization: The legislature of the State of Minnesota has,
in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 103F and Chapter 462 delegated the responsibility to
local government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the City of Rockford, Minnesota does ordain as follows:
A. Findings of Fact. The flood hazard areas of Rockford, Minnesota, are subject to
periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures or flood protection and relief, and impairment of
the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
B. Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards. This Ordinance is based upon a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards, which is consistent with the
standards established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
C. National Flood Insurance Program Compliance. This Ordinance is adopted to
comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program
codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 59 -78, as amended, so as to
maintain the community’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
D. Statement of Purpose: It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those losses described in
Subdivision 1.21 by provisions contained herein.
Subd. 2. General Provisions:
A. Lands to Which Ordinance Applies: This Ordinance shall apply to all lands within
the jurisdiction of the City of Rockford shown on the official zoning map.
B. Official Zoning Map: The Official Zoning Map adopted in accordance with Section
1001.10, Subd. 2 of this Chapter shall include the Flood Insurance Study for
Hennepin County, Minnesota dated November 4, 2016, for Wright County,
Minnesota dated August 18, 1992, and incorporated areas, and the following
Flood Insurance Rate Maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency therein numbered:
2705340033B
2705340042C
27053C0109F
27053C0126F
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-2
27053C0128F
27053C1ND18
(Ordinance 16-04, adopted September 25, 2016)
C. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation: The regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of the regional
flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the flood
plain that result from designation of a floodway.
D. Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the Governing Body and shall not be deemed a limitation or
repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling distances
on the Official Zoning Map. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the Official Zoning Map, as
for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions and there is a formal appeal of the decision of the
Zoning Administrator, the Board of Adjustment shall make the necessary
interpretation. All decisions will be based on elevations on the regional (100-
year) flood profile, the ground elevations that existed on the site at the time the
Community adopted its initial floodplain ordinance, and other available technical
data. Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Board of Adjustment and to
submit technical evidence.
E. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this Ordinance to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with
this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
F. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability: This Ordinance does not imply that areas
outside the flood plain districts or land uses permitted within such districts will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This Ordinance shall not create liability on
the part of City of Rockford or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
G. Severability: If any subdivision, clause, provision, or portion of this Ordinance is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-3
H. Definitions: Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
Ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they
have in common usage and so as to give this Ordinance its most reasonable
application.
1. Accessory Use or Structure - a use or structure on the same lot with, and
of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
2. Basement - means any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having
its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides,
regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level.
3. Conditional Use - means a specific type of structure or land use listed in
the official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in
the official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding that;
Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist. The
structure and/or land use conform to the comprehensive land use plan if
one exists and are compatible with the existing neighborhood.
4. Equal Degree of Encroachment - a method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream
are capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
5. Flood – a temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the
stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry
areas.
6. Flood Frequency – the frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
7. Flood Fringe – that portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway.
Flood fringe is synonymous with the term “floodway fringe” used in the
Flood Insurance Study.
8. Flood Plain – the beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional
flood.
9. Flood Proofing – a combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for
the reduction or elimination of flood damages.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-4
10. Floodway – the bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse
and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably
required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.
11. Lowest Floor – the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor.
12. Manufactured Home – a structure, transportable in one or more
subdivisions, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include the term
“recreational vehicle.”
13. Obstruction – any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or
projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood plain which
may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in
itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
14. Principal Use or Structure – means all uses or structures that are not
accessory uses or structures.
15. Reach – a hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment
of a stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In
an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive
bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
16. Recreational Vehicle - a vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck,
and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the term recreational vehicle
shall be synonymous with the term travel trailer/travel vehicle.
17. Regional Flood - a flood which is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of
what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude
of the 100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with
the term "base flood" used in a flood insurance study.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-5
18. Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation - The regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation
of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a
floodway.
19. Structure - anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories,
sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational
vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in Subdivision 9.31 of
this Ordinance and other similar items.
20. Substantial Damage - means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
21. Substantial Improvement - within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the
structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term
includes structures that have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of
the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include
either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
Any alteration of an “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure’s continued designation as an “historic structure.”
For the purpose of this Ordinance, “historic structure” shall be as defined
in Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1.
22. Variance - means a modification of a specific permitted development
standard required in an official control including this Ordinance to allow an
alternative development standard not stated as acceptable in the official
control, but only as applied to a particular property for the purpose of
alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty or unique circumstance as
defined and elaborated upon in a community's respective planning and
zoning enabling legislation.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-6
Subd. 3. Establishment of Zoning Districts:
A. Floodway District. The Floodway District shall include those areas designated as
floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in Subdivision 2.2.
B. Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District shall include those areas
designated as floodway fringe. The Flood Fringe District shall include those
areas shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as adopted in Subdivision 2.2 as
being within Zone AE, Zone A0, or Zone AH but being located outside of the
floodway.
C. Compliance: No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure
shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without
full compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance. Within the Floodway
and Flood Fringe Districts, all uses not listed as permitted uses or conditional
uses in Subdivisions 4.0 and 5.0 that follow, respectively, shall be prohibited. In
addition, a caution is provided here that:
1. New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain
travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of
this Ordinance and specifically Subdivision 9.0.
2. Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal maintenance and
repair, or repair after damage to existing nonconforming structures and
nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the general
provisions of this Ordinance and specifically Subdivision 11.0.
3. As-built elevations for elevated or flood proofed structures must be
certified by ground surveys and flood proofing techniques must be
designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
as specified in the general provisions of this Ordinance and specifically as
stated in Subdivision 10.0 of this Ordinance.
Subd. 4. Floodway District (FW):
A. Permitted Uses:
1. General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck
farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
2. Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport landing
strips.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-7
3. Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery
ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting
preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing
areas, and single or multiple purpose recreational trails.
4. Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
B. Standards for Floodway Permitted Uses:
1. The use shall have a low flood damage potential.
2. The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if one exists.
3. The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations and
shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of
materials or equipment.
C. Conditional Uses:
1. Structures accessory to the uses listed in 4.A above and the uses listed in
4.C2 - 4.C8 below.
2. Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.
3. Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control structures.
4. Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines.
5. Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
6. Placement of fill or construction of fences.
7. Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of record or in existing or
new subdivisions or commercial or condominium type campgrounds,
subject to the exemptions and provisions of Subdivision 9.C of this
Ordinance.
8. Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and floodwalls
constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual
structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural
crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the 10-year
frequency flood event.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-8
D. Standards for Floodway Conditional Uses:
1. All Uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for
roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment,
or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause any
increase in the stage of the 100-year or regional flood or cause an
increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.
2. All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the procedures and
standards contained in Subdivision 10.D of this Ordinance.
3. The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if
one exists.
4. Fill:
a. Fill, dredge spoil, and all other similar materials deposited or stored
in the flood plain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative
cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
b. Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be
allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is
submitted which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention
element to the plan.
c. As an alternative, and consistent with Sub-subdivision (b)
immediately above, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel
operations may allow temporary, on-site storage of fill or other
materials which would have caused an increase to the stage of the
100-year or regional flood but only after the Governing Body has
received an appropriate plan which assures the removal of the
materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time
available. The conditional use permit must be title registered with
the property in the Office of the County Recorder.
5. Accessory Structures:
a. Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
b. Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed
on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the
flow of flood waters: Whenever possible, structures shall be
constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of
flood flow; and so far as practicable, structures shall be placed
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-9
approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining
structures.
c. Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry
flood proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an
accessory structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood
proofing classification in the State Building Code provided the
accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not
exceed 500 square feet in size at its largest projection, and for a
detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for
parking of vehicles and limited storage. All flood proofed accessory
structures must meet the following additional standards:
1) The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and
shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls;
2) Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be
elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation
or properly flood proofed; and
3) To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there
must be a minimum of two “automatic” openings in the
outside walls of the structure having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding. There must be openings on at least
two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings
must be no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent
grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a
garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement
for automatic openings.
6. Storage of Materials and Equipment:
a. The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
b. Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood
warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the Governing
Body.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-10
7. Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or
cross subdivision of protected wetlands or public waters shall be subject to
the provisions of Minnesota Statute, Chapter 103G. Community-wide
structural works for flood control intended to remove areas from the
regulatory flood plain shall not be allowed in the floodway.
8. A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway shall not cause an
increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the technical analysis must
assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
Subd. 5. Flood Fringe District (FF):
A. Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or structures listed
as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district(s). If no pre-existing,
underlying zoning use districts exist, then any residential or non residential
structure or use of a structure or land shall be a permitted use in the Flood Fringe
District provided such use does not constitute a public nuisance. All permitted
uses shall comply with the standards for Flood Fringe District “Permitted Uses”
listed in Subdivision 5.B and the "Standards for all Flood Fringe Uses" listed in
Subdivision 5.D.
B. Standards for Flood Fringe Permitted Uses:
1. All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on fill so
that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above the regulatory
flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures shall be
no lower than one (1) foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation
and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least fifteen (15) feet beyond
the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.
2. As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that constitute a
minimal investment and that do not exceed 500 square feet at its largest
projection may be internally flood proofed in accordance with Subdivision
4.D5 (c).
3. The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess of onethousand
(1,000) cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be
allowable only as a conditional use, unless said fill is specifically intended
to elevate a structure in accordance with Subdivision 5.B1 of this
ordinance.
4. The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill to the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-11
5. The provisions of Subdivision 5.D of this Ordinance shall apply.
C. Conditional Uses: Any structure that is not elevated on fill or flood proofed in
accordance with Subdivision 5 B1 and or any use of land that does not comply
with the standards in Subdivision 5.B3 - 5.B4 shall only be allowable as a
conditional use. An application for a conditional use shall be subject to the
standards and criteria and evaluation procedures specified in Subdivisions 5.C-
5.D and 10.4 of this Ordinance.
D. Standards for Flood Fringe Conditional Uses:
1. Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be utilized to
elevate a structure's lowest floor above the regulatory flood protection
elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of stilts, pilings,
parallel walls, etc., or above-grade, enclosed areas such as crawl spaces
or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be
considered above-grade and not a structure's basement or lowest floor if:
1) the enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the structure;
2) it is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood resistant
materials; and 3) it is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access
or storage. The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to
the following additional standards:
a. Design and Certification - The structure's design and as-built
condition must be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect as being in compliance with the general design standards
of the State Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities must be at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation or be designed to prevent flood water from
entering or accumulating within these components during times of
flooding.
b. Specific Standards for Above-grade, Enclosed Areas - Abovegrade,
fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under
garages must be designed to internally flood and the design plans
must stipulate: A minimum area of openings in the walls where
internal flooding is to be used as a flood proofing technique. There
shall be a minimum of two openings on at least two sides of the
structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one-foot above grade. The automatic openings shall have a
minimum net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot subject to flooding unless a registered professional engineer or
architect certifies that a smaller net area would suffice. The
automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves,
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-12
or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters without any form of human
intervention; and
c. That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials
in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State
Building Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking
of vehicles or storage.
2. Basements, as defined by Subdivision 2.H12 of this Ordinance, shall be
subject to the following:
a. Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
b. Non-residential basements may be allowed below the regulatory
flood protection elevation provided the basement is structurally dry
flood proofed in accordance with Subdivision 5.D3 of this
Ordinance.
3. All areas of non-residential structures including basements to be placed
below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be flood proofed in
accordance with the structurally dry flood proofing classifications in the
State Building Code. Structurally dry flood proofing must meet the FP-1 or
FP-2 flood proofing classification in the State Building Code and this shall
require making the structure watertight with the walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
the effects of buoyancy. Structures flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4
classification shall not be permitted.
4. When at any one time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other similar
material is located on a parcel for such activities as on-site storage,
landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge spoil
disposal or construction of flood control works, an erosion/sedimentation
control plan must be submitted unless the community is enforcing a state
approved shoreland management ordinance. In the absence of a state
approved shoreland ordinance, the plan must clearly specify methods to
be used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the
100-year or regional flood event. The plan must be prepared and certified
by a registered professional engineer or other qualified individual
acceptable to the Governing Body. The plan may incorporate alternative
procedures for removal of the material from the flood plain if adequate
flood warning time exists.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-13
5. Storage of Materials and Equipment:
a. The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
b. Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily
removable from the area within the time available after a flood
warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the Governing
Body.
6. The provisions of Subdivision 5.E of this Ordinance shall also apply.
E. Standards for All Flood Fringe Uses:
1. All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an
elevation not more than two (2) feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board of
Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of
the structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate
flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.
2. Commercial Uses – accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks,
and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by
the employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of
a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the
area would be inundated to a depth and velocity such that when
multiplying the depth (in feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the
product number exceeds four (4) upon occurrence of the regional flood.
3. Manufacturing and Industrial Uses – measures shall be taken to minimize
interference with normal plant operations especially along streams having
protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such as yards
and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set
out in Subdivision 5.E2 above. In considering permit applications, due
consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose business
requires that it be located in flood plain areas.
4. Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected
by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method. The
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria
for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain
structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation –
FEMA’s requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-14
protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These
standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if
a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
5. Flood plain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity
of the channel and adjoining flood plain of any tributary watercourse or
drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not
been specified on the Official Zoning Map.
6. Standards for recreational vehicles are contained in Subdivision 9C.
7. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement
is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
Subd. 6. Land Development Standards: All subdivisions must have street
access to both the subdivision and individual building sites not lower than two (2)
feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. (Ordinance 16-04, adopted
September 25, 2016)
Subd. 7. Subdivisions:
Note: This Subdivision is not intended as a substitute for a comprehensive city or
county subdivision ordinance. It can, however, be used as an interim control until the
comprehensive subdivision ordinance can be amended to include necessary flood plain
management provisions.
A. Review Criteria: No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason
of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. All
lots within the flood plain districts shall be able to contain a building site outside
of the Floodway District at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All
subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with
the provisions of this Ordinance and have road access both to the subdivision
and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory
flood protection elevation. For all subdivisions in the flood plain, the Floodway
and Flood Fringe District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation
and the required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all
required subdivision drawings and platting documents.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-15
B. Removal of Special Flood Hazard Area Designation: The Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special
flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill
above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill
compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot
developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of
site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be
requested.
Subd. 8. Public Utilities, Railroads, Roads, and Bridges:
A. Public Utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and
water supply systems to be located in the flood plain shall be flood proofed in
accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to above the regulatory
flood protection elevation.
B. Public Transportation Facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located
within the flood plain shall comply with Subdivisions 4.0 and 5.0 of this
Ordinance. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be
provided where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would result
in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are essential to
the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be
constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation
services would not endanger the public health or safety.
C. On-site Sewage Treatment and Water Supply Systems: Where public utilities
are not provided: 1) On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 2) New or
replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject to impairment or
contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed
in accordance with the State's current statewide standards for on-site sewage
treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this Subdivision.
Subd. 9. Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Home Parks and Placement
of Recreational Vehicles:
A. New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured home
parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by Subdivision 7.0
of this Ordinance.
B. The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing
manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in flood
plain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only if
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-16
elevated in compliance with Subdivision 5.0 of this Ordinance. If vehicular road
access for pre-existing manufactured home parks is not provided in accordance
with Subdivision 5.E1, then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed
until the property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan acceptable
to the Governing Body.
1. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement
is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
C. Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria specified in
Subdivision 9.C1 below shall be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance and
as specifically spelled out in Subdivisions 9.C3-9.C4 below.
1. Exemption - Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this
Ordinance if they are placed in any of the areas listed in Subdivision 9.C2
below and further they meet the following criteria:
a. Have current licenses required for highway use.
b. Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the internal jacking
system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle
parks and the recreational vehicle has no permanent structural type
additions attached to it.
c. The recreational vehicle and associated use must be permissible in
any pre-existing, underlying zoning use district.
2. Areas Exempted For Placement of Recreational Vehicles:
a. Individual lots or parcels of record.
b. Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds.
c. Existing condominium type associations.
3. Recreational vehicles exempted in Subdivision 9.C1 lose this exemption
when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500 for a structural
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-17
addition to the recreational vehicle or exceeding $500 for an accessory
structure such as a garage or storage building. The recreational vehicle
and all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a new
structure and shall be subject to the elevation/flood proofing requirements
and the use of land restrictions specified in Subdivisions 4.0 and 5.0 of
this Ordinance. There shall be no development or improvement on the
parcel or attachment to the recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of
the recreational vehicle to a flood free location should flooding occur.
4. New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and new
residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the
expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five (5) units or dwelling
sites shall be subject to the following:
a. Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will be allowed in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts provided said recreational
vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood
protection elevation and proper elevated road access to the site
exists in accordance with Subdivision 5.E1 of this Ordinance. No
fill placed in the floodway to meet the requirements of this
Subdivision shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or regional
flood.
b. All new or replacement recreational vehicles not meeting the
criteria of (a) above may, as an alternative, be allowed as a
conditional use if in accordance with the following provisions and
the provisions of 10.D of the Ordinance. The applicant must submit
an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and
people during the 100 year flood. Said plan shall be prepared by a
registered engineer or other qualified individual, shall demonstrate
that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation,
and shall demonstrate the provisions of Subdivision 9.C1 (a) and
(b) of this Ordinance will be met. All attendant sewage and water
facilities for new or replacement recreational vehicles must be
protected or constructed so as to not be impaired or contaminated
during times of flooding in accordance with Subdivision 8.C of this
Ordinance.
Subd. 10. Administration:
A. Zoning Administrator: A Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the
Governing Body shall administer and enforce this Ordinance. If the Zoning
Administrator finds a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the person responsible for such violation in accordance
with the procedures stated in Subdivision 12.0 of the Ordinance.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-18
B. Permit Requirements:
1. Permit Required. A Permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in
conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be secured prior to
the erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation (including normal
maintenance and repair), or alteration of any building, structure, or portion
thereof; prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure, or land;
prior to the construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic system; prior to
the change or extension of a nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a
structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other
source; and prior to the placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the
storage of materials or equipment within the flood plain.
2. Application for Permit. Application for a permit shall be made in duplicate
to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the Zoning
Administrator and shall include the following where applicable: plans in
duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of
materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream
channel.
3. State and Federal Permits. Prior to granting a permit or processing an
application for a conditional use permit or variance, the Zoning
Administrator shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary
state and federal permits.
4. Certificate of Zoning Compliance for a New, Altered, or Nonconforming
Use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of
any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure until a
certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning
Administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the
requirements of this Ordinance.
5. Construction and Use to be as Provided on Applications, Plans, Permits,
Variances and Certificates of Zoning Compliance. Permits, conditional
use permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of
approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no
other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation
of this Ordinance, and punishable as provided by Subdivision 12.0 of this
Ordinance.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-19
6. Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a
registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land
surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Flood proofing
measures shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
registered architect.
7. Record of First Floor Elevation. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a
record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the flood
plain. The Zoning Administrator shall also maintain a record of the
elevation to which structures or alterations and additions to structures are
flood proofed.
8. Notifications for Watercourse Alterations. The Zoning Administrator shall
notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Commissioner
of the Department of Natural Resources prior to the community
authorizing any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the applicant
has applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to
Minnesota Statute, Chapter 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to
the Commissioner of Natural Resources. A copy of said notification shall
also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
9. Notification to FEMA When Physical Changes Increase or Decrease the
100-year Flood Elevation. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six
(6) months after the date such supporting information becomes available,
the Zoning Administrator shall notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA
of the changes by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific data.
C. Board of Adjustment:
1. Rules. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for the conduct of
business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such Boards by
State law.
2. Administrative Review. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement or administration of this Ordinance.
3. Variances. The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon appeal in
specific cases such relief or variance from the terms of this Ordinance as
will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances
such as hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-20
property under consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling
legislation for planning and zoning for cities or counties as appropriate. In
the granting of such variance, the Board of Adjustment shall clearly
identify in writing the specific conditions that existed consistent with the
criteria specified in this Ordinance, any other zoning regulations in the
Community, and in the respective enabling legislation that justified the
granting of the variance. No variance shall have the effect of allowing in
any district uses prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree of flood
protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular
area, or permit standards lower than those required by state law. The
following additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency must be satisfied:
a. Variances shall not be issued by a community within any
designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge would result.
b. Variances shall only be issued by a community upon (i) a showing
of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant
the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant,
and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
c. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
4. Hearings. Upon filing with the Board of Adjustment of an appeal from a
decision of the Zoning Administrator, or an application for a variance, the
Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing and give due
notice to the parties in interest as specified by law. The Board of
Adjustment shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural
Resources a copy of the application for proposed variances sufficiently in
advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least ten days notice of
the hearing.
5. Decisions. The Board of Adjustment shall arrive at a decision on such
appeal or variance within sixty days. In passing upon an appeal, the
Board of Adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify
the order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning
Administrator or other public official. It shall make its decision in writing
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-21
setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decisions. In
granting a variance the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards such as those specified in Subdivision 10.D6,
which are in conformity with the purposes of this Ordinance. Violations of
such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under
which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this
Ordinance punishable under Subdivision 12.0. A copy of all decisions
granting variances shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of
Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such action.
6. Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Board of Adjustment may be
made, and as specified in this community's official controls and also by
Minnesota Statutes.
7. Flood Insurance Notice and Record Keeping. The Zoning Administrator
shall notify the applicant for a variance that: 1) The issuance of a variance
to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100
of insurance coverage and 2) Such construction below the 100-year or
regional flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification
shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. A community
shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance, and report such variances issued in its annual or biennial
report submitted to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance
Program.
D. Conditional Uses. The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall
hear and decide applications for conditional uses permissible under this
Ordinance. Applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator who shall
forward the application to Planning Commission for consideration.
1. Hearings. Upon filing with the City of Rockford an application for a
conditional use permit, the City of Rockford shall submit by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for
proposed conditional use sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner
will receive at least ten days notice of the hearing.
2. Decisions. The City Council shall arrive at a decision on a conditional use
within sixty days. In granting a conditional use permit the City Council
shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
specified in Subdivision 10.D6, which are in conformity with the purposes
of this Ordinance. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when
made a part of the terms under which the conditional use permit is
granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance punishable under
Subdivision 12.0. A copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-22
shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources
within ten (10) days of such action.
3. Procedures to be followed by the City Council in Passing on Conditional
Use Permit Applications Within all Flood Plain Districts.
a. Require the applicant to furnish such of the following information
and additional information as deemed necessary by the City of
Rockford for determining the suitability of the particular site for the
proposed use: Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, flood proofing measures, and
the relationship of the above to the location of the stream channel;
and Specifications for building construction and materials, flood
proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of
materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
b. Transmit one copy of the information described in sub-subdivision
(a) to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for
technical assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed
project in relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of
flood damage to the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection,
and other technical matters.
c. Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or
expert, the City Council shall determine the specific flood hazard at
the site and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation
to the flood hazard.
4. Factors Upon Which the Decision of the City Council Shall Be Based. In
passing upon conditional use applications, the City Council shall consider
all relevant factors specified in other subdivisions of this Ordinance, and:
a. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
b. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges,
culverts or other hydraulic structures.
c. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary
conditions.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-23
d. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
e. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
f. The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
g. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
h. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
i. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and flood plain management program for the area.
j. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
k. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
l. Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
Ordinance.
5. Time for Acting on Application. The City of Rockford shall act on an
application in the manner described above within sixty days from
receiving the application, except that where additional information is
required pursuant to Subd. 10D 4 of this Ordinance. The City Council
shall render a written decision within 30 days from the receipt of such
additional information.
6. Conditions Attached to Conditional Use Permits. Upon consideration of
the factors listed above and the purpose of this Ordinance, the City
Council shall attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use
permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Ordinance.
Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
b. Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
c. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
d. Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective
measures.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-24
e. Flood proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building
Code and this Ordinance. The applicant shall submit a plan or
document certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the flood proofing measures are consistent with the
regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors
for the particular area.
Subd. 11. Non-Conforming Uses:
A. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the
passage or amendment of this Ordinance but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance may be continued subject to the following conditions.
Historic structures, as defined in Subdivision 2.H31(b) of this Ordinance, shall be
subject to the provisions of Subdivisions 11A-2 – 11A-5 of this Ordinance.
1. No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that
increases its nonconformity.
2. Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage
potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood
proofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 thru FP-4 flood proofing classifications)
allowable in the State Building Code, except as further restricted in 11-A3
and 11-A6 below.
3. The cost of any structural alterations or additions to any nonconforming
structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50 percent of the
market value of the structure unless the conditions of this Subdivision are
satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions constructed
since the adoption of the Community's initial flood plain controls must be
calculated into today's current cost which will include all costs such as
construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all manpower or
labor. If the current cost of all previous and proposed alterations and
additions exceeds 50 percent of the current market value of the structure,
then the structure must meet the standards of Subdivision 4.0 or 5.0 of
this Ordinance for new structures depending upon whether the structure is
in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
4. If any nonconforming use is discontinued for l2 consecutive months, any
future use of the building premises shall conform to this Ordinance. The
Assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses that have been discontinued for a period of l2
months.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-25
5. If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as defined
in Subdivision 2H-20 of this Ordinance, it shall not be reconstructed
except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. The applicable
provisions for establishing new uses or new structures in Subdivisions 4.0
and 5.0 will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.
6. If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in Subdivision 2H-21 of
this Ordinance, from any combination of a building addition to the outside
dimensions of the existing building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction,
alteration, or other improvement to the inside dimensions of an existing
nonconforming building, then the building addition (as required by
Subdivision 11-A2 above) and the existing nonconforming building must
meet the requirements of Subdivision 4.0 or 5.0 of this Ordinance for new
structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or
Flood Fringe District, respectively.
Subd. 12. Penalties for Violation:
A. Violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law.
B. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Council from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Such actions
may include but are not limited to:
1. In responding to a suspected Ordinance violation, the Zoning
Administrator and Local Government may utilize the full array of
enforcement actions available to it including but not limited to prosecution
and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective
measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial
of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The Community must act
in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct Ordinance
violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
2. When an Ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought to the
attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall
immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent
of the violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible,
this information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural
Rockford Zoning Ordinance Floodplain District
22-26
Resources' and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office
along with the Community's plan of action to correct the violation to the
degree possible.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the
requirements of this Ordinance and all other official controls and the
nature and extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the
structure and/or use is under construction or development, the Zoning
Administrator may order the construction or development immediately
halted until a proper permit or approval is granted by the Community. If
the construction or development is already completed, then the Zoning
Administrator may either: (1) issue an order identifying the corrective
actions that must be made within a specified time period to bring the use
or structure into compliance with the official controls; or (2) notify the
responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact permit/development
approval within a specified period of time not to exceed 30-days.
4. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the Zoning
Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that
lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this Ordinance and shall
be prosecuted accordingly. The Zoning Administrator shall also upon the
lapse of the specified response period notify the landowner to restore the
land to the condition which existed prior to the violation of this Ordinance.
Subd. 13. Amendments: The flood plain designation on the Official Zoning Map
shall not be removed from flood plain areas unless it can be shown that the designation
is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory
flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the flood plain. Special
exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if
he determines that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the
intended use.
All amendments to this Ordinance, including amendments to the Official Zoning Map,
must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to
adoption. Changes in the Official Zoning Map must meet the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's (FEMA) Technical Conditions and Criteria and must receive
prior FEMA approval before adoption. The Commissioner of Natural Resources must
be given 10-days written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this
Ordinance and said notice shall include a draft of the Ordinance amendment or
technical study under consideration.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance POC District
22A-1
1001.22A. POC, PUBLIC / OPEN / CONSERVATION
Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of the POC District is to provide for the reservation
of publicly (or in specific cases, privately) owned or managed open space. Such areas
are intended to be maintained as long term open space, and this district is not intended
as a "holding" zone for future development land.
Subd. 2. Permitted Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are permitted uses in a POC District:
A. Agriculture, the keeping of livestock and poultry, nurseries, greenhouses for
growing only, landscape gardening and tree farms, including sale of products
grown on premises.
B. Golf courses (except club houses, miniature courses and driving tees operated
for commercial purposes).
C. Residential care facilities licensed by the state and regulated, located and
operated per State Statutes.
D. Single family detached dwellings.
Subd. 3. Interim Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are interim uses in the POC District and are governed by Section 1001.03,
Subd. 6 of this Chapter.
A. Model homes as regulated by Section 1001.09, Subd. 16 of this Chapter.
30 B. Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) as regulated by Section 1001.09,
Subd. 21 of this Chapter.
Subd. 4. Accessory Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are permitted accessory uses in the POC District:
A. Barns, stables, silos, other agricultural buildings.
B. Fences as herein regulated.
C. Keeping of not more than two (2) boarders or roomers by a resident family.
D. Living quarters of persons employed on the premises.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance POC District
22A-2
E. Parking as herein regulated.
F. Private garage.
G. Secondary uses customarily incident to the permitted or conditional uses allowed
in the district.
H. Signs as herein regulated.
Subd. 5. Conditional Uses. Subject to applicable provisions of this Chapter, the
following are conditional uses allowed in a POC District: (Requires a conditional use
permit based upon procedures set forth in and regulated by Section 1001.03, Subd. 5.
of this Chapter.)
A. Cemeteries, provided that:
1. The site accesses on a major collector.
2. The site is landscaped in accordance with Section 1001.09 of this
Chapter.
3. The provisions of this Chapter are considered and determined to be
satisfied.
B. Dog kennels provided that:
1. No person shall maintain or operate any kennel or shelter without a
license as regulated by the City Code.
2. A minimum lot size of one (1) acre is required to be licensed for operation
of a kennel or shelter.
3. Every kennel or shelter shall be enclosed or fenced in such a manner as
to prevent the running at large or escape of animals confined therein.
4. Both dog kennels or cat shelters shall be open for inspection by the City
authorities at any time.
5. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep three (3) or more dogs
and/or cats over six (6) months of age on his/her premises in the City
without obtaining a kennel license pursuant to this section and the City
Code.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance POC District
22A-3
C. Home occupations provided that the following general provisions are met:
1. No home occupation shall produce light, glare, noise, fumes, odor, or
vibration that will in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or
nearby property.
2. No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will create
electrical interference to surrounding properties. No equipment shall be
used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television
receives off the premises or causes fluctuations in the voltage off the
premises.
3. Any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the premises; not more than ten (l0) percent of the floor
area of the dwelling unit shall be permanently set aside to be used in the
conduct of the home occupation. It shall not change the residential
character thereof, and shall result in no incompatibility or disturbance to
the surrounding residential uses.
4. No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or involve
construction features not customarily found in dwellings except where
required to comply with local and state fire and police recommendations.
5. There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in the
home occupation, except personal vehicles used in the home occupation
which comply with applicable provisions of this Chapter may be parked on
the site.
6. The home occupation shall meet all applicable fire and building codes.
7. There shall be no exterior display or exterior signs or interior display or
interior signs which are visible from outside the dwelling with the exception
of directional and identification/business signs to the extent authorized by
the provisions of Section 1001.08 of this Chapter.
8. All home occupations shall comply with the provisions of the City Code.
9. No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of 10:00 PM
and 7:00 AM unless approved by the City Council and said occupation is
contained entirely within the principal building and will not require any onstreet
parking facilities.
10. Home occupations shall not create a parking demand in excess of that
which can be accommodated in an existing driveway, where no vehicle is
parked closer than fifteen (15) feet from the curb line or edge of paved
surface.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance POC District
22A-4
11. No person other than those who customarily reside on the premises shall
be employed as part of the home occupation.
12. All permitted home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the
principal building and may not be conducted in an accessory building.
13. Permitted home occupations include and are limited to: art studio,
dressmaking, secretarial services, family day care, foster care, offices,
teaching with musical, dancing and other instructions which consist of no
more than one pupil at a time, and similar uses.
14. The home occupation shall not involve any of the following: repair service
or manufacturing which requires equipment other than found in a home;
teaching which customarily consists of more than one (1)pupil at a time;
over-the-counter sale of merchandise produced off the premises.
D. Municipal, administrative or service buildings or uses including public and
semi-public institutions, libraries, museums, post offices, etc., except industrial
type uses provided that:
1. When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 1001.09 of this
Chapter.
2. The provisions of Section 1001.03 of this Chapter are considered and
determined to be satisfied.
E. Private recreation including golf club houses, country club, swimming or tennis
club provided that:
1. The principal use, function or activity is open, outdoor in character.
2. Not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the site shall be covered
by buildings or structures.
3. When abutting a residential use or a residential use district, the property is
screened and landscaped for the protection of the abutting use, according
to the provisions of Section 1001.09 of this Chapter.
4. The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the
minimum established for the district.
5. The use will not negatively impact the natural setting intended for this
district or neighboring residential uses.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance POC District
22A-5
6. The traffic generated by the use can be adequately accommodated
(volume and weight) upon City streets serving the use.
7. An adequate septic system and well can be established on the site.
F. Parks and recreation areas owned or operated by public bodies, other than the
City.
G. Essential service buildings.
H. Railroad rights-of-way.
Subd. 6. Lot Area and Setback Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in a POC District, subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications set forth in this Chapter.
A. Lot Requirements.
1. Lot Area: Not less than five (5) acres.
2. Lot Width: Not less than three hundred (300) feet.
3. Lot Depth: Not less than three hundred (300) feet.
B. Principal Structure Setback Requirements.
1. Front Yard:
a. One or Two Family: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
b. Other Uses: Not less than one hundred (100) feet.
2. Side Yard:
a. One or Two Family: Not less than fifteen (15) feet, nor less than fifty
(50) feet abutting a street.
b. Other Uses Abutting Residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
c. Other Uses: Not less than thirty (30) feet.
d. Detached Access Uses: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
e. Attached Access Uses: Not less than fifteen (15) feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance POC District
22A-6
3. Rear Yard:
a. One or Two Family: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet, nor less
than fifty (50) feet abutting a street.
b. Other Uses Abutting Residences: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
c. Other Uses: Not less than forty (40) feet.
d. Detached Access Uses: Not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
e. Abutting an Arterial Street: Not less than fifty (50) feet.
Subd. 7. Other Requirements.
A. Any development in the POC District shall be required to submit a plan indicating
further subdivision of the property to include public sanitary sewer and water.
3B. All unsewered development in the POC District must meet state and local on-site
sewer requirements.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance S, Shoreland District
23-1
1001.23 S, SHORELAND DISTRICT 27
Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of the S, Shoreland District is to manage the
effect of shoreland and water surface crowding, to prevent pollution of surface and
ground waters of the City, to provide ample space on lots for sewage treatment
systems, to minimize flood damages, to maintain property values, and to maintain
natural characteristics of shorelands and adjacent water areas via shoreland controls
which regulate lot sizes, placement of structures and alterations of shoreland areas.
Subd. 2. District Authorization. The shorelands within the City of Rockford are
hereby designated as shoreland districts and the requirements set forth in this
Ordinance shall govern development and other activities within these districts, pursuant
to authorization and policies contained in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 103F, Minnesota
Regulations, Parts 6120.2500-6120.3900. The classification of the shoreland areas
shall govern the use, alteration and development of these areas according to said
classification.
Subd. 3. District Application. The S, Shoreland District shall be applied to and
superimposed (overlaid) upon all zoning districts of this Ordinance as existing or
amended by the text of this Ordinance. The regulations and requirements imposed by
the S, Shoreland District shall be in addition to those established for districts which joint
apply. Under the joint application of districts, the more restrictive requirements shall
apply.
Subd. 4. District Boundaries. The boundaries of the S, Shoreland District are
established within the following distances from the ordinary high water mark of the
surface water depending on the size of the surface water as indicated on the Rockford
Shoreland District Map.
Surface Water District 1
Greater than ten (10) acres 1,000 feet
Rivers and Streams (draining an area
greater than two (2) square miles)
300
2
1
The practical distance may be less whenever the waters
involved are bounded by topographical divides which
extend landward from the waters for lesser distances and
prevent flowage toward the surface water.
2
The distance requirement shall be increased to the limit of the
floodplain when the floodplain is greater than three hundred (300)
feet.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance S, Shoreland District
23-2
Subd. 5. Shoreland Classification. The surface waters affected by this section
and which require controlled development of their shoreland (Shoreland District) are
shown on the map designed as the official “Rockford Zoning Map” which is incorporated
herein by this reference and filed with the City Clerk . Surface waters generally greater
than ten (10) acres and given an identification number by the State of Minnesota as
defined in this section and listed below. Other surface waters affected, generally having
less than ten (10) acres, are classified as wetland systems.
DNR Identification Number Name Classification
- - Crow River, South Fork AR
86-27W Spotanski Lake NE
Subd. 6. Allowable Land Uses. The land uses allowable for the S, Shoreland
District shall follow the “permitted”, “accessory”, and “conditional” use designations as
defined and outlined in the base zoning districts established by Chapters 1001.10
through 1001.23 of this Ordinance.
Subd. 7. Minimum Lot and Setback Requirements.
A. Subject to other more restrictive provisions that may be imposed by the Zoning
Ordinance, the following chart sets forth the minimum area setbacks and other
requirements of each respective classification:
NE
Natural
Environment
RD
Recreational
Development
AR
Agricultural
River
1. Minimum lot size above normal
high water mark:
Non-sewered
Sewered - abutting water
Sewered - non-abutting
5 acres
40,000 SF
20,000 SF
5 acres
20,000 SF
15,000 SF
NA
2. Lot Width:
Non-sewered
Sewered
200 feet
125 feet
150 feet
80 feet
100 feet
80 feet
3. Setback from ordinary high water
mark (1):
Non-sewered
Sewered
200 feet
150 feet
100 feet
75 feet
100 feet
50 feet
5. Setback from top of bluff 30 feet 30 feet 30 feet
6. Maximum impervious surface to
area ratio (2)
30% 30% 30%
7. Maximum building height 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet
8. Side yard setback (3) 30 feet 20 feet 20 feet
Rockford Zoning Ordinance S, Shoreland District
23-3
1
Setback requirements from the ordinary high water mark shall not apply to boathouses, piers,
park buildings or structures, and docks. Boathouses may be permitted to be located up to the
ordinary high water mark provided they shall not be used for habitation and they shall not
contain sanitary facilities. Where development exists on both sides of a proposed building site,
building setbacks may be altered to more closely conform to adjacent building setbacks,
provided the proposed building site is not located in a shoreland impact zone or in a bluff impact
zone.
2 Within the C-O District, impervious surface coverage may be allowed to exceed 30 percent
provided that all structures and best management practices are in place for the control and
treatment of stormwater runoff and a shoreland impact plan is submitted and approved in
accordance with Section 1001.23, Subd. 8.B of this Section.
3
Where feasible and practical, all roads and parking area shall meet the setback requirements
established for structures in (c) above. Natural vegetation or other natural materials shall be
required in order to screen parking areas when viewed from the water. Parking areas of more
than four (4) spaces shall be screened in accordance with a landscaping plan submitted and
approved by the City Council.
B. Substandard Lots. Any lot of record filed in the office of the Hennepin or Wright
County Register of Deeds on the effective date of this Ordinance amendment
which does not meet the area requirements of this Ordinance may be allowed as
a building site subject to approval of a shoreland impact plan and provided:
1. The lot is serviced by municipal sewer and water.
2. Except for lot area, all other sanitary and dimensional requirements of the
Shoreland District are complied with insofar as practical.
Subd. 8. Development Regulations.
A. Applications. Landowners or developers desiring to develop land or construct a
dwelling, building, or any other artificial obstruction on land located within any
shoreland district within the City of Rockford shall make one of the following
applications:
1. Single family dwelling, two family dwelling, or accessory buildings shall
submit an application for building permit.
2. Multiple family, townhomes, commercial, or industrial buildings shall
submit application for a site and building plan review as regulated by
Section 1001.09, Subd. 12 of this Ordinance.
3. Subdivision request shall submit an application for preliminary and/or final
plat as required by the Rockford Subdivision Ordinance.
B. Shoreland Impact Plan. The aforementioned applications shall be accompanied
by plans for development referred to as a shoreland impact plan which shall set
forth proposed provisions to preventing erosion into public waters, infiltrating
Rockford Zoning Ordinance S, Shoreland District
23-4
rainwater runoff, preserving shoreland aesthetics and historic values, preventing
bank slumping, limiting direct and indirect impacts on water quality, and
protecting fish and wildlife habitat. A shoreland buffer, consisting of trees,
shrubs, and ground cover of native plants and understory, shall be required as
part of the plan. Shoreline buffers standards shall include the following:
1. Removal or alterations of natural vegetation, except for forest
management or agricultural uses shall follow these standards:
a. A shoreline buffer shall exist within the shore impact zone,
consisting of trees, shrubs, and low ground cover of native plants
and understory in a natural state.
b. Vegetation clearing and removal of ground cover, including leaf
litter and the forest floor duff layer, within the shore and bluff impact
zones and on steep slopes shall not be allowed, except as follows:
1) Limited clearing of trees and shrubs, and cutting, pruning,
and trimming of trees to accommodate the placement of
stairways and landings, access paths, view corridors,
recreation use areas, and permitted water-oriented
accessory structures or facilities shall be allowed within the
shore impact zone. Trees, shrubs, and a low ground cover
consisting of native plants and understory shall be
maintained in a natural state within this area. An access path
permitted within this area shall not exceed a cleared width of
6 feet and must be oriented generally perpendicular to the
shoreline. Only one shoreline recreation use area shall be
allowed on each residential lot and it shall not exceed the
following dimensions:
Classification Width Length
NE 10 15
RD 20 15
AR 30 15
2) For conservation subdivisions, planned unit developments
and new resorts, shoreline recreation use areas shall be no
larger than 20 feet in width along the shoreline for each 100
feet of shoreline, not to exceed 5000 square feet in total
area, with the depth of the shoreline recreational area not
exceeding 25 feet landward from the ordinary high water
level. A perennial ground cover shall be maintained to
prevent erosion on all shoreline recreation use areas, and a
tree canopy shall cover half of the area to intercept rainfall
and lessen erosion potential.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance S, Shoreland District
23-5
3) Limited clearing of trees and shrubs, and cutting, pruning,
and trimming of trees to accommodate the placement of
stairways and landings, and access paths shall be allowed in
bluff impact zones and on steep slopes. Trees, shrubs, and
a low ground cover consisting of native grasses and plants
shall be maintained in these areas.
4) The removal of dead or dying trees or branches that pose a
safety hazard shall be allowed.
c. Removal of trees and shrubs within the secondary shoreline buffer
zone may be allowed, provided that a well-distributed stand of trees
and shrubs are maintained. A well distributed stand of trees and
shrubs means that a tree and shrub canopy covers over 50 percent
the area. A ground layer of predominantly perennial vegetation,
such as grass, flowers, forbs, or preferably native plants, shall be
preserved, established or maintained in this area.
2. Use of fertilizer shall not be allowed within the shore impact zone. Use of
fertilizer and pesticides elsewhere within the shoreland management
district must be done in such a way as to minimize runoff into the shore
impact zone or public water.
3. Vegetation within the shore impact zone shall be maintained to screen
structures with trees and shrubs so that the structures are at most 50
percent visible from public waters during summer, leaf-on conditions.
4. No impervious surfaces shall be allowed within the shore impact zone,
except for boat launches, stairways, lifts or landings, and, where
permitted, one water-oriented accessory structure.
5. Open areas and lawns within the shore impact zone, except those allowed
in part 1, shall be left unmowed or replanted with native vegetation of trees
and shrubs to establish and maintain a vegetative buffer, with a natural
ground layer of understory plants.
6. Shoreland controls shall meet or exceed the following standards:
a. Filling of any wetlands within the shore impact and secondary
shoreline buffer zones shall be prohibited.
b. Natural swales, depressions, steep slopes, and topsoil shall be
preserved. Alterations to these areas may only be permitted in
conjunction with erosion control, stormwater management, and
vegetation buffer plans that are approved by the local government
and effectively implemented.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance S, Shoreland District
23-6
c. Excavation or placement of more than five (5) cubic yards of
material within shore impact zone may be permitted provided that
erosion control, stormwater management, and vegetation buffer
plans are approved by the local government and effectively
implemented.
d. Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that
ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the
shortest time possible.
e. Mulches or similar materials must be used for erosion control,
where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage, and a
permanent vegetation cover must be established as soon as
possible.
f. Silt fences or other methods to trap sediments before they reach
any surface water feature must be used.
g. Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control
standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the
local soil and water conservation districts and the Natural
Resources Conservation Service.
h. Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that
creates an unstable slope.
i. Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes, including
the construction of walkout basements, shall be developed by a
registered professional engineer for continued slope stability and
must not create finished slopes of 30 percent or greater.
k. Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact zones.
l. Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public waters
shall be authorized by the commissioner under Minnesota Statutes,
sections 103G.245 and 103G.405 prior to the commencement of
any work.
m. Alterations of topography shall only be allowed if they do not
adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties.
n. Placement of natural rock riprap and retaining walls, where allowed
shall comply with regulations adopted pursuant to Minnesota
Statutes, section 103G.245. Natural rock riprap shall only be used
for the correction of an established erosion problem that cannot be
Rockford Zoning Ordinance S, Shoreland District
23-7
controlled through the use of native vegetation, slope stabilization
using mulch, biomat, or similar bioengineered means. Riprap and
retaining walls used for ornamental purposes or for terracing
natural slopes shall be prohibited within the shore and bluff impact
zones.
7. Excavations where the intended purpose is connection to a public water,
such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors, shall be regulated by
local shoreland controls. Permission for excavations may be given only
after the commissioner has approved the proposed connection to public
waters pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.245. Structures
setbacks and the shore impact zone shall be measured from the
excavation.
C. Bluff Impact Zones. Structures and accessory facilities except stairways,
landings, and public utilities shall not be placed within bluff impact zones.
D. Stairways, Lifts, and Landings. Stairways and lifts, solely for the purpose of
pedestrian transportation, are the preferred alternative to major topographic
alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore
areas. Stairways and lifts must meet the following design requirements:
1. Stairways and lifts shall not exceed four feet (4') in width on residential
lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, public openspace
recreational properties, and planned unit developments;
2. Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots shall not exceed thirty
two (32) square feet in area;
3. Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or landings;
4. Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either constructed above the ground
on posts or pilings, no higher than thirty inches (30") above grade at any
one point, or placed into the ground provided they are designed and built
in a manner that ensures control of soil erosions;
5. Stairways, lifts, and landings shall be located in the most visually
inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the public
water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical; and
6. Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for physically handicapped
persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas, provided
that the dimensional and performance standards of Section 1001.23,
Subd. 8.C of this Ordinance are complied with in addition to the
requirements of Minnesota Regulations, chapter 1340.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance S, Shoreland District
23-8
E. Steep Slopes: The City Engineer shall evaluate possible soil erosion impacts
and development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for
construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures, or other
improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary, conditions must be
attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation
screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface
of public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation.
F. Sewage and Waste Disposal: Any premises used for human occupancy shall be
provided with an adequate method of sewage disposal to be maintained in
accordance with the requirements of Section 401 of the City Code and existing
individual on site septic systems in accordance with Minnesota Rules 7080.
G. Water Supply: Any private supply of water for domestic purposes shall conform
to Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, Hennepin and Wright County, and
Minnesota Department of Health Standards for water quality and Section 402 of
the City Code.
H. Stormwater Management: The following general and specific standards shall
apply in regard to stormwater management within any shoreland district within
the City:
1. When possible, existing natural drainage ways, wetlands, and vegetated
soil surfaces shall be used to convey, store, filter, and retain stormwater
runoff before discharge to public waters.
2. Development shall be planned to minimize the extent of disturbed areas,
runoff velocities, erosion potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes.
Disturbed areas shall be stabilized and protected as soon as possible, and
no later than thirty (30) days after completion of the project. All methods of
stormwater management shall comply with the Rockford Comprehensive
Storm Drainage Plan.
3. When development density, topographic features, and soil and vegetation
conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff using
natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities
such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways,
and ponds may be used. Preference shall be given to designs using
surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and
manmade materials and facilities.
4. New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters shall provide for
filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris
before discharge.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance S, Shoreland District
23-9
5. Stormwater outfalls above the OHW will not need a permit. All stormwater
outfalls below the OHW will need to apply for a Pollution Control Agency
General Stormwater Permit and a DNR permit.
I. Placement and Design of Streets, Driveways, And Parking Areas: The following
standards shall apply in regard to street, driveway and parking area placement
and design within any shoreland district within the City.
1. Public streets and private driveways and parking areas shall be designed
to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve
maximum screening from view from public waters. Documentation shall be
provided to the City Engineer that all streets, driveways and parking areas
are designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public
waters consistent with City standards.
2. Private driveways, and parking areas shall meet structure setbacks and
shall not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when other
reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives
exist, they may be placed within these areas by conditional use permit,
and must be designed to minimize adverse impacts. Natural vegetation or
other natural materials shall be required in order to screen parking areas
when viewed from the water. Parking areas of more than four (4) spaces
shall be screened in accordance with a landscape plan, submitted and
approved by the City Council.
3. Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and accessrelated
parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided
the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this subpart are
met.
4. Fences: Fences shall not exceed forty eight inches (48") in height and
shall be at least seventy five percent (75%) open space for passage of air
and light inside the ordinary high-water level setback. Fences shall not be
located within ten feet (10') from the ordinary high-water mark.
Subd. 9. Shoreland Alterations: Alterations of vegetation and topography will be
regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland
aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, and protect fish and wildlife
habitat.
A. Vegetation Alterations: The removal of natural vegetation shall be restricted to
prevent erosion into public waters, to conserve nutrients in the soil, and to
preserve shoreland aesthetics.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance S, Shoreland District
23-10
1. During the site grading of new subdivision development and other
planning actions, any removal of significant trees shall require a tree
preservation plan in accordance with the City's subdivision regulations.
2. Natural vegetation shall be restored as soon as feasible after any
construction project, but not later than the start of the next growing
season.
3. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to vegetation alterations
necessary for the construction of structures and the construction of streets
and parking areas subject to the following standards:
a) In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited
clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and trimming of
trees is allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal
dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and
landings, access paths, beach and watercraft access areas or
facilities, provided that:
1) The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities as
viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions, is not substantially reduced.
2) Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is preserved.
3) The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of
trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose
safety hazards.
B. Grading and Filling Associated With Any Development Project Involving
Subdivisions, Commercial, Industrial, Or Multiple- Family Uses:
1. Grading and filling within shoreland districts, or any alterations of the
natural topography where the slope of the land is toward public water or
watercourse leading to public water shall be approved by the City
Engineer. A permit shall be obtained prior to the commencement of any
work thereon. The permit may be granted subject to the conditions that:
a. Temporary ground cover such as mulch shall be used and
permanent cover such as sod shall be planted as soon as possible.
b. Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment shall be employed in
accordance with the Rockford Standard Detail Plates.
c. Fill shall not be placed in areas lower in elevation than the normal
high-water mark.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance S, Shoreland District
23-11
d. Fill shall be stabilized according to accepted engineering standards.
e. Fill shall not restrict a floodway or destroy the storage capacity of a
flood plain.
f. The maximum slope of the finished surface which slopes toward a
water body or a watercourse leading to such water body shall be
three (3) units horizontal to one vertical.
g. Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact zones.
h. Any alterations below the ordinary high-water level of public waters
must first be authorized by the Commissioner under Minnesota
Statutes section 103G.245.
2. Any work which will change or diminish the course, current, or cross
section of a public water shall require a permit from the City Engineer and
be approved by the Department of Natural Resources before the work is
begun. This includes construction of boat slips, canals, channels and
ditches, lagooning, dredging of lake bottoms for the removal of muck, silt
or weeds, and filling in the lake bed including low lying marsh areas.
Approval will be given only if the proposed work is consistent with
applicable State regulations for beds of public waters.
C. Special Provisions for Agricultural, Extractive, and Commercial Uses:
1. Agriculture Use Standards: General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are
permitted uses if steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are
maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved
conservation plan (resource management systems) consistent with the
field office technical guides of the Hennepin and Wright County Soil and
Water Conservation Districts or the United States Soil Conservation
Service, as provided by a qualified individual or agency. The shore impact
zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is equal to a line
parallel to and fifty feet (50') from the ordinary high-water level.
Subd. 10. Variances. Variances may be granted by the City Council upon
application as required in Section 1001.03, Subd. 4.A of this Ordinance in extraordinary
cases but only when the proposed use is determined to be in the public interest and no
variance shall be granted which the Council determines will or has a tendency to:
A. Impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance S, Shoreland District
23-12
B. Unreasonably increase the congestion in the public street.
C. Have the effect of allowing any uses which are prohibited, permit a lesser degree
of flood protection than the flood protection elevation for the particular area, or
permit standards which are lower than those required by State Law.
D. Increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety.
E. Unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the
neighborhood, or in any way be contrary to the intent of the Chapter.
F. Violate the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan.
G. Violate any of the terms or conditions of Item B of Section 1001.03, Subd. 4.A.
Subd. 11. Conditional Uses. Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas
shall be subject to the review and approval procedures set forth in Section 1001.03,
Subd. 5 of this Ordinance. The following additional evaluation criteria and conditions
apply within shoreland areas:
A. Evaluation Criteria: A thorough evaluation of the water body and the topographic,
vegetation, and soils conditions on the site must be made to ensure:
1. The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of public waters,
both during and after construction.
2. The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from public waters
is limited.
Subd. 12. Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources.
A. Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances, amendments,
or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls must be sent to
the commissioner or the commissioner's designated representative and
postmarked at least ten (10) days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to
consider proposed subdivisions/plans must include copies of the subdivision/plat.
B. A copy of approved amendment and subdivisions/plats, and final decisions
granting variances or conditional uses under local shoreland management
controls must be sent to the commissioner or the commissioner's designated
representative and postmarked within ten (10) days of final action.
Rockford Zoning Ordinance S, Shoreland District
23-13
Subd. 13. Effect of Permit. The granting of any permit, variance, or subdivision
approval under provisions of this Chapter shall in no way affect the owner's capability to
obtain the approval required by any other statute, ordinance or legislation of any State
agency or subdivision thereof. Approval may be expressly given in conjunction with
other permits applied for, but no approval shall be implied from the grant of such permits
or from the necessity to apply for a permit as described herein.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
1002. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
PASSED JUNE 12, 2007 - ORDINANCE 07-06
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
1002.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT …………………………………………... 1
1002.02 APPLICATION ………………………………………………………. 1
1002.03 APPROVALS NECESSARY FOR ACCEPTANCE OF PLATS ... 1
1002.04 CONDITIONS FOR RECORDING ………………………………… 1
1002.05 INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS
Subd. 1. Conflicting Provisions ………………………………………………. 2
Subd. 2. Measured Distances ………………………………………………... 2
1002.06 COMPLIANCE WITH CITY REGULATIONS …………………….. 2
1002.07 BUILDING PERMITS ……………………………………………….. 2
1002.08 SEVERABILITY ……………………………………………………... 2
1002.09 DEFINITIONS ……………………………………………………….. 2
1002.10 FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES
Subd. 1. Fees, Charges and Expenses Established ………………………. 8
Subd. 2. Payment of Fees, Charges and Expenses ……………………….. 8
Subd. 3. Fees, Charges and Expenses are Additional ……………………. 8
1002.11 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY
Subd. 1. Sale of Lots From Unrecorded Plats ……………………………… 8
Subd. 2. Receiving or Recording Unapproved Plats ………………………. 8
Subd. 3. Misrepresentations ………………………………………………….. 8
Subd. 4. Misdemeanor Violation ……………………………………………... 9
1002.12 VARIANCES AND APPEALS
Subd. 1. Variance Findings …………………………………………………… 9
Subd. 2. Requests for Variance or Appeal ………………………………….. 9
Subd. 3. Planning Commission Procedures ………………………………… 9
Subd. 4. City Council Procedures ……………………………………………. 10
Subd. 5. Grant of Variance or Appeal ……………………………………….. 11
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
Page
1002.13 ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS
Subd. 1. Qualification ………………………………………………………….. 11
Subd. 2. Content and Data Requirements ………………………………….. 11
Subd. 3. Design Standards …………………………………………………… 11
Subd. 4. Processing …………………………………………………………… 12
1002.14 SUBDIVISION PLATTING PROCEDURES
Subd. 1. Sketch Plan ………………………………………………………….. 12
Subd. 2. Preliminary Plat ……………………………………………………… 12
Subd. 3. Final Plat ……………………………………………………………... 15
1002.15 PREMATURE SUBDIVISIONS
Subd. 1. Qualification ………………………………………………………….. 16
Subd. 2. Conditions Establishing Premature Subdivision …………………. 16
Subd. 3. Burden of Establishing Premature Subdivision ………………….. 18
1002.16 PLAT AND DATA REQUIREMENTS
Subd. 1. Sketch Plan ………………………………………………………….. 18
Subd. 2. Preliminary Plat ……………………………………………………… 18
Subd. 3. Final Plat ……………………………………………………………... 21
Subd. 4. Certification Required ………………………………………………. 22
1002.17 DESIGN STANDARDS
Subd. 1. Compliance with Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance … 23
Subd. 2. Minimum Design Requirements …………………………………… 23
Subd. 3. Land Requirements …………………………………………………. 23
Subd. 4. Blocks ………………………………………………………………… 24
Subd. 5. Lots …………………………………………………………………… 24
Subd. 6. Streets ………………………………………………………………... 26
Subd. 7. Street Design ………………………………………………………… 29
Subd. 8. Water and Sewer Systems ………………………………………... 29
Subd. 9. Drainage System ……………………………………………………. 30
Subd. 10. Easements …………………………………………………………… 31
Subd. 11. Erosion and Sediment Control …………………………………….. 31
Subd. 12. Protected Areas …………………………………………………….. 32
Subd. 13. Floodplain ……………………………………………………………. 33
Subd. 14. Tree Preservation …………………………………………………… 33
Subd. 15. Parks and Trails …………………………………………………….. 36
1002.18 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
Subd. 1. Monuments …………………………………………………………... 39
Subd. 2. Streets ………………………………………………………………... 40
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
Page
Subd. 3. Street Signs ………………………………………………………….. 40
Subd. 4. Street Lighting ……………………………………………………….. 40
Subd. 5. Tree Planting ………………………………………………………… 40
Subd. 6. Water and Sewer Systems ………………………………………… 41
Subd. 7. Stormwater Management ………………………………………….. 42
Subd. 8. Utilities Location …………………………………………………….. 42
Subd. 9. Inspections …………………………………………………………… 42
Subd. 10. Certificate of Occupancy …………………………………………… 42
1002.19 IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
Subd. 1. Improvements Required ……………………………………………. 42
Subd. 2. Construction Plans and Inspection ………………………………... 43
Subd. 3. Responsibility for Installation Costs ……………………………….. 44
Subd. 4. Agreement for Private Installation of Improvements …………….. 44
Subd. 5. Agreement for Installation of Improvements by City …………….. 45
Subd. 6. Financial Guarantee ………………………………………………… 45
Subd. 7. Completion of Improvements Prior to Final Plat Approval ……… 46
Subd. 8. Trunk Facilities ………………………………………………………. 46
Subd. 9. Administrative Fee ………………………………………………….. 46
Subd. 10. Alternate Installation ………………………………………………… 46
1002.20 CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS …………………….. 46
1002.21 REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS ………………………………….. 47
LIST OF AMENDMENTS
Symbol
Ordinance
Number Dated Passed
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
1
1002.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT
This Chapter is enacted for the following purposes: to safeguard the best interests of
the City of Rockford; to assist the subdivider in harmonizing their interests with those of
the City at large; to correlate land subdivision with the comprehensive plan; to
encourage well planned, efficient and attractive subdivisions by establishing adequate
and impartial standards for design and construction; to provide for the health and safety
of residents by requiring properly designed streets and adequate sewer and water
service; to place the cost of improvements against those benefiting from their
construction; to secure the rights of the public with respect to public lands and waters; to
improve land records by establishing standards for surveys and plats; to discourage
inferior development which might adversely affect property values; to establish
subdivision development standards; and to set the minimum requirements necessary to
protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
1002.02 APPLICATION
Any plat, hereafter made, for each subdivision or each part thereof lying within the City,
shall be prepared, presented for approval and recorded as herein prescribed. The
regulations contained herein shall apply to the subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
into two or more lots, tracts or other division of land for the purpose of sale, building
development, whether immediate or future, or any other purpose, including the
resubdivision or re-platting of land or lots.
1002.03 APPROVALS NECESSARY FOR ACCEPTANCE OF PLATS:
Before any plat shall be recorded or be of any validity, it shall be referred to the City
planning commission and approved by the City Council as having fulfilled the
requirements of this Chapter.
1002.04 CONDITIONS FOR RECORDING:
No plat or any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the Hennepin or Wright County
recorder's office or have any validity until the plat or subdivision has been prepared,
approved and acknowledged in the manner prescribed by this Chapter.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
2
1002.05 INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS
Subd. 1. Conflicting Provisions. Whenever there is a difference between
minimum standards or dimensions specified herein and those contained in other official
regulations, resolutions or City Code provisions, the most restrictive standards shall
apply.
Subd. 2. Measured Distances. All measured distances expressed in feet shall be
the nearest tenth of a foot.
1002.06 COMPLIANCE WITH CITY REGULATIONS
No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the county recorders office, or
have any validity until the plat thereof has been prepared, approved, and acknowledged
in the manner prescribed by this Chapter.
1002.07 BUILDING PERMITS
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building, structure or
improvement upon any land or to any lot in a subdivision unless and until all
requirements of this Chapter have been complied with relative to the property for which
a permit is sought.
1002.08 SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter is for any reason
held to be invalid or unenforceable as to any person or circumstance, the application of
such section, subsection, clause or phrase to persons or circumstances, other than
those as to which it shall be held invalid or unenforceable, shall be affected thereby, and
all provisions hereof, in all other respects, shall remain valid and enforceable.
1002.09 DEFINITIONS
Except for those words and phrases defined in this section, the words and phrases used
in this Chapter shall be interpreted to be given the meanings in common usage, and as
may be commonly defined in dictionaries so as to give this Chapter its most reasonable
application.
Alley: A public or private right of way primarily designed to serve as secondary access
to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a street.
Applicant: The owner, their agent or person having legal control and/or an interest in
the land proposed to be subdivided.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
3
Base Lot: A lot meeting all the specifications within its zoning district prior to being
divided into a subdivision of single-family attached units.
Block: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or by
streets and the entire boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or a combination of the
above, with a river, lake, railroad, or unsubdivided acreage.
Boulevard: The portion of the street right of way between the curb line and the property
line.
Building: Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
chattels or moveable property of any kind.
Butt Lot: A lot at the end of a block, located between two (2) corner lots.
City: The City of Rockford.
City Attorney: The attorney appointed by the City, unless otherwise stated.
City Council: The Rockford City Council
City Engineer: The registered engineer appointed by the City, unless otherwise stated.
City Planner. The planner appointed by the City unless otherwise stated.
Comprehensive Plan: A comprehensive plan prepared by the City, including a
compilation of policy statement goals, standards and maps, indicating the general
locations recommended for the various functional classes of land use, places and
structures, and for the general physical development of the City, including any unit or
part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
Contour Map: A map on which irregularities of land surface are shown by lines
connecting points of equal elevations. "Contour interval" shall mean the vertical height
between contour lines.
Copy: A print or reproduction made from a tracing.
County: are the counties of Hennepin and Wright as applicable.
Dedication: The contribution of property or of money to the governing body. Said
property is forever vacated by the dedicators or their successors.
Design Standards: The specifications to landowners or those proposing to subdivide
land for the preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating, among other
things, the optimum, minimum or maximum dimensions of such items as rights of way,
blocks, easements and lots.
Developments: The act of building structures and installing site improvements.
Double Frontage Lots: A lot which has a property line abutting on one street and an
opposite property line abutting on another nonintersecting street.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
4
Drainage Course: A watercourse or indentation for the drainage of surface water.
Easement: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land and for the purpose
of constructing and maintaining drives, sidewalks, trails and utilities, including, but not
limited to, wetlands, ponding areas, sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines,
telephone lines, storm sewer or storm drainageways and gas lines.
Final Plat: A drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all of the requirements of the city
and the Minnesota State Statutes regarding the platting of land and in such form as
required for the purposes of recording.
Key Map: A map drawn to comparatively small scale which definitively shows the area
proposed to be platted in relation to known geographical features (e.g., town centers,
lakes and roads).
Lot: A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land separated from other
parcels or portions by description, as on a subdivision or record of survey map, for the
purpose of sale or lease or separate use thereof and having its principal frontage on a
public street.
Lot, Corner: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior angle of
such intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
Lot Improvements: Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object, or
improvement of the land on which they are situated, constituting a physical betterment
of real property, or any part of such betterment. Certain proposed "lot improvements"
shall be properly bonded for as provided in this Chapter.
Lot of Record: A parcel of land whether subdivided and/or otherwise legally described
and recorded under a single parcel identification number prior to the effective date of
the City’s subdivision regulations or approved by the City as a lot and which is occupied
by or intended for occupancy by one principal building or principal use, together with
any accessory buildings and such open spaces as required by the Rockford Zoning
Ordinance and having its principal frontage upon a public street.
Metes and Bounds Description: A description of real property which is not described
by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by starting at a known
point and describing the bearings and distances of the lines forming the boundaries of
the property or delineating a fractional portion of a section, lot or area by described lines
or portions thereof.
Natural Waterways: A natural passageway in the surface of the earth, so situated and
having such a topographical nature that surface water flows through it from other areas
before reaching a final ponding area. The term also shall include all drainage structures
that have been constructed or placed for the purpose of conducting water from one
place to another.
Outlot: A lot remnant or parcel of land left over after platting, which is intended as open
space or other future use, for which no building permit shall be issued.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
5
Owner: An individual, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other
legal entity holding an equitable or legal ownership interest in the land sought to be
subdivided.
Park: Playgrounds, trails, parks or open spaces within the City, owned, leased or used,
wholly or in part, by the City for park and recreational purposes or which are designated
by the City Council as a park.
Pedestrianway: A public right of way or private easement across a block or within a
block to provide access for pedestrians and which may be used for the installation of
paths or trails.
Percentage of Grade: Along a centerline of a street, the change in vertical elevation in
feet and tenths of a foot for each one hundred feet (100') of horizontal distance,
expressed as a percentage.
Planning Commission: The planning commission of the City of Rockford.
Preliminary Plat: A drawing or map of a proposed subdivision, meeting the
requirements herein enumerated, submitted to the planning commission and governing
body for their consideration, in compliance with the comprehensive plan, along with
required supporting data.
Private Drive: A driveway serving as vehicular access to two (2) or more parcels of
land which is not dedicated to the public and is owned by one or more private parties.
Protective Convents: Contracts entered into between all owners and holders of
mortgages constituting a restriction on the use of all private property within a subdivision
for the benefit of the property owners, and providing mutual protection against
undesirable aspects of development which would tend to impair the stability of property
value and economic integrity of any given area.
Public Improvements: Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, street, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, water system, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off street parking
area, lot improvement or other facility for which the City may ultimately assume
ownership, responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an
improvement for which local government responsibility is established.
Quadraminiums: Single structures which contain four (4) subdivided dwelling units all
of which have individually separate entrances from the exterior of the structure.
Reserve Strips: A narrow strip of land placed between lot lines and streets to control
access.
Right of Way: The land covered by a public road, otherwise dedicated for public use, or
land for certain private uses, such as land over which a power line passes.
Road: is a public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and vehicles to
abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway,
road, avenue, boulevard, place, or however otherwise designated.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
6
Setback: The distance between a building and the property line nearest thereto.
Street: A public right of way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court
or otherwise designated.
Street Width: The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right of way of a
street.
Streets, Arterial: Those streets designated as arterial streets by the Rockford
Comprehensive Plan.
Streets, Collector: Those streets designated as collector streets (major or minor) by
the Rockford Comprehensive Plan.
Streets, Cul-de-Sacs: Those local streets with only one outlet and having a terminal for
the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
Streets, Local: Those streets which are used primarily for access to abutting properties
and for local traffic movement.
Subdivider: is an individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation,
trust or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this
chapter.
Subdivision: is the dividing of any parcel of land into two or more parcels.
A. Platted Subdivision - if any resulting parcel is less than five acres in area and
less than three hundred feet in width and the subdividing was done for the
purpose of transfer of ownership to effectuate building development or if a new
street or road is involved, regardless of the size of the parcel and/or its width,
such parcels must be platted in accordance with the terms and procedures of this
chapter.
B. Unplatted Subdivision - a division of any parcel of land into two or more parts
wherein all parts are at least five acres and have at least three hundred feet in
width and. frontage on an existing public road. Ingress and egress easements of
any type shall not be construed as public roads. These do not require platting,
but shall be zoned for the appropriate use.
Surveyor: A land surveyor registered under Minnesota state laws.
Tangent: is a straight line that is perpendicular to the radius of a curve where a tangent
meets a curve.
Tracing : A plat or map drawn on transparent paper, film, or cloth which can be
reproduced by using regular reproduction procedure.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
7
Tree Preservation Related:
A. Caliper: The diameter of a replacement tree measured at a height of one (1) foot
above the ground level.
B. Diameter: The diameter of a tree measured at diameter breast height (four and
one-half (4.5) feet from the uphill side of the existing ground level).
C. Drip Line: The farthest distance away from the trunk that rain or dew will fall
directly to the ground from the leaves or branches of the tree.
D. Forester: A person holding a bachelor’s degree in forestry from an accredited
four (4) year college of forestry.
E. Landscape Architect: A person registered with the State of Minnesota as a
landscape architect.
F. Significant Tree: A healthy tree measuring at least six (6) inches in diameter for
deciduous trees or twelve (12) feet in height for coniferous trees.
G. Tree Certification: A certified inventory of trees on the site after work is complete
listing all trees and their final disposition, which is signed by a licensed forester or
landscape architect.
H. Tree Preservation Plan: A plan and inventory certified by a forester or landscape
architect indicating all of the significant trees and their locations in the proposed
development or on the lot. The tree preservation plan shall include the size,
species, and location of all significant trees proposed to be saved and removed
on the area of development, and the measures proposed to protect the
significant trees to be saved.
I. Tree Protection: Snow fencing or polyethylene laminar safety netting placed at
the drip-line of the significant trees to be preserved. The tree protection
measures shall be shown on the tree preservation plan drawings and remain in
place until all grading and construction activity is terminated.
Unit Lots: Lots created from the subdivision of single-family attached dwellings having
different minimum lot size requirements than the conventional base lot within the zoning
district.
Vertical Curve: is the surface curvature on a road or highway center line located
between lines of different percentage of grade.
Zoning Ordinance: The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Rockford.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
8
1002.10 FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES
Subd. 1. Fees, Charges And Expenses Established. Fees and charges, as well
as expenses incurred by the City for engineering, planning, attorney, and other services
related to the processing of application shall be established by ordinance and collected
by the City Administrator for deposit in the City accounts.
Subd. 2. Payment Of Fees, Charges And Expenses. Such fees, charges, and
estimated expenses (as well as a deposit, if so required by the City Administrator) shall
be collected prior to City action on any application. All such applications must be
accompanied by a written agreement between the City and the subdivider (when the
subdivider is not the same person or entity as the landowner, both the landowner and
the subdivider must sign the agreement) whereby the subdivider/landowner agrees to
pay all applicable fees, charges, and administrative, planning, engineering and legal
expenses associated with the review and processing of the development application, if
these expenses exceed the application escrow, and which allows the City to assess
said fees, charges and expenses against the landowner if such monies are not paid
within thirty (30) days after a bill is sent to the subdivider/landowner.
Subd. 3. Fees, Charges And Expenses Are Additional. These fees shall be in
addition to sewer access charges, water access charges, sewer and water trunk
charges, transportation impact fees, park dedication fees in lieu of land, building permit
fees, inspection fees, subdivision application fees, charges, and expenses, and other
such fees, charges, and expenses currently required by ordinance or which may be
established by ordinance in the future.
1002.11 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY
Subd. 1. Sale Of Lots From Unrecorded Plats. It shall be a misdemeanor to sell,
trade, or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land as a part of, or in conformity with,
any plan, plat or replat of any subdivision or area located within the jurisdiction of this
Chapter unless said plan, plat or replat shall have first been recorded in the office of the
recorder of Hennepin or Wright County, as applicable.
Subd. 2. Receiving Or Recording Unapproved Plats. It shall be unlawful for a
private individual to receive or record in any public office any plans, plats of lands laid
out in building lots and streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be
dedicated to public or private use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting
on or adjacent thereto, and located within the jurisdiction of this Chapter, unless the
same shall bear thereon, by endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the City Council.
Subd. 3. Misrepresentations. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person owning an
addition or subdivision of land within the City to represent that any improvement upon
any of the streets, alleys or avenues of said addition or subdivision has been
constructed according to the plans and specifications approved by the City Council, or
has been supervised or inspected by the City, when such improvements have not been
so constructed, supervised or inspected.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
9
Subd. 4. Misdemeanor Violation. Anyone violating any of the provisions of this
Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each month during which compliance is
delayed shall constitute a separate offense.
1002.12 VARIANCES AND APPEALS
Subd. 1. Variance Findings. The City Council may approve a variance from the
minimum standards of this Chapter (not procedural provisions) when, in its opinion,
undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In approving any variance, the City
Council shall prescribe any conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the
public interest. In making its approval, the City Council shall take into account the nature
of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of
persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the
proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. A variance shall only be
approved when the City Council finds:
A. That there are special circumstances or highly unique conditions affecting the
property such that the strict application of the provisions of this Chapter would
deprive the subdivider of the reasonable use of their land.
B. That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which property
is situated.
C. That the variance is to correct inequities resulting from an unusual physical
hardship such as topography. Hardships relating to economic difficulties shall not
be considered for the purpose of granting a variance.
D. That the hardship is not a result of an action or actions by the owner, subdivider
or any agent thereof.
Subd. 2. Requests For Variance Or Appeal. Requests for a variance or appeal
shall be filed with the City Administrator on an official application form. Such application
shall be accompanied by a fee as set out in section 1002.12 of this chapter. Such
application shall also be accompanied by four (4) copies of detailed written and graphic
materials including one plan no larger than eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x
17") necessary for the explanation of the request.
Subd. 3. Planning Commission Procedures.
A. Upon receiving said application, the City Clerk shall refer the application, along
with all related information, to the Planning Commission for a report and
recommendation to the City Council as outlined in 1002.15 of this Chapter.
B. The Planning Commission shall consider the variance at its next regular meeting
unless the filing date falls within fifteen (15) days of said meeting, in which case,
the requests would be placed on the agenda and considered at the regular
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
10
meeting following the next regular meeting. The City Administrator shall refer
said application, along with all related information, to the Planning Commission
for consideration and a report and recommendation to the City Council.
C. The variance application shall be referred to the City staff for a report and
recommendation to be presented to the Planning Commission.
D. The Planning Commission and City Staff shall have the authority to request
additional information from the subdivider concerning the variance or to retain
expert testimony at the expense of the subdivider concerning said variance
where said information is declared necessary to ensure preservation of health,
safety and general welfare of the city.
E. The City Administrator shall set a date for a public hearing. Notice of such
hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to
said hearing, and individual notices shall be mailed not less than ten (10) days
nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing to all owners of property within
three hundred fifty feet (350) of the parcel included in the request.
F. Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such
proceedings as set forth within this Chapter.
G. The subdivider or a representative thereof shall appear before the Planning
Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed variance
request.
H. The Planning Commission shall make a finding of fact and recommend such
actions or conditions relating to the request as they deem necessary to carry out
the intent and purpose of this Chapter.
Subd. 4. City Council Procedures.
A. The City Council shall not grant a variance until they have received a report and
recommendation from the Planning Commission and the City staff or until thirty
(30) days after the first regular Planning Commission meeting at which the
request was considered.
B. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and
City staff, the City Council shall place the report and recommendation on the
agenda for the next regular meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall
be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of the City Council
meeting.
C. Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission and
City staff, the City Council shall make a recorded finding of fact and impose any
conditions it considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare
of the city.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
11
D. The City Council shall decide whether to approve or deny a request for a
variance or an appeal within thirty (30) days after the public hearing on said
request.
Subd. 5. Grant Of Variance Or Appeal. A variance of this Chapter or grant of an
appeal shall be by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the full City Council.
1002.13 ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS
Subd. 1. Qualification. This section shall apply to the following applications:
A. In the case of a request to divide a portion of a lot where the division is to permit
the adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lot so that no additional lots are
created and both new lots conform to Zoning Ordinance lot size minimum
standards.
B. In the case of a request to combine two (2) existing platted lots.
C. In the case of a request to divide a lot from a larger tract of land and thereby
creating no more than two (2) lots. To qualify, the parcel of land shall not have
been part of a subdivision within the last five (5) years.
D. In the case of a request to divide a base lot which is a part of a recorded plat
upon which has been constructed a two-family dwelling, townhouse or
quadraminium, where the division is to permit individual private ownership of a
single dwelling unit within such a structure, and the newly created property lines
will not cause any of the unit lots or the structure to be in violation of the Zoning
Ordinance or the state building code.
Subd. 2. Content and Data Requirement.
A. Certificate Of Survey: The requested administrative subdivision shall be prepared
by a registered land surveyor in the form of a certificate of survey.
B. Property Description And Submission Information: The data and supportive
information detailing the proposed administrative subdivision shall be the same
as required for a preliminary plat as described in section 1002.15 Subd. 2 of this
Chapter. Exceptions, as stipulated in writing, may be granted by the city
administrator.
Subd. 3. Design Standards.
The administrative subdivision shall conform to all design standards as specified in this
Chapter. Any proposed deviation from said standards shall require the processing of a
variance request.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
12
Subd. 4. Processing.
A. If the land division involves property which has been previously platted, or the
total property area involved is greater than ten (10) acres, the City Administrator
shall have the authority to approve the subdivision; provided, that it complies with
applicable provisions of this Chapter.
B. In the case of applications involving property not previously platted, and less than
ten (10) acres in total area, the subdivision platting procedures of Section
1002.14 of this Chapter shall be followed.
1002.14 SUBDIVISION PLATTING PROCEDURES
Subd. 1. Sketch Plan. In order to ensure that all subdividers are informed of the
procedural requirements and minimum standards of this Chapter and the requirements
or limitations imposed by other City Code provisions or plans, prior to the development
of a preliminary plat, all subdividers shall present a sketch plan to the City Administrator
prior to filing a preliminary plat. The City Administrator may refer said sketch plan to City
staff, the Planning Commission and/or the City Council for review or comments.
Subd. 2. Preliminary Plat.
A Filing:
(1) The subdivider shall prepare and file a plat which is in conformity with the
requirements of this Chapter. The subdivider must demonstrate to the City
ownership of the land in question or show the legal and written power to
file a preliminary plat application for the land in question.
(2) The subdivider also shall complete an official City application form as may
be required, and shall submit any additional information, plans or studies
as are required by this Chapter, and shall furnish the City Administrator
with ten (10) copies of the plat and one reduced copy of the plat no larger
than eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17").
(3) The subdivider shall submit a list of property owners located within three
hundred fifty feet (350') of the subject property. The records of the County
recorder shall be deemed sufficient for determining the location and
ownership of all such properties.
(4) The subdivider shall submit any necessary applications and information for
variances from the provisions of this Chapter, as set out in section
1002.10 of this Chapter, which may be heard during the review of the
proposed preliminary plat.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
13
(5) Prior to consideration of the proposed preliminary plat by the City, the
subdivider shall pay the required filing fee as set out in section 1002.10 of
this Chapter.
(6) The plat shall be considered as being officially submitted when all of the
information requirements are complied with and the appropriate fees paid.
(7) Whenever an application for a preliminary plat has been considered and
denied by the City Council, a similar application and proposal for a land
division affecting either a portion or all of the same property shall not be
considered again by the planning commission or City Council for at least
one year from the date of its denial, except as follows:
(a) Applications are withdrawn prior to the City Council taking action on
the matter.
(b) If the City Council determines that the circumstances surrounding a
previous application have changed significantly.
(c) If the City Council decides to reconsider such matter by a four-fifths
(4/5) vote of the entire City Council.
B Hearing:
(1) Upon receipt of the completed application as outlined in subsection (1) of
this section, the City Administrator shall set a public hearing for public
review of the preliminary plat. The hearing shall be held after adequate
time has been allowed for staff and planning commission review of the
plat, but within forty-five (45) days of the completed filing of the
application.
(2) Notice of the hearing shall consist of a legal property description,
description of request and shall be published in the official newspaper at
least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Written notification of the hearing
shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land within
three hundred fifty feet (350) of the boundary of the property in question.
Failure of any property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate the
public hearing.
(3) The subdivider and/or their representative(s) shall appear at the public
hearing before the Planning Commission in order to answer questions
concerning the proposal.
C. Technical Assistance Reports: The City Administrator may instruct the
appropriate staff to prepare technical reports and provide general assistance in
preparing a recommendation on the action to the City Council. This may include
the City Planner, City Engineer, City Building Official, or the City Attorney, among
others.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
14
D. Review By Other Jurisdictions: The City Administrator shall refer copies of the
preliminary plat to county, state or other public jurisdictions for their review and
comment, where appropriate and when required.
E. Planning Commission Action: The Planning Commission shall report its findings
and make its recommendation to the City Council no later than sixty (60) days
after the close of public hearing described in subsection (2) of this section. If the
Planning Commission has not acted upon the preliminary plat within sixty (60)
days following the close of public hearing on such and in compliance with this
Chapter, the City Council may act on the preliminary plat without the Planning
Commission's recommendation.
F. City Council Action:
(1) The City Council shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plat within
one hundred twenty (120) days following delivery of an application
completed in compliance with this Chapter unless an extension of the
review period has been agreed to by the subdivider.
(2) If the preliminary plat is approved, such approval shall not constitute final
acceptance of the layout. The City Council may impose such conditions
and restrictions as it deems appropriate or require such revisions or
modifications in the preliminary plat or final plat as it deems necessary to
protect the health, safety, comfort, general welfare and convenience of the
City. Subsequent approval will be required of the engineering proposals
and other features and requirements as specified by this Chapter to be
indicated on the final plat.
(3) The City Council reserves the right to decline approval of a subdivision if
due regard is not shown for the preservation of all natural features, such
as topography, trees, watercourses, scenic points, historical spots and
similar community assets, which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and
stability to the proposed development of the property.
(4) Following City Council approval of a preliminary plat, the subdivider must
submit a final plat to the city administrator within one hundred (100) days
of preliminary approval unless otherwise specified as part of a
development agreement. If this procedure is not followed, then approval of
the preliminary plat shall be considered void, unless a request for time
extension is submitted in writing and approved by the City Council.
(5) Should the subdivider desire to amend a preliminary plat as approved, the
subdivider may submit an amended preliminary plat. No public hearing or
fee will be required unless the amendment, in the opinion of the City
Council, is of such scope as to constitute a new preliminary plat.
(6) If the preliminary plat is not approved by the City Council, the reasons for
such action shall be recorded in the proceedings of the City Council and
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
15
shall be transmitted in writing to the subdivider within ten days of the
action.
Subd. 3. Final Plat.
A. Filing:
(1) After the preliminary plat has been approved, the final plat shall be
submitted for review as set forth in this section. The City may agree to
review the preliminary and final plats simultaneously. The final plat shall
incorporate all changes, modifications and revisions required by the City.
Otherwise, it shall conform to the approved preliminary plat.
(2) Unless the following requirement is modified as part of a development
contract, the submission of a complete final plat application shall be no
later than one hundred (100) days after the date of approval of the
preliminary plat for distribution to the City Council and appropriate City
staff. Ten (10) copies of the final plat and one reduced copy, no larger
than eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17"), shall be submitted to
the City Administrator for City review. Failure to timely submit a complete
final plat application shall result in the expiration of the preliminary plat
approval.
(3) Prior to consideration of the proposed final plat by the City, the subdivider
shall pay the required filing fee as set out in section 1002.10 of this
Chapter.
(4) The final plat shall be considered as being officially submitted when all of
the information requirements are complied with and the appropriate fees
paid.
B. Compliance With Provisions: All final plats shall comply with the provisions of
Minnesota state statutes and requirements of this Chapter.
C. Title Or Registered Certificate Required: A subdivider shall submit with the final
plat a current abstract of title or a registered property certificate, along with any
unrecorded documents, and an opinion of title.
D. Review Of Final Plat:
(1) Upon receipt of a final plat, the City Administrator shall refer one copy
each to the City Council, appropriate City staff, the County surveyor and to
all applicable government or public jurisdictions, and one copy, with
abstract of title or registered property certificate and opinion title, to the
City attorney.
(2) The City Council may refer the final plat to the Planning Commission for
recommendation if they feel the proposed final plat is substantially
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
16
different from the approved preliminary plat. The Planning Commission
shall submit a report thereon to the City Council within forty five (45) days.
(3) The County surveyor shall review the final plat and notify the subdivider's
surveyor or final plat preparer of corrections that are to be made to the
final plat.
(4) Prior to approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall have executed an
agreement with the City controlling the installation of all required
improvements. Said agreement will require all improvements to comply
with approved engineering standards and applicable regulations.
(5) The City Council shall take action on a final plat not more than sixty (60)
days after the plat is filed with the City Administrator.
(6) Upon receiving an approved final plat in conformance with the
requirements of the county surveyor, representatives of the city shall sign
the plat, and the subdivider, as a condition of approval, shall record it with
the applicable County registrar of titles within one hundred twenty (120)
days, or the approved final plat shall be considered void. If recording is not
accomplished according to these procedures, the City may require another
review of the proposed subdivision according to this Chapter and State
law.
(7) If the final plat is not approved, the reasons for such action shall be
recorded in the official proceedings of the City Council and shall be
transmitted in writing to the subdivider within ten (10) days of the action.
1002.15 PREMATURE SUBDIVISIONS
Subd. 1. Qualification. Any preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision deemed
premature for development shall be denied by the City Council.
Subd. 2. Conditions Establishing Premature Subdivision. A subdivision may be
deemed premature should any of the conditions set forth in the following provisions
exist:
A. Inconsistency With Comprehensive Plan: The proposed subdivision is
inconsistent with the purposes, objectives and recommendations of the duly
adopted comprehensive plan of Rockford, as may be amended.
B. Lack Of Adequate Drainage:
(1) A condition of inadequate drainage shall be deemed to exist if:
(a) Surface or subsurface water retention and runoff is such that it
constitutes a danger to the structural security of the proposed
structures, including streets, sidewalks and utilities.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
17
(b) The proposed subdivision will cause pollution of water sources or
damage from erosion and siltation on downhill or downstream land.
(c) The proposed site grading and development will cause harmful and
irreparable damage from erosion and siltation on downstream land.
(2) Factors to be considered in making these determinations may include:
(a) Average rainfall for the area;
(b) The relation of the land to floodplains;
(c) The nature of soils and sub-soils and their ability to adequately
support surface water runoff and waste disposal systems;
(d) The slope of the land and its effect on effluents; and
(e) The presence of streams as related to effluent disposal.
C. Lack Of Adequate Water Supply: A proposed subdivision shall be deemed to
lack an adequate water supply if the proposed subdivision does not have
adequate sources of water to serve the proposed subdivision if developed to its
maximum permissible density without causing an unreasonable depreciation of
existing water supplies for surrounding areas.
D. Lack Of Adequate Streets Or Highways To Serve Subdivision: A proposed
subdivision shall be deemed to lack adequate streets or highways to serve the
subdivision when:
(1) Roads which serve the proposed subdivision are of such a width, grade,
stability, vertical and horizontal alignment, site distance and surface
condition that an increase in traffic volume generated by the proposed
subdivision would create a hazard to public safety and general welfare, or
aggravate an already hazardous condition, and when, with due regard to
the advice of Hennepin or Wright County and/or the Minnesota department
of transportation, said roads are inadequate for the intended use; or
(2) The traffic volume generated by the proposed subdivision would create
unreasonable highway congestion or unsafe conditions on highways
existing at the time of the application or proposed for completion within the
next two (2) years.
E. Lack Of Adequate Waste Disposal Systems: A proposed subdivision shall be
deemed to lack adequate waste disposal systems if, in subdivisions for which
sewer lines are proposed, there is inadequate sewer capacity in the present
system to support the subdivision if developed to its maximum permissible
density indicated in the Rockford Comprehensive Plan, as may be amended.
F. Providing Public Improvements: If public improvements, such as recreational
facilities, streets and utilities, reasonably necessitated by the subdivision, which
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
18
must be provided at public expense, cannot be provided for within the next two
(2) fiscal years.
Subd. 3. Burden of Establishing Premature Subdivision. The burden shall be
upon the subdivider to show that the proposed subdivision is not premature.
1002.16 PLAT AND DATA REQUIREMENTS
Subd. 1. Sketch Plan. Sketch plans shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
A. Plat boundary.
B. North arrow.
C. Scale.
D. Street layout on and adjacent to plat. Where the subdivider owns property
adjacent to that which is being proposed for the subdivision or where adjacent
lands will be impacted by the proposed subdivision, it shall be required that the
subdivider submit a sketch plan for the adjacent property so as to show the
possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and future, existing or
potential adjacent subdivisions and land uses.
E. Designation of land use and current and proposed zoning.
F. Significant topographical or physical features.
G. General lot locations and layout.
H. Preliminary evaluation by the subdivider that the subdivision is not classified as
premature based upon criteria established in section 1002.16 Subd. 2 of this
Chapter.
Subd. 2. Preliminary Plat. The subdivider shall prepare and submit a preliminary
plat, together with any necessary supplementary information. The preliminary plat shall
contain the following information:
A. General Requirements:
(1) The proposed name of the subdivision; names shall not duplicate or be
alike in pronunciation to the name of any plat heretofore recorded in the
county.
(2) Location of boundary lines in relation to a known section, quarter section
or quarter-quarter section line comprising a legal description of the
property.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
19
(3) Name, address and phone number of the record owner, any agent having
control of the land, the subdivider, land surveyor, engineer and designer of
the plan.
(4) Graphic scale not less than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100').
(5) North point and key map of the area showing well known geographical
points for orientation within a one-half (1/2) mile radius.
(6) Date of preparation.
B. Existing Conditions:
(1) Boundary line and total acreage of proposed plat, clearly indicated.
(2) Existing zoning classifications for land in and abutting the subdivision.
(3) Approximate total acreage.
(4) Location, right of way width and names of existing or platted streets or
other public ways, parks and other public lands, permanent buildings and
structures, easements and section, corporate and school district lines
within the plan, to a distance one hundred feet (100') beyond the plat.
(5) Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other
underground facilities within the preliminary plat area and to a distance of
one hundred feet (100') beyond. Such data as grades and locations of
catch basins, manholes, hydrants and street pavement width and type
shall also be shown.
(6) Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land within one
hundred feet (100'), identified by name and ownership, including all
contiguous land owned or controlled by the subdivider.
(7) Topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals of not more than
two feet (2') shown on a contour/topographic map. Watercourses,
marshes, wooded areas, rock outcrops, power transmission poles and
lines, and other significant features shall also be shown. USGS datum
shall be used for all topographic mapping where feasible.
(8) A statement certifying the environmental condition of the site, including the
presence of any "hazardous substance" as defined in Minnesota statutes
section 115B.02, subdivision 8. Such statement may be required to be
based upon an environmental assessment of the site by a qualified
environmental engineering firm which is acceptable to the city.
C. Proposed Design Features:
(1) Layout of proposed streets showing the right of way widths, centerline
gradients, typical cross sections, proposed road improvements, including
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
20
turning and passing lanes, traffic signals and medians, and proposed
names of streets.
(2) Locations and widths of proposed pedestrianways.
(3) Locations and size of proposed sewer lines and water mains.
(4) Gradients of proposed streets, sewer lines and water mains, as requested.
(Design work to be completed by the city engineer if a city project.)
(5) Location, dimension and purpose of all easements.
(6) Layout, numbers, lot areas and preliminary dimensions of lots and blocks.
(7) Minimum front and side street building setback lines.
(8) When lots are located on a curve, the width of the lot at the building
setback line.
(9) Areas, other than streets, pedestrianways, and utility easements, intended
to be dedicated or reserved for public use, including the size of such area
or areas in acres.
(10) Water mains shall be provided to serve the subdivision by extension of the
existing city water system. Service connections shall be stubbed to the
property line, and all necessary fire hydrants shall also be provided.
Extensions of the public water supply system shall be designed so as to
provide public water in accordance with the standards of the City.
(11) Sanitary sewer mains and service connections shall be installed in
accordance with the standards of the city.
(12). Grading plan which shall include the proposed grading and drainage of the
site. Also to be stipulated are the garage floor and basement elevations of
all structures.
(13) Provisions for surface water ponding, drainage and flood control.
(14) A storm water pollution control plan.
(15) A tree preservation plan.
D. Compliance With Provisions: The items listed in this section shall be in
conformance with all other applicable sections of this Chapter.
E. Platting Adjoining Lands: A preliminary plat shall contain the entire tax parcel to
be platted plus all of the owner's contiguous lands unless such lands are subject
to a planned unit development or the City Planner and City Engineer agree to
waive such requirement. The final plat may cover only a portion of the
preliminary plat, provided it is in conformance with the approved preliminary plat,
development contract and other requirements herein.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
21
F. Supplementary Information: Any or all of the supplementary information
requirements set forth in this subsection shall be submitted when deemed
necessary by the City staff, advisory bodies and/or City Council:
(1) Proposed protective covenants or private restrictions.
(2) Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of buildings with
number of proposed dwelling units or type of business or industry, so as to
reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards, and
congestion of population. The city may require the subdivider to have
formal traffic or other studies performed to the city's satisfaction which
show the effect of the proposed development on traffic, fire hazards and
congestion.
(3) If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan for the
areas, including dimensions, shall be shown. Such proposed zoning plan
shall be for information only and shall not vest any rights in the subdivider.
(4) Where structures are to be placed on large or excessively deep lots which
are subject to potential replat, the preliminary plat shall indicate a logical
way in which the lots could possibly be resubdivided in the future.
(5) A plan for soil erosion and sediment control both during construction and
after development has been completed. The plan shall include gradients of
waterways, design of velocity and erosion control measures, design of
sediment control measures, and landscaping of the erosion and sediment
control system. Such plans are to be in accordance with the technical
standards and specifications of the soil conservation service, as provided
by the Hennepin or Wright County soil and water conservation district
office.
(6) When the City has agreed to install improvements in a development, the
developer may be required to furnish a financial statement, satisfactory to
the City, indicating the developer's ability to develop the plat.
(7) An environmental assessment worksheet shall be submitted if the City,
Minnesota Environmental Quality Board or other groups or agencies
determine that one is required by law.
(8) Statements and supporting documentation and plans for zoning approvals
being sought for the subdivision.
(9) Such other information as may be required by City staff.
Subd. 3. Final Plat.
A. The subdivider shall submit a final plat, together with any necessary
supplementary information. The final plat, prepared for recording purposes, shall
be prepared in accordance with provisions of Minnesota state statutes and
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
22
Hennepin or Wright County regulations, and such final plat shall contain the
following information:
(1) Name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or too closely
approximate the name of any existing plat heretofore recorded in the
county.
(2) Location by section, township, range, county and state, and including
descriptive boundaries of the subdivision, based on an accurate traverse,
giving angular and linear dimensions.
(3) The location of monuments shall be shown and described on the final plat.
Locations of such monuments shall be shown in reference to existing
official monuments on the nearest established street lines, including true
angles and distances to such reference points or monuments.
(4) Location of lots, outlots, streets, public highways, and parks and other
features, with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the
length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, and with all other information
necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground shall be shown.
Dimensions shall be shown from all angle points of curve to lot lines.
(5) Lots shall be numbered clearly; blocks are to be numbered, with numbers
shown clearly in the center of the block.
(6) The exact locations, widths and names of all streets to be dedicated.
(7) Location, purpose and width of all easements to be dedicated including
the exact locations, widths and names of all private drives.
(8) Name and address of surveyor preparing the lot.
(9) Scale of plat (the scale to be shown graphically on a bar scale), date and
north arrow.
(10) Statement dedicating all easements as follows: Easements for installation
and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities and buffers within
easements are reserved over, under and along the strips marked
"drainage and utility easements".
(11) Statement dedicating all streets and other public areas not previously
dedicated as follows: Streets and other public areas shown on this plat
and not heretofore dedicated to public use are hereby so dedicated.
Subd. 4. Certification Required.
A. Certification by registered surveyor in the form required by Section 505.03,
Minnesota Statutes, as amended.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
23
B. Execution of all owners of any interest in the land and holders of a mortgage
thereon of the certificates required by Section 505.03, Minnesota Statutes, as
amended, and which certificate shall include a dedication of the utility easements
and other public areas in such form as approved by the City Council.
C. Space for certificates of approval and review to be filled in by the signatures of
the Mayor and City Administrator in the form:
For Approval of the City:
This plat of (name of plat) was approved and accepted by the City of
Rockford, Minnesota, at a regular meeting thereof held this day of
, A.D. 20____.
CITY COUNCIL OF ROCKFORD, MINNESOTA
BY: Mayor
BY: City Administrator
1002.17 DESIGN STANDARDS
Subd. 1. Compliance with Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Ordinance. A
proposed subdivision shall conform to the Rockford Comprehensive Plan and related
policies adopted by the City and to the provisions of the Rockford Zoning Ordinance.
Subd. 2. Minimum Design Requirements. The design features set forth in this
chapter are minimum requirements. The City may impose additional or more stringent
requirements concerning lot size, streets and overall design as deemed appropriate,
considering the property being subdivided, based upon site considerations and the
Rockford Comprehensive Plan.
Subd. 3. Land Requirements.
A. Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided. No plan shall
be approved if the site is not suitable for the purposes proposed by reason of
potential flooding, topography, wetlands, or adverse soil or rock formation.
B. Land subject to hazards to life, health or property shall not be subdivided until all
such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate safeguards against such
hazards are provided by the subdivision plan.
C. Proposed subdivisions shall be coordinated with existing nearby municipalities or
neighborhoods so that the city, as a whole, may develop efficiently and
harmoniously.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
24
Subd. 4. Blocks. Block length and width or acreage within bounding streets shall
be such as to accommodate the size of residential lots required in the area by the
Zoning Ordinance and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of
street traffic.
A. Block Length: In general, intersecting streets shall be provided at such intervals
so as to serve cross traffic adequately and to meet existing streets. Where no
existing plats control, the blocks in residential subdivisions, other than those with
lake frontage, shall not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320')
nor be less than six hundred feet (600') in length, except where topography or
other conditions justify a departure from this maximum. In blocks longer than
eight hundred feet (800'), ten foot (10') wide pedestrian rights of way and/or
easements through the block may be required in locations deemed necessary for
the public health, convenience and necessity. Suitable surfacing and fencing
shall be provided in pedestrianways and shall be subject to city review.
B. Block Width: The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow two (2)
tiers of lots of minimum depth as required by the Zoning Ordinance except
adjoining a lake, stream, railroad or arterial street or where one tier or lot is
necessary because of topographic conditions. Blocks intended for business or
industrial use shall be of such width as to be considered most suitable for his
respective use, including adequate space for off street parking, deliveries and
loading. Such facilities shall be provided with safe and convenient limited access
to the street system.
Subd. 5. Lots.
A. Area, Width And Depth: The minimum lot area, width and depth shall not be less
than that established by the Rockford Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time of
adoption of the final plat.
B. Side Lot Lines: Side lines of lots shall be at right angles to street lines, radial to
curved street lines, or radial to lake or stream shores unless topographic
conditions necessitate a different arrangement.
C. Building Sites: Each lot shall provide an adequate building site, excluding
drainage course and wetlands, and said building site shall be at least one and
one-half feet (1 1/2') above the street grade.
D. Butt Lots: Butt lots in any subdivision are to be discouraged. Where such lots
must be used to fit a particular type of design, they shall be platted at least
twenty feet (20') wider than the average width of interior lots in the block.
E. Frontage On Public Street: Every lot must have the minimum frontage on a city
approved public street other than an alley, as required in the Zoning Ordinance.
F. Setback Lines: Setback or building lines shall be shown on all lots and shall not
be less than the setback required by the Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
25
G. Drainage courses, Ponding Areas, Channels: Lots abutting a drainage course,
ponding area, drainageway, or channel shall have additional depth and width, as
required under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance to assure building sites
that are not subject to flooding. Lots abutting a pond or watercourse shall contain
adequate lot area which is capable of accommodating a structure with its lowest
opening (window or door) no less than two feet (2') above the highest known
water level, or no less than two feet (2') above the 100-year flood level, or two
feet (2') above the emergency overflow elevation, whichever is greater.
H. Lakeshore Frontage: Lots with lakeshore frontage shall be designed so that the
lot lines extended shall maintain the closest approximation to riparian rights.
I Natural Features: In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for
all natural features, such as tree growth, watercourses, historic spots or similar
conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and stability to the
proposed development.
J. Lot Remnants: All remnants of lots below minimum size for the respective zoning
district in which they are located must be added to abutting lots or lots
immediately adjoining, separated only by a public right of way. In those cases
where parcels are separated by a public right of way, the lot remnant shall be
designated as an outlot. Lot remnants may be allowed if a plan for future use is
found acceptable by the City Council.
K. Political Boundaries: No singular lot shall extend over a political boundary or
school district line.
L. Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage, or lots with frontage on two (2) parallel
or nonintersecting streets, shall not be permitted except: where lots back on
arterial streets or highways, or where topographic or other conditions render
subdividing otherwise unreasonable.
M. Access to Arterial and Major Collector Streets: In the case where a proposed plat
is adjacent to an arterial or major collector street, there shall be no direct
vehicular access from individual lots to such streets. In the platting of small tracts
of land fronting on an arterial or major collector street or where there is no other
alternative, a temporary entrance may be granted. As neighboring land becomes
subdivided and more preferable access arrangements become possible, such
temporary access permits shall become void.
N. Outlots: The creation of outlots is to be discouraged. In such cases where outlots
are created or exist, this area shall not be utilized in calculating minimums for
buildable lot area requirements. Said outlots are also prohibited from qualifying
for building permits except for public uses and private recreational uses
accessory to allowable uses within the respective zoning district and which are
properties under common ownership. In those cases where outlots are located
within a shoreland overlay district, they shall comply with the minimum shoreland
overlay district requirements.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
26
O. Irregular Shaped Lots: On single-family residential lots determined to be irregular
in shape (i.e., triangular), the developer shall demonstrate to the city an ability to
properly place principal buildings and accessory structures upon the site which
are compatible in size and character to the surrounding area.
Subd. 6. Streets:
A. Compliance With State And County Plans: Proposed streets shall conform to
state and county highway plans which have been prepared, adopted and/or filed
as prescribed by law.
B. Topography: Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce
usable lots and reasonable grades.
C. Required Access: Access shall be given to all lots and portions of the tract in a
subdivision and to adjacent unsubdivided parcels, unless the topography clearly
indicates that such connection is not feasible. Reserved strips and landlocked
areas shall not be created.
D. Adjacent Street Connection: The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions
shall make provision for the appropriate continuation of existing streets in
adjoining areas.
E. Connection To Adjoining Areas: Where adjoining areas are not subdivided but
may be subdivided, the arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make
provision for the proper projection of streets into adjoining areas by carrying the
new streets to the boundaries of the new subdivision at appropriate locations. A
temporary turnaround facility may be required at the closed end, in conformance
with cul-de-sac requirements. The street design shall not be such as to cause
hardship to owners of adjoining property in platting their own land and providing
convenient access to it.
F. Second Access Required: A residential plat within which single or multiple
roadways are to be continued in the future as subsequent development phases
are implemented shall not create dead end access situations limited by a single
location for ingress and egress to major collector or arterial roadways.
(a) No more than twenty five (25) units on local streets and no more than fifty
(50) units on minor collector streets may be developed within a single plat
without providing a second street access into/out of the subdivision. The
developer shall be limited by the issuance of building permits as regulated
by the City Building Official.
(b) Upon issuance of the twenty fifth building permit within a plat, the
developer shall be required to construct a secondary access street. No
other building permits will be issued within current or future phases of the
plat until the secondary access road is in place. The limitation on building
permits shall not prevent the developer or landowner from planning or
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
27
platting land unrelated to the affected plat and located in other portions of
the city.
(c) Under this subsection, all streets to provide either the primary or
secondary access shall be constructed to city standards and paved with
asphalt. The required secondary access street shall coincide with the
approved plan for permanent street location.
(d) In no case shall an abutting landowner be allowed to plat new residential
lots adjacent to a plat whereby the addition of lots would increase the
number of units located on a dead end street or intensify the negative
effects upon adjoining, established neighborhoods. Adjacent development
by adjoining landowners shall be permitted if the plat provides for the
second access required herein.
(e) Without the provision of adequate vehicular access, the remaining portions
or phases of the subdivision may be deemed premature according to
1002.16 of this Chapter.
G. Relation Of Streets To Proposed Uses: Local streets shall be laid out to
discourage their use by through traffic. The arrangement of arterial and collector
streets shall be considered in their relation to the reasonable circulation of traffic,
to topographic conditions, to runoff of storm water, to public convenience and
safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the area to be
served.
H. Resubdivision Of Large Lots And Parcels: When a tract is subdivided into larger
than normal building lots or parcels, such lots or parcels shall be so arranged as
to permit the logical location and openings of future streets and appropriate
resubdivision, with provision for adequate utility connections for such
resubdivision.
I. Half Or Partial Streets Rights-of-way:
(a) Prohibited Generally: Half or partial streets will not be permitted except
where essential to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with
the other requirements and standards of this Chapter and where, in
addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the
street can be secured.
(b) Completion Of Existing Partial Streets: Wherever a tract to be subdivided
adjoins an existing half or partial street, the part of the street within such
tract shall be platted.
J. Private Streets Prohibited: Private streets and reserve strips, except in the case
of planned unit developments, shall be prohibited, and no public improvements
shall be approved for any private street. All streets shall be dedicated for public
use. If any person applies to subdivide or replat any land or parcels adjoining an
existing private street, the private street shall be required to be dedicated for
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
28
public use and scheduled for improvement to public street standards at the time
of final plat.
K. Plats Abutting Arterial Streets Or Railroad Rights Of Way: Where a subdivision
abuts or contains an existing or planned major arterial street or a railroad right-ofway,
a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such arterial and right
of way may be required for adequate protection of residential properties and
separation of through and local traffic. Such service streets shall be located at a
distance from the major arterial or railroad right of way suitable for appropriate
use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for
commercial and industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall
also be determined with due regard to the requirements of approach grades and
future grade separations.
L. Street Improvements: Whenever a proposed subdivision and accompanying
development is expected to generate additional traffic on streets within the City,
the subdivider shall construct at their expense or provide surety for future
construction of street improvements reasonably necessary to offset the impacts
the additional traffic is expected to have on traffic flow on streets within the City.
M. Dead End Streets Prohibited: Dead end streets shall be prohibited except as
stubs to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts with possible
temporary cul-de-sacs, as determined by the City, or when designed as cul-desac
streets.
N. Permanent Cul-De-Sacs:
(1) Criteria For Construction: Permanent cul-de-sacs shall be allowed only
where one or more of the following criteria have been met:
(a) Physical site conditions warrant a cul-de-sac.
(b) A through street is not physically feasible or desirable due to
environmental considerations.
(2) Requirements: Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall
not exceed five hundred feet (500) in length, including a terminal
turnaround which shall be provided at the closed end, with a right of way
radius of not less than ninety feet (90). The length shall be measured
along the centerline from the nearest intersection to the center point of the
cul-de-sac.
O. Temporary Cul-De-Sacs: Where a temporary cul-de-sac is required, the
turnaround right of way shall be placed adjacent to a plat boundary line and a
right of way of the same width as the street shall be carried to said property line
in such a way as to permit future extension of the street into the adjoining tract. A
sign as specified by the City Standard Detail Plates shall be posted at the
terminus of the temporary cul-de-sac providing notice that a future street
extension is planned. At such time a such a street is extended, the acreage
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
29
coverage by the turnaround outside the boundaries of the extended street shall
revert in ownership to the property owner fronting on the temporary turnaround.
P. Street Names: Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted
street names, unless a new street is a continuation of or in alignment with the
existing or platted street. In that event, it shall bear the same name of the existing
or platted street. Street names shall conform to the City's street naming and
property numbering system as applicable.
Q. Sidewalks. All local residential through streets shall have a sidewalk on one side
of the public right-of-way as determined by the City Engineer. All city sidewalks
shall have a minimum width of five (5) feet when setback not less than five feet
from the back of curb or six and one-half (6.5) feet when at the back of curb. The
subdivider shall be responsible for the payment of the cost of sidewalks.
Subd. 7. Street Design. For all public streets hereafter dedicated and accepted,
the minimum right-of-way widths for streets shall not be less than the minimum
dimensions for each classification as follows:
A. Dedication Required. Where any proposed subdivision abuts a public street,
right-of-way dedication from centerline of a public street shall be provided in
compliance the Rockford Transportation Plan and this Chapter. Right-of-way
dedication for county roads and state highways shall be subject to the
requirements of the respective government jurisdiction.
B. Street Dimension Standards: The right-of-way, pavement width, minimum and
maximum grades and minimum axle load for City streets shall be provided in
accordance with the Rockford Standard Detail Plates or otherwise recommended
by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council
C. Where the existing or anticipated traffic on major collector and minor or principal
arterial roadways warrants greater widths of right-of-way, these shall be required.
Right-of-way widths for principal arterials shall also meet standards established
by the Minnesota State Highway Department to facilitate inclusion in a State Aid
funded street system.
D. Local street access to existing arterial and major collector streets shall not be
permitted at intervals of less than six hundred sixty (660) feet.
Subd. 8. Water and Sewer Systems.
A. Water Supply:
(1) Extensions of the public water supply system, when available, shall be
designed so as to provide public water service to each lot.
(2) For any lots within a plat graded to a first floor elevation of 1025.0 feet or
above, the developer shall provide for installation at their expense an
individual water pressure booster pump with a reservoir tank in all dwelling
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
30
units within the plat, unless the City has entered into a contract to
construct a water booster station or some other water pressure boosting
mechanism that will specifically serve such dwelling units prior to the
issuance of the final occupancy permit. Said water pressure booster
system to be installed by the developer shall be of a type which meets the
approval of the City Public Works Director. A bypass of the system shall
be included in the plumbing configuration to allow water to be supplied (at
lower pressure) to the home while the booster is being repaired. Prior to
the sale of any lot with a first floor elevation of 1025.0 or above, the
developer shall notify the prospective purchaser of the necessity of a
water booster for said lot, and shall inform the prospective buyer that the
developer will install the water booster and reservoir tank at the
developer’s expense unless the City has already contracted for a
municipal improvement to increase the pressure. Once installed, the
homeowner shall be responsible for the maintenance and eventual
replacement of the booster pump system installed within the dwelling.
The City will not own or maintain these individual systems.
(3) For any lots within a plat graded to a first floor elevation between 990.0
and 1004.0 feet, a disclosure of the purchaser must be made as follows:
“The City’s static water pressure at your home, while
adequate by Department of Health Standards, may not
satisfy all of your expectations for service. You may wish
to consider the installation of an in-home water pressure
boosting pump with a reservoir tank to better meet your
expectations. The installation and maintenance of the
water pressure boosting system would be at your cost.
The City does not own or maintain these systems.”
B. Sewage Disposal: Extension of the public sanitary sewer system, when
available, shall be designed so as to provide public sewer service to each lot.
Subd. 9. Drainage System:
A. A complete and adequate drainage system design shall be required for the
subdivision and may include a storm sewer system or system of open ditches,
culverts, pipes, catch basins and ponding areas, or a combination thereof.
B. Drainage system utilities shall be provided for in accordance with the Rockford
Stormwater Policy and constructed in accordance with standards established by
the Rockford Standard Detail Plates or as otherwise specified by the City
Engineer.
C. The easement limits of open ditch ponding areas, wetlands and wetland buffers
shall be delineated as reasonably practical at all common lot lines and angle
points in the easements with markers consistent with the Rockford Standard
Detail Plates. The cost of preparing and installing such markers shall be borne
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
31
by the subdivider and the markers shall be installed prior to the sale of lots and
construction of any buildings or structures.
Subd. 10. Easements:
A. Drainage and Utility Easements:
(1) Easements for drainage and utilities of at least ten feet (10') wide shall be
provided on all lot lines. In the case of side or rear lot lines, these may be
centered on the lot line.
(2) Utility easements shall connect with easements established in adjoining
properties. These easements, when approved, shall not thereafter be
changed without the approval of the City Council after a public hearing.
(3) Drainage and utility easements shall be provided along each side of the
centerline of any watercourse or drainage channel, whether or not shown
on the comprehensive plan, to a sufficient width to provide proper
maintenance and protection, to provide for storm water runoff and to
provide for installation and maintenance of storm sewers.
(4) Drainage and utility easements shall be provided to encompass all
wetlands, required wetland buffers and stormwater ponds to the high
water level.
B. Dedication of Easements: All easements shall be dedicated for the required use
and shall be shown on the final plat.
Subd. 11. Erosion and Sediment Control. The following guidelines shall be
applied in the subdivision:
A. The development shall conform to the natural limitations presented by
topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil erosion;
B. Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that adequate
erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction progresses.
Appropriate control measures shall be installed prior to development when
necessary to control erosion. The smallest practical area of land shall be
exposed at any one period of time;
C. When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest feasible period of
time, as specified in the development agreements;
D. Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set aside for respreading
over the areas to be planted. The soil shall be restored to a minimum
depth of four inches (4") or a depth as may be established by the City Engineer
and shall be of a quality at least equal to the soil quality prior to development;
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
32
E. Natural vegetation shall be protected wherever possible;
F. As determined by the City Engineer, runoff water shall be diverted to a
sedimentation basin before allowed to enter the natural drainage system. Storm
water runoff from the developed site shall not, at any time, exceed the runoff
rate existing prior to development except as may be approved by the City
Council.
Subd. 12. Protected Areas.
A. Where land proposed for subdivision is deemed environmentally sensitive by the
city due to the existence of wetlands, drainageways, watercourses, floodable
areas or steep slopes or wooded areas, the design of said subdivision shall
clearly reflect all necessary measures of protection to ensure against adverse
environmental impact.
B. Based upon the necessity to control and maintain certain sensitive areas, the city
shall determine whether said protection will be accomplished through lot
enlargement and redesign or dedication of those sensitive areas in the form of
outlots.
C. In general, measures of protection shall include design solutions which allow for
construction and grading involving a minimum of alteration to sensitive areas.
Such measures, when deemed appropriate by the city, may include, but shall not
be limited to, the following:
(1) The establishment of easements and/or outlots over wetlands, wetland
buffers, drainageways, and watercourses.
(2) The implementation of flood control measures.
(3) The enlargement of lots or redesign of the subdivision.
(4) The submission of a tree preservation plan subject to the review of the
planning commission and approval of the City Council.
(5) The utilization of appropriate erosion control measures subject to approval
by the city engineer.
(6) Soil testing to determine the ability of the proposed subdivision to support
development.
(7) The limitation of development on natural or manmade slopes over
eighteen percent (18%).
(8) Structure conformance to the natural limitations presented by the
topography and soil so as to create the least potential of soil erosion.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
33
Subd. 13. Floodplain. All developments in flood hazard areas shall include:
A. Construction and modification of sewage, water supply and drainage facilities to
meet the standards of this Chapter and to promote the health, safety and general
welfare.
B. Construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees and other protective
measures to include filling in.
C. Establishment of flood warning systems. The limits of the areas which have been
or would be inundated by the 100-year flood shall be delineated as reasonably
practical at three hundred foot (300') intervals by means of firmly placed markers
of sufficient size to be easily read from a distance of twenty feet (20'). The
markers shall record the maximum known depth of flooding or height to the flood
protection level, whichever is greater. All flood warning signs in flood-prone
areas shall be in accordance with the above requirements or any other additional
requirements as provided by the use of the 100-year flood profile and other
supporting technical data in the Flood Insurance Study and the Flood Insurance
Rate Map. The subdivision markers shall meet the following specifications:
(1) The markers shall be on substantial permanent metal posts.
(2) The marker(s) shall have notification painted white and shall be stenciled
or otherwise lettered with the inscription "100-year flood elevation". This
lettering is to be of a permanent nature.
(3) The marker be firmly placed in the ground and be at least two feet (2')
above the ground.
(4) The cost of preparing and installing such markers shall be borne by the
subdivider and the markers shall be installed prior to the sale of lots and
construction of any buildings or structures.
D. Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions enforceable by
the City to restrict the type and design of uses. Such restrictions shall include
floodproofing of intended uses mandated by the Minnesota State Building Code.
Structurally dry floodproofing standards for construction shall be in accordance
with the Minnesota State Building Code.
Subd. 14. Tree Preservation. A tree preservation plan shall be submitted to and
approved by the City and implemented for all subdivisions containing four (4) or more
lots.
A. Subdividers shall:
(1) Submit a tree preservation plan superimposed on the grading plan.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
34
(2) Ensure the tree preservation plan is followed during the plan development.
(3) Submit a five hundred dollar ($500.00) security for each lot having at least
one significant tree for tree preservation requirements. The security will
be included in the development contract.
B. The tree preservation plan must be certified by a forester or landscape architect
and must include the following information:
(1) The name(s), telephone number(s), and address(es) of subdividers,
property owners, developers and/or builders.
(2) Delineation of all areas to be graded and limits of proposed land
disturbance including those areas on lots where homes and other
structures area anticipated.
(3) Size, species, and location of all significant trees. These significant trees
should be identified in both graphic and tabular form.
(4) Identification in graphic and tabular form of all significant trees proposed to
be saved and to be removed.
(5) Identification of all diseased or hazardous trees.
(6) Tree protection methods, including those listed in Section 1002.10, Subd.
6 (9) of this Chapter.
C. During preliminary plat review, the tree preservation plan will be reviewed to
determine the best available layout to preserve significant trees and the efforts of
the subdivider to mitigate damage to significant trees. If two (2) or more
significant trees are preserved in the front yard of each lot, the landscape plan
requirement of two (2) two-inch caliper trees is waived in accordance with
Section 1001.09 Subd. 3 A.2.
D. No significant trees shall be removed until a tree preservation plan is approved
and except in accordance with the approved tree preservation plan. If a
significant tree indicated to be saved on the tree preservation plan is destroyed
or damaged so that it is in a state of decline one (1) year from the date of project
closure, the subdivider shall mitigate tree loss by reforestation of appropriate
areas within the development area in accordance with the following replacement
schedule.
E. For each significant tree removed that was indicated to be saved, two (2)
deciduous trees with a minimum of two and one-half (2.5) inch caliper or two (2)
coniferous trees with a height of not less than six (6) feet must be planted.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
35
Species of replacement trees shall be subject to City review and approval. The
planting of trees for mitigation shall be in addition to any other landscape
requirements.
F. Prior to grading, all diseased and hazardous trees on the subject property shall
be removed from the property.
G. After grading for streets, house pads, or any other purpose has been completed
and streets and utilities are installed, the forester or landscape architect shall
certify in writing to the City whether required tree protection measures were
installed, the status of all trees indicated to be saved in the approved plan, and
the status of any trees designated to be removed that were saved. Measures
proposed to protect significant trees shall include, but are not limited to:
(1) Installation of snow fencing or polyethylene laminar safety netting at the
drip line before any grading or construction begins and remaining in place
until all grading and construction is terminated.
(2) No grade change, construction activity, or storage of fill, materials, or
equipment shall occur within the fenced area.
(3) Installation of erosion control measures is required.
(4) Prevention of change in soil chemistry due to concrete washout and
leakage or spillage of toxic materials such as fuels or paints is required.
(5) Pruning of oak trees must not take place from April 15 through July 1. If
wounding of oak trees occurs, a nontoxic tree wound sealant must be
applied immediately.
H. The subdivider shall provide a financial guarantee as part of the development
contract to guarantee replacement of all significant trees which were to have
been saved but were actually destroyed or damaged. The financial security of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each lot with at least one significant tree shall
be provided as part of the development contract to ensure tree protection.
I. The financial security may be released upon certification in writing by the forester
or landscape architect indicating the tree protection measurers were
implemented and tree replacement completed, if necessary, but in no event shall
the financial security be released earlier than one (1) year after the date of the
project closure.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
36
Subd. 15. Parks and Trails.
A. Land for parks and trails shall be acquired, planned and developed according to
the park and trail classification guidelines contained in the Comprehensive Plan,
which specifies the appropriate sizes, locations,
B. Dedication Requirements.
(1) Subdividers shall be required to dedicate to the city for park, trail and
public open space purposes the following minimum amounts of land or
cash, improvements or a combination thereof, which the City shall require
at its option. The required dedication shall be made prior to the City's
release of the final plat for filing. The amount of any required cash
contribution shall be calculated based upon rates established by the City
and in effect as of the date of the release of the final plat for filing.
(2) Land to be dedicated for public use shall be reasonably suitable for its
intended use as determined by the City and shall be at a location
convenient to the public to be served. Factors used in evaluating the
adequacy of proposed park and recreation areas shall include size, shape,
topography, geology, hydrology, vegetation, access and location.
(3) The subdivider shall consult with the Park and Recreation Commission, at
the time the preliminary plat is under consideration, to secure their
recommendation as to the location of any property that should be
dedicated to the public, such as parks, trails, open space or other public
property. The preliminary plat shall show the location, area, and
dimensions of all areas to be dedicated in this manner. Such contribution
requirement recommendation(s) will be sent to the City Council for their
approval.
(4) When a proposed park, trail or sidewalk located outside of a street right of
way, park, or other public property has been indicated in the
Comprehensive Plan and is located in whole or in part within a proposed
plat, it shall be dedicated to the City. If the subdivider elects not to
dedicate an area in excess of the land required hereunder for a proposed
public site that the city feels is in the public interest to acquire, the City
may consider acquiring the excess land through purchase or
condemnation.
(5) Land area conveyed or dedicated to the city shall not be used in
calculating density requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and shall be in
addition to and not in lieu of open space requirements for planned unit
developments.
(6) Where private open space for park, trail, open space or other recreation
purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision and such space is to be
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
37
privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision,
such areas may be used for credit at the discretion of the City Council
against the requirement of dedication for purposes described in this
Chapter, provided the City Council finds it is in the public interest to do so
and that the following standards are met:
(a) That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open space required to
be maintained by the zoning and building regulations shall not be
included in the computation of such private open space; and
(b) That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is
adequately provided for by written agreement; and
(c) That the private open space is restricted for park, playground, trail,
open space or recreational purposes by recorded covenants which
run with the land in favor of the future owners of property within the
tract and which cannot be eliminated without the consent of the City
Council; and
(d) That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for
use for such purposes, taking into consideration such factors as
size, shape, topography, vegetation, geology, access and location
of the private open space land; and
(e) That facilities proposed for such purposes are in substantial
accordance with the provisions of the recreational element of the
Comprehensive Plan and are approved by the City Council; and
(f) That where such credit is granted, the amount of credit shall not
exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of dedication as
calculated herein.
(7) The City, upon consideration of the particular type of development, may
require larger or lesser parcels of land to be dedicated if the city
determines that present or future residents would require greater or lesser
land for park, trail and open space purposes. In addition, the City Council
may also require lots within the subdivision be held in escrow for future
sale or development. The monies derived from the sale of escrowed lots
will be used to develop facilities or to purchase park land in the future.
(8) If the subdivider is unable to make a commitment to the City as to the type
of building that will be constructed on lots in the proposed plat, then the
land and cash contribution requirement will be a reasonable amount as
determined by the City Council.
(9) Wetlands, ponding areas, floodplains and drainageways accepted by the
City shall not be considered as satisfying the park and dedication
requirements established by this Section.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
38
(10) Residential Dedications:
(a) Land Dedication: Land shall be dedicated pursuant to the following
schedule wherein density is calculated by considering the total net
acreage (minus wetlands, floodplains and arterial or major collector
street rights-of-way) of the entire plat, subdivision or development
being considered:
Net Density:
Units Per Acre
Land Dedication
Percentage
0.00>5.00 du/ac. 12%
5.01>9.00 du/ac. 14%
9.00 du/ac or more. 18%
(b) Cash Contribution In Lieu Of Land Dedication: A cash contribution
in lieu of land dedication may be required at the discretion of the
City Council pursuant to Section 1002.10 of this Chapter.
(11) Commercial, Industrial And Public/Institutional Dedications:
(1) Land Dedication: Land dedication, if required, shall be ten percent
(10%) of a commercial, industrial or public/institutional (except
schools and public recreational facilities) subdivision or
development.
(2) Cash Contribution In Lieu Of Land Dedication: A cash contribution
in lieu of land dedication may be required at the discretion f the City
Council pursuant to Section 1002.10 of this Chapter.
(12) Combination Land And Cash Dedication: The City Council may at its
discretion require the subdivider to make a combination cash and land
dedication pursuant to the following formula:
(1) The amount of land which could be required in accordance with this
section shall be calculated.
(2) From the total calculated in subsection (i) of this section, the actual
amount of land the city determines to be needed to fulfill the
purposes of this section shall be subtracted.
(3) The balance arrived at in subsection (ii) of this section shall be
converted into a cash contribution in lieu of land dedicated pursuant
to subsection (2) of this section.
(13) Combination Cash, Land and Development of Land for Park Use: The City
may elect at its discretion to receive a combination of cash, land and
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
39
development of improvements to the land for park use. In this case, the
City may reduce the amount of land to be dedicated or the cash
contribution in lieu of land dedication by an amount equivalent to the cost
of the facilities provided.
(14) Planned Unit Development: Planned unit developments with mixed land
uses shall make cash and/or land contributions in accordance with this
section based upon the percentage of land devoted to the various uses.
(15) Unplatted Lands: In the event the City waives the requirement that an
subdivider proposing to subdivide land plat the same, the City Council may
require the subdivider, as a condition of granting such waiver, to dedicate
parks (or pay cash in lieu thereof), trails, and open space in a manner
consistent with the provisions of this section.
(16) Divided Land with Same Number of Lots; Increase in Lot Number:
Property being divided with the same number of lots shall be exempt from
all park land dedication requirements. If the number of lots is increased or
if land outside the previously recorded plat is added, then the park land
dedication and/or park cash contributions shall be based on the additional
lots and on the additional land being added to the plat. If the additional
land does not create additional lots, then each one-third (1/3) acre added
shall be considered a new lot for purposes of calculating the dedication
requirements.
(17) If the subdivider does not believe that the estimates contained in this
section fairly and accurately represent the effect of the subdivision on the
park or trail system of the City, the subdivider may request that the City
prepare in depth study of the effect of the subdivision on the park and trail
system and an estimate of that effect in money and/or land. All costs of
such study shall be borne by the subdivider. If the subdivider requests the
preparation of such a study, the request must be made at the time the
development application is submitted. No application for development that
is submitted shall be deemed complete until the requested study has been
completed and a determination is made as to the appropriate amount of
land or money necessary to offset the effects of the subdivision.
1002.18 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
Subd. 1 Monuments.
A. Monuments shall be placed at all block and lot corners, angle points, points of
curves in streets and at intermediate points as shall be required by the City and
State Statute. Monuments shall be metal and shall be placed by a Registered
Engineer or Registered Land Surveyor. Monument placement shall meet the
current accepted standards of practice for surveying including the Wright County
Surveyor requirements.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
40
B. All lot corners and survey control monuments shall be set and in place at the time
the plat is recorded. An exception to this requirement may be granted for up to
one (1) year by the City Council, provided such approval is made part of the
development contract and a financial guarantee in a form determined by the City
Attorney is provided.
C. Stakes showing the locations of easements shall be provided by the subdivider
upon request of the City. The stakes shall be wood laths and will be used only to
insure the proper location of utilities on the easements. The stakes shall not be
intended to be permanent survey monuments.
Subd. 2. Streets.
A. Grading: Streets shall be graded in accordance with a plan approved by the city
engineer. The grading shall include the entire width of the right of way and shall
provide a boulevard section, in addition to the minimum pavement width.
B. Pavement: The design of street pavement for all streets covered by this section
shall be in accordance with the Minnesota Department of Transportation road
design manual for flexible pavements, the City Standard Detail Plates or as
otherwise specified by the City Engineer.
C. Soil Tests: To determine sub-grade soil classifications, soil samples shall be
collected and analyzed by a reputable testing laboratory. Reports of the soil
analysis shall be submitted to the city engineer with the pavement plans. Soil
samples shall be taken along the centerline of the proposed road at intervals not
exceeding three hundred feet (300').
D. Curb And Gutter: Concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed on both sides of
all streets in accordance with the City Standard Detail Plates.
E. Boulevards: All boulevards shall have four inches (4") of topsoil (black dirt)
placed on them and then shall be seeded or sodded.
F. Sidewalks shall be concrete, a minimum of five (5) feet in width, and shall be
constructed in accordance with the City Standard Detail Plates.
Subd. 3. Street Signs. Street signs and all traffic management signs shall be
provided by and at the expense of the subdivider.
Subd. 4. Street Lighting. The minimum requirement for street lighting facilities
shall be one 2,500-lumen light, or equal, light standard as approved by the City
Engineer at each street intersection within or abutting the subdivision.
Subd. 5. Tree Planting. Developers of all residential, commercial and industrial
property in the city shall be required to plant two (2) shade trees and/or evergreen trees
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
41
per lot or unit as defined in section 1001.07 of the Zoning Ordinance. This planting shall
be in addition to other landscaping, screening or buffering requirements.
Subd. 6. Water and Sewer Systems.
A. Installation and Connection to Public System: Water and sewer lines shall be
installed and connected to the public system to serve all lots within the proposed
subdivision under the provisions of applicable statutes and ordinances. The City
Council shall require the installation of water and sewer mains, at the
subdivider's expense or under the provisions of applicable statutes and
ordinances.
B. All utilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards established by the
City in the City Standard Detail Plates or as otherwise specified by the City
Engineer.
(1) Water Main: A minimum water main of eight inch (8") ductile iron pipe,
PVC C-900 pipe or other approved pipe shall be required. Mains over
eight inches (8") in size may be required, and the additional cost shall be
allocated pursuant to established City Council policies.
(2) Sanitary Sewer: Unless otherwise required, a sanitary sewer of eight inch
(8") pipe shall be installed as the minimum size, placed at grades
approved by the city engineer. Mains over eight inches (8") in size may be
required, and the additional cost shall be allocated pursuant to established
City Council policies. Service wyes shall be four inches (4") for residential
uses and a minimum of six inches (6”) for commercial and industrial uses.
(3) House Services: Each house service shall be run from the main to the
property line, where a cap or plug shall be placed until the service is
extended to the structure. A one inch (1") type K copper water service, or
approved equal; corporation cock, curb box and stop; and four inch (4")
PVC soil pipe, or approved equal, sewer service shall be the minimum
requirements, and they may be placed in a common trench in accordance
with the City Standard Detail Plates, Building Code and MPCA standards.
(4) Fire Hydrants: Installation shall be pursuant to plans approved by the City
Engineer, Public Works Director and Fire Chief and shall be located in
accordance with Insurance Service Office (ISO) standards. Hydrants shall
be placed at the end of all "dead ends", cul-de-sacs and at intersections.
All hydrants shall have wedge gate valves and shall be easily accessible
to fire fighting personnel and equipment. The single hydrant style shall be
throughout the distribution system and that type is shown on the City
Standard Detail Plates.
(5) As Built Plans: Reproducible as built drawings showing all utilities and
improvements shall be furnished to the City by the subdivider of all
required improvements. Such as built drawings shall be certified to be true
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
42
and accurate by the registered engineer responsible for the installation of
the improvements.
Subd. 7. Stormwater Management. All surface and underground drainage
systems shall be installed to adequately remove all natural drainage that accumulates
on the developed property. All such systems shall provide a permanent solution for the
removal of drainage water and shall not drain or discharge more than the
predevelopment rate of runoff.
Subd. 8. Utilities Location. All utilities shall be placed underground unless
otherwise approved by the City Engineer. All underground work shall be completed
prior to street surfacing.
Subd. 9. Inspections. All required improvements shall be inspected by the City
Engineer during construction at the expense of the subdivider.
Subd. 10. Certificate of Occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by
the City Building Official for any building in the subdivision prior to all improvements
outlined in the development contract having been installed. Exceptions to this provision
may be granted by the City Council at their discretion as part of the development
contract.
1002.19 IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
Subd. 1. Improvements Required. Prior to the approval of a final plat by the City
Council, the subdivider shall have agreed, in the manner set forth in this Chapter, to
install the following improvements on the site at the subdivider's expense, in conformity
with approved construction plans and in conformity with all applicable standards and
ordinances:
A. Monuments: Monuments are to be installed for each lot as required by Section
1002.19, Subd. 1 of this Chapter.
B. Grading: The full width of the right of way of each street dedicated in the plat
shall be graded as outlined in section 1002.19 Subd. 2 of this Chapter.
C. Pavement: All streets shall be improved with concrete or bituminous surface in
accordance with the City Standard Detail Plates.
D. Curb And Gutter: There shall be concrete curb and gutter installed along both
sides of all streets in accordance with the City Standard Detail Plates.
E. Sidewalks. There shall be concrete curb and gutter installed along both sides of
all streets and alleys to the standards listed in section 1002.19 Subd. 2 of this
Chapter.
F. Water Mains: In the case where water mains from a public water system are
available, the subdivider shall be required to install water mains in the plat and
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
43
connect the same to the public water system. The water house service shall be
installed in accordance with the City Standard Detail Plates.
G. Public Sanitary Sewer: In all cases where trunk line sanitary sewer facilities are
available, the subdivider shall be required to install sanitary sewers in the plat
and connect the same to the trunk line sewers. The sanitary sewer house service
shall be installed in accordance with the City Standard Detail Plates.
H. Drainage Facilities: Such facilities and easements shall be installed as will
adequately provide for the drainage of surface waters and storm water pollution
control, and a storm sewer system may be required. Drainageway easements or
land dedication may be required when such easements or land is needed, in the
public interest, for purposes of floodplain management, proper drainage,
prevention of erosion, pedestrian access to water bodies, or other public
purpose. All surface water drainage must be approved by the Hennepin or Wright
County soil and water conservation district.
I. Miscellaneous Facilities: Tree planting, street name signs, traffic control signs,
oversized trunk lines, pedestrianways and other improvements may be required
to be furnished and installed by the subdivider. The subdivider shall install four
inches (4") of black dirt and a good quality sod in the boulevard at the time of
occupancy of the adjacent lot. During the construction phase, if the utility lines
(electric power, telephone, gas, and cable TV) are placed prior to placing the
curb, the subdivider shall place four inches (4") of black dirt and adequate seed
in the boulevard within thirty (30) days after curb placement. If the curb is placed
prior to placing the utility lines, the subdivider shall place four inches (4") of black
dirt and grass sod in the boulevard within thirty (30) days after the utility lines are
placed, or within one year after the curb is placed, whichever occurs sooner.
Placing of black dirt and grass sod in the boulevard shall not relieve the
subdivider from placing black dirt and sod in the boulevard at the time of
occupancy of the adjacent lot.
J. Flooding: No final plat shall be approved by the City Council on land subject to
flooding or containing poor drainage facilities and on land which would make
adequate drainage of the streets and lots impossible. However, if the subdivider
agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the council, make the
area suitable for use without interfering with the flow of water under flood
conditions, the final plat of the subdivision may be approved.
Subd. 2. Construction Plans and Inspection.
A. Construction plans for the required improvements conforming in all respects with
the standards and ordinances of the city shall be prepared, at the subdivider's
expense, by a professional engineer who is registered in the State of Minnesota,
and said plans shall contain their certificate or by the City Engineer at the request
of the subdivider. Such plans, together with the quantities of construction items,
shall be submitted to the City Engineer for their approval and estimate of the total
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
44
costs of the required improvements. Upon approval, such plans shall become a
part of the required contract.
B. The subdivider is required to submit the final plat in electronic format. The
electronic format shall be either AutoCAD.DWG file or a .DWG file. All
construction record drawings (e.g., grading, utilities, streets) shall be in electronic
format in accordance with standard City specifications. The subdivider shall also
submit one complete set of reproducible construction plans on Mylar.
C. All required improvements on the site that are to be installed under the provisions
of this chapter shall be inspected during the course of construction by the city
engineer at the subdivider's expense, and acceptance by the city shall be subject
to the city engineer's certificate of compliance with the contract.
Subd. 3. Responsibility for Installation Costs. The required improvements as
listed elsewhere are to be furnished and installed at the sole expense of the subdivider.
If any improvement installed within the subdivision will be of substantial benefit to lands
beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, provision may, at the discretion of the City
Council, be made for causing a portion of the cost of the improvement, representing the
benefit to such lands, to be assessed against the same. In such a situation, the
subdivider may be required only to pay for such portion of the whole cost of said
improvement as will represent the benefit to the property within the subdivision.
Subd. 4. Agreement for Private Installation of Improvements.
A. Prior to the installation of any required improvements by the subdivider and prior
to approval of the plat, the subdivider shall enter into a contract in writing with the
City requiring the subdivider to furnish and construct said improvements at
subdivider's sole cost and in accordance with City plans and specifications and
usual contract conditions. This shall include provision for supervision of details of
construction by the City Engineer.
B. The agreement shall require the subdivider to make an escrow deposit or furnish
an irrevocable letter of credit or a certified check as is determined by the City
Attorney, City Engineer and City Administrator. The amount of the deposit or
security is to be based upon the City Engineer's estimate of the total cost of the
improvements to be furnished under the contract, including the cost of
inspection. The deposit or security shall equal one hundred percent (110%) of
the City Engineer's estimate.
C. The time for completion of the work and the several parts thereof shall be
determined by the City Council, upon recommendation of the City Engineer after
consultation with the subdivider. It shall be reasonable with relation to the work to
be done, the seasons of the year, and proper coordination with construction
activities in the plat and subdivision.
D. No subdivider shall be permitted to start work on any other subdivision, without
special approval of the City Council if the subdivider has previously defaulted on
work or commitments.
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
45
Subd. 5. Agreement for Installation of Improvements by City.
A. A subdivider may request the City to install required street and utility
improvements subject to the following conditions and to the approval and
authorization thereof by the City Council and as authorized by State law.
B. If so approved by the City Council, a request for City installation of required
street and utility improvements include an escrow deposit or an irrevocable letter
of credit or a certified check as is determined by the City Attorney, City Engineer
and City Administrator. The amount of the deposit or security is to be based upon
the City Engineer's estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be furnished
under the contract, including the cost of inspection. The deposit or security shall
equal one hundred percent (110%) of the City Engineer's estimate.
C. Improvements shall be constructed only in platted real estate.
D. No subdivider shall be allowed to start work on any other subdivision
improvements without compliance with this Section and approval of the City
Council.
Subd. 6. Financial Guarantee. The contract provided for in section 1002.20 Subd.
4 and Subd. 5 of this Chapter shall require the subdivider to make an escrow deposit or
provide a certified check or irrevocable letter of credit as determined by the City
Attorney, City Engineer and City Administrator. The escrow deposit, certified check or
irrevocable letter of credit shall conform to the requirements of this Chapter.
A. Escrow Deposit; Certified Check: If an escrow deposit or certified check is
required, the escrow deposit or certified check shall be made with the city
treasurer in a sum equal to the amount calculated as provided in section 1002.20
Subd. 4 of this chapter, as estimated by the city engineer, of all the
improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider pursuant to the
contract (developer's agreement), which have not been completed prior to
approval of the plat. The total cost shall include costs of inspection by the City.
The City shall be entitled to reimburse itself out of said deposit or check for any
cost and expense incurred by the City for completion of the work in case of
default of the subdivider under said contract, and for any damages sustained on
account of any breach thereof. Upon completion of the work and termination of
any liability, the balance remaining in said deposit or check shall be refunded to
the subdivider.
B. Irrevocable Letter Of Credit: If an irrevocable letter of credit is required, it shall be
payable to the order of the City and delivered to the City Administrator in a sum
equal to the amount calculated, as provided in Section 1002.20, Subd. 4 of this
Chapter, as estimated by the City Engineer for all the improvements to be
furnished and installed by the subdivider pursuant to the contract, which have not
been completed prior to the approval of the plat. The total cost shall include costs
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
46
of inspection by the City. The irrevocable letter of credit shall be approved as to
form by the City Attorney and filed with the City Administrator.
Subd. 7. Completion of Improvements Prior to Final Plat Approval.
Improvements within a subdivision which have been completed prior to application for
approval of the final plat, or execution of the contract for installation of the required
improvements, shall be accepted as equivalent improvements in compliance with this
Chapter only if the City Engineer certifies the existing improvements conform to
applicable standards and if evidence of payment for the work that has been completed
is presented in such form as the City reasonably requires.
Subd. 8. Trunk Facilities. Where a larger size water main, sanitary sewer, storm
drain or similar facility is required to serve areas outside the subdivision, the larger
facility required shall be constructed. Additional costs may, at the discretion of the City
Council, be allocated pursuant to established city policies.
Subd. 9. Administrative Fee. Prior to the release of a final plat, the subdivider
shall pay an administrative fee equal to one (1.0) percent of the cost of all municipal
improvements installed in or on the plat as required by this ordinance. Municipal
improvements shall include streets, curb, gutter, sidewalk, sanitary sewer, storm sewer,
water main, storm water ponding and other such items which will be dedicated to the
City after their installation. This administrative fee shall be in addition to out of pocket
costs incurred by the City such as engineering, planning and attorney fees. The City
may, from time to time by resolution, change the amount of the administrative fee set
out herein.
Subd. 10. Alternate Installation. The City Council may elect to install any or all of
the required improvements pursuant to a cash escrow agreement or other financial
arrangements with the subdivider.
1002.20 CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS
Subd. 1. Conveyance by Metes and Bounds of Less Than Five Acres.
A. The regulations established by this section are for the purpose of providing for
the reasonable regulation of conveyance by metes and bounds descriptions,
thereby promoting greater efficiency in the City offices having responsibilities
relating to the conveyance of land and to promote the purpose set forth in
Minnesota Statutes, Section 272.19, as amended.
B. No conveyance of land to which the regulations are applicable shall be filed or
recorded if the land is described in the conveyance by metes and bounds or by
reference to an unapproved registered land survey after date of passage of these
regulations, or to an unapproved plan made after such regulations have become
Rockford Subdivision Ordinance
47
effective. The foregoing provision does not apply to a conveyance if the land
described:
(1) Was a separate parcel of record on the date of adoption of subdivision
regulations under Section 394.12 to 394.37 of Minnesota Statutes.
(2) Was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered into prior to
such time, or
(3) Was a separate parcel of not less than five (5) acres and having a width of
not less than three hundred feet.
C. Building permits shall be withheld for buildings on tracts which have been
subdivided and conveyed by the metes and bounds method, except as set out
above.
1002.21 REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS:
All registered land surveys shall be filed subject to the same procedure as required for
the filing of a preliminary plat for platting purposes. The standards and requirements set
forth in this Chapter shall apply to all registered land surveys. Unless the City Council
approves, a registered land survey shall not be used to divide a parcel of land into lots
for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development if any of the tracts do
not have the required frontage on a dedicated public street.
____________________________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
1003-1
1003 Building Code
1003.01 Minnesota State Building Code.
Subd. 1. Codes Adopted by Reference. The Minnesota State Building code,
as adopted by the Commissioner of Administration pursuant to Minnesota Statues
Chapter 16B.59 to 16B75, including all of the amendments, rules and regulations
established adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota Commission of
Administration, through the Building Codes and Standards Division is herby adopted by
reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this
ordinance. The Minnesota State Building Code is herby incorporated in this ordinance
as if fully set out herein.
Subd. 2. Application, Administration and Enforcement. The application,
administration, and enforcement of the code shall be in accordance with Minnesota
Sate Building Code. The code shall be enforced with the extraterritorial limits permitted
by Minnesota Statutes, 16B.62, subdivision 1, when so established by this ordinance.
The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the City of Rockford.
This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified Building Official designated by
this Municipality to administer the code (Minnesota Statues 16B.65) subdivision 1.
Subd. 3. Permits and Fees. The issuance of permits and the collection of
fees shall be as authorized in Minnesota Statues, 16B.62, subdivision 1.
Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in accordance with the
fee schedule adopted by the municipality per annual resolution of fees. In addition a
surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by this code in
accordance with Minnesota Statute 16B.70.
Subd. 4. Violations and Penalties. A violation of the code is a misdemeanor
(Minnesota Statute 16B.69). (Amended by Ord. No. 03-08, October 28, 2003)
Subd. 5. Building Code Optional Chapters. The Minnesota State Building
Code, established pursuant to Minnesota Statues 16B.59 to 16B.75 allows the
Municipality to adopt by reference and enforce certain optional chapters of the most
current edition of the Minnesota State Building Code. Amended by Ordinance 03-08
(October 28, 2003)
____________________________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
1004-1
1004. Planning Commission
1004.01 Planning Commission Established and Membership. A Planning
Commission for the City is hereby continued. The Planning Commission shall consist of
five members who shall be reviewed and recommended by the Planning Commission
then appointed by the mayor with council approval for three year terms commencing
January 1st. Terms shall be staggered so that no more than one-half of the members'
terms expire at one time. Both the original and successive appointee shall hold their
respective offices until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies during
the terms shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments are made for
the unexpired portion of the term vacated. Every appointed member shall, before
entering upon the discharge the duties of his office. (Amended by ordinance 86-14,
passed October 28, 1986.)
1004.02 Meetings, Officers, Procedures. The commission shall establish
regular meeting dates and shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. Special
meetings may be called by any two members of the commission upon three days
written notice to all members. The commission shall establish such rules of procedure
as may be deemed necessary. The commission shall select a chairperson and vicechairperson
at the first meeting in January, from its membership, who shall serve for
terms of one year upon selection. The commission may select a secretary from its
membership or authorize the City Staff secretary attending the commission meetings to
act as the commission secretary. Official minutes of each meeting shall be kept by the
designated member and filed in the office of the clerk/treasurer one week after the
meeting. (Amended by Ordinance 95-04, passed April 11, 1995.)
1004.03 Removal. Any commission member may be removed prior to the
end of the term only by a two-thirds vote of the council. Three consecutive absences by
any member shall require council review and action for dismissal or continuance.
(Amended by Ordinance 86-14, passed October 28, 1986.)
1004.04 Duties. The commission shall have such duties as assigned in this
code, by statute, and any other ordinances of the City.
26 1004.05 Meetings. Meetings shall be held at least one per month, two per
month during the months of April through October, as called by the chairman, or as set
by the council. Fifty-one percent shall constitute a quorum. Minutes of each meeting
shall be kept and provided to the council.
1004.06 Compensation. Commissioners shall be paid the last week in
December in an amount established by Council resolution annually. (Amended by
Ordinance –2-12, passed August 27, 2002.)
____________________________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
1004-2
1004.07 Quorum. A majority of the entire commission shall be a quorum to
transact business, and less than a quorum may recess a meeting to a future date. In the
event of vacancies, the “entire commission” shall be temporarily reduced to include only
those members legally entitled to participate, and the quorum shall be a majority of the
temporarily reduced “entire commission”. (Amended by Ordinance 96-06, passed
August 19, 1996.)
____________________________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
1005-1
1005 Moratorium on Multiple Unit Housing
1005.01 Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the terms listed below
shall have the meanings assigned:
Subd. 1. Multiple Unit Housing. A housing subdivision, planned unit
development, apartment building, condominium, or other housing arrangement allowed
in R2 and, R3 Zoning Districts.
Subd. 2. Corporation by Reference. The definitions set forth in the City Code
of Ordinances, Section 1001.04, Subdivision 2, are incorporated into this chapter by
reference.
1005.02 Prohibition of Development. The development and building of
multiple unit housing within the City is prohibited for a period of one year from the
effective date of this chapter.
1005.03 Extensions. The prohibition established by Section 1005.02 may be
extended by resolution of the City Council for a period not to exceed six months for such
resolution. The City Council shall not extend the prohibition for more than a total of 18
months.
1005.04 Grandfather Clause. This ordinance shall not be construed to
prohibit the building or development of any multiple unit housing project for which
preliminary approval has been granted prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
1005.05 Rescinding. The prohibition established by Section 1005.02 may be
rescinded by the City Council at any time by resolution.
(Amended by Ordinance 97-14, passed July 28, 1997)
____________________________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
1006-1
1006 Fire Code
1006.01 Minnesota State Fire Code. The Minnesota State Fire Code as in
effect, and any amendments duly enacted or adopted hereafter, is hereby adopted.
(Chapter 1006 added by Ordinance 86-8 passed June 9, 1986.)
____________________________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
1007-1
1007 Land Alteration
1007.01
Subd. 1. Intent. The intent of this ordinance is to ensure that alteration to the
topography of the land is planned and controlled:
(1) to conform to and complement the City's drainage plan;
(2) to prevent overburdening any part of the City's existing drainage system;
(3) to protect adjacent land and property from physical harm, additional water
runoff, unsightly conditions, dust and debris;
(4) to prevent pollution caused by soil erosion and sedimentation;
(5) to ensure that altered land does not become a health or safety hazard, or
stand in violation of the ordinance;
(6) to establish minimum uniform limitations and requirements to ensure
property planning and control of items one through five above for all land
within the City.
Subd. 2. Definitions. Under this ordinance, land alterations so defined as
changing the topography of the land so as to alter the grade by depositing, excavation,
or re-grading ten (10) or more cubic yards of dirt, soil, sand, clay, rock or other earth
materials. Land alterations shall not include the excavation, removal, moving or storage
of earth materials necessary for the construction of some pending structure, for which a
building permit has been issued, and which is to be erected immediately following the
excavation, removal, moving or storage of such materials. Land alteration shall not
include the depositing, excavation or moving of earth materials for construction of roads,
sewer lines, storm sewers, water mains, or surface water drainage.
Subd. 3. Annual Permit Required. Land alteration in all districts shall be
allowed only by annual permit issued by the City. Land alteration in flood plains shall be
in accordance with the flood plain ordinance.
The permit application shall be obtained from the City Clerk. The fee for the permit shall
be as set forth in Chapter 212.02 (24). (Amended by Ordinance 87-10, Passed
September 22, 1987.)
Persons, partnerships, companies or corporations now conducting land alteration as
defined by the ordinance, and for which this ordinance requires a permit may continue
such operations, but within 60 days of the effective date of this Ordinance shall make
application for a permit and shall include a finished grading plan and land restoration
plan. Failure to do so shall be a violation of this ordinance; however, on request, and for
____________________________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
1007-2
reasonable cause, the City Council may extend the time for the initial application to
ninety (90) days. If application is not made within the required time, all land alteration
operations shall be terminated.
The City Council may terminate land alteration permit for violation of this ordinance or a
condition of the permit. or for other cause. To terminate a permit, the City Council shall
give notice of the violation or other cause for the termination along with an order that the
condition be remedied. If the condition has not been remedied to satisfaction within a
two week period, the City Council shall determine whether the permit should be
terminated. No land alteration shall take place after the permit is terminated.
Subd. 4. General Provisions. Approval of the land alteration shall be granted
by the City Administrator with the right to appeal to the City Council only after:
(1) A finished grading plan; and
(2) A land restoration plan have been approved by the City Administrator
according to the requirements of this ordinance and are attached as part of
the permit application, and the required fee has been paid.
The finished grading plan and the land restoration plan shall complement the City's
drainage plans and shall not overburden any part of the existing City drainage system.
Land alteration shall not adversely effect adjacent land or property and shall as much as
possible retain. gently rolling topography in substantial conformity with the immediately
surrounding land. The plans shall be prepared in accordance with requirements set by
the City Engineer and/or the City Administrator under authority of this ordinance.
A finished grading plan shall consist of not less than a written description of:
(1) The maximum number of cubic yards of material to be deposited,
excavated or re-graded;
(2) The start and finish dates for land alteration;
(3) Any change in water runoff and drainage caused by the land alteration;
and
(4) The measures will be used to:
(a) Prevent pollution caused by soil erosion and sedimentation.
(b) Ensure that altered land does not become a health or safety hazard.
(c) Protect adjacent property.
____________________________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
1007-3
In addition, the City Administrator may require that the finished grading plan also
include:
(1) A certified survey by a registered surveyor.
(2) Topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals specified by the
City Engineer or City Administrator and/or
(3) A written description of types of land materials to be deposited or
excavated, conditions for the general maintenance of the site, controls for
vehicular ingress and egress, conditions for control of materials disbursed
from wind or during hauling materials to or from the site, or any other
conditions deemed necessary to ensure conformance with the intent of this
ordinance.
The land restoration plan shall be designed to prevent soil erosion by wind and water,
sedimentation, gullying, and other detrimental effects as determined by the City
Administrator and/or City Engineer.
A land restoration plan shall consist of not less than a written description of:
(1) The vegetation and ground cover to be used in restoring disturbed land.
(2) Land restoration start and finish dates.
(3) How the land restoration plan will prevent soil erosion by wind and water,
sedimentation, and gullying.
In addition, the City Administrator may require a landscape plan showing the locations
and types of vegetation and ground covers to be used on the site which shall conform to
the requirements set by the City Administrator and other sections of the ordinance;
and/or any other written or descriptive materials to ensure conformance with the intent
of this ordinance and all other City regulations.
(Section 1007 Added by Ordinance 86-15, passed November 25, 1986)
____________________________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
1008-1
1008 Park Dedication
1008.01
Subd. 1. Intent. The City Council recognizes that the health, safety and
welfare of all people depends greatly on the quality and character of their environment.
Thus, preserving and enhancing the quality and importance in the planning and
development of the City.
Dedicating a portion of land to the City for parks, playgrounds, and public open spaces
at the time of residential, commercial and industrial development is an essential means
to provide and maintain the high quality environment today's citizens demand and to
ensure that it will continue to exist for future residents.
Furthermore, the City Council recognizes that new residential, commercial and industrial
developments contribute to increased demands for parks, playgrounds and public open
spaces by new residents, workers and visitors and that these demands are directly
related to the density and intensity of development which is permitted in any district.
Therefore, it is the policy of the City that the following standards and guidelines for the
dedication of land for parks, playgrounds, and public open spaces, or cash contributions
in lieu of such dedication, shall be directly related to the density and intensity of each
subdivision and development which occurs within the City.
Subd. 2. Standards for Accepting Dedication of Land for Public Purposes.
(1) Land proposed to be dedicated for public purposes shall meet identified
needs contained in the City's Comprehensive Park and Trail Corridor
Plans.
(2) To be eligible for park dedication credit, no less than 100% of the land
dedicated shall be located outside of drainways, flood plains or ponding
areas after the site has been developed unless specific purposes for land
proposed to be dedicated for public purposes shall be identified in the City
Comprehensive Plan for Parks and Trails Corridor Plan. (Amended by
Ordinance 88-8, passed June 28, 1988.)
(3) In those cases where subdividers and developers of land provide
significant amenities, such as, but not limited to, swimming pools, tennis
courts, handball courts, ball fields, etc., within the development for the
benefit of those residing or working therein, and where, in the judgment of
the City Administrator, such amenities significantly reduce the demands for
public recreational facilities, he may recommend to the City Council that
the required amount of land to be dedicated for park, playground, public
open space (or cash contributions in lieu of such dedication) be reduced by
an amount not to exceed 20%.
____________________________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
1008-2
(4) The City may permit easements to be dedicated for trail corridors which are
identified in the City's Trail Corridor Plan thereby allowing the developer to
include the land area in the determination of setbacks and building density
on the site; however, park dedication credit shall not be given in such
cases to the easement.
(5) Exceptions to these provisions shall be reviewed and recommended by the
Park and Recreation Commission.
Subd. 3. Residential Dedication Requirements. A person who desires to
subdivide property for purposes of urban development shall, as a prerequisite to
approval of lot division or final plat, dedicate to the public for use as a park, playground,
or open space, a percentage of the land being platted or developed as hereinafter
specified. In the alternative, the subdivider shall at the option of the City, pay to the City
a sum of money based upon the fair market value of the undeveloped land in lieu of
dedicating property, which the City shall use in the acquisition, development or
maintenance of public parks, playgrounds or debt retirement in connection with the
public space. Any such cash payment received shall be placed in a separate fund
maintained by the City and used only for those purposes. In establishing the percentage
of land to be dedicated, or the cash value to be donated, the City Council shall take into
account the open space, park, recreational or common areas or facilities which the
subdivider proposes to reserve for the subdivision. These parks, playground and open
space areas shall be independent of and distinct from the areas dedicated to the public
for use as streets or for utility easements, sewers, water facilities, storm water drainage,
holding ponds, run-off improvements, trails or other similar utilities or improvements.
The City may choose to accept an equivalent amount in cash from the applicant for part
or all of the portion required to be dedicated to such public uses or purposes based on
the fair market value of the land no later than at the time of final approval. Any cash
payments received shall be placed in a special fund by the City and used only for the
purposes for which the money was obtained. In establishing the reasonable portion to
be dedicated, the regulations may consider the open space park, recreational or
common areas and facilities which the applicant proposes to reserve for the subdivision.
The City reasonably determines that it will seek to acquire that portion of land for the
purposes stated as a result of approval of the subdivision.
The City of Rockford finds that parks, playgrounds, green areas and open spaces
improve the value of property in the City, provides amenities and outlets for citizens,
preserves natural environment, and in many ways improves the health, safety, welfare
and morale of the citizens of the City of Rockford. In order to facilitate such
improvements, the City of Rockford finds that park land, playground areas, green and
open spaces are necessary in all new developments, lot divisions, subdivisions of land
within the City. In order to provide uniform benefit to all residents of said areas, the City
of Rockford requires subdivider and developers of land to dedicate land to the City or at
the City's option, to make a cash donation for the City to acquire land and park
equipment and for other related purposes.
____________________________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
1008-3
The City requires that a reasonable portion of any proposed subdivision be dedicated to
the public or preserved for public use as street, roads, sewers, electric, gas and water
facilities, storm water drainage and holding areas or ponds and similar utilities and
improvements.
The form of contribution (cash or land, or any combination thereof) shall be decided by
the City Council upon recommendation of the Park and Recreation Commission and
based upon need and conformance with the City's Comprehensive Plan.
The amount of land/cash shall be determined as follows:
TYPE OF USE: SUBDIVISION (Land dedication = 10% of gross land area)
Cash Dedication:
Single family: $1,724.00
Townhouse: $1,724.00 per unit
Apartment: $1,724.00 per unit plus
$50.00 per bedroom above the first bedroom
(Amended by Ordinance 05-13, passed October 25, 2005)
TYPE OF USE: NEW CONSTRUCTION/PREVIOUSLY PLATTED
Cash Dedication:
Single family: $1,724.00
Two family: $1,724.00 per unit
Townhouse: $1,724.00 per unit
Apartment: $1,724.00 per unit plus
$50.00 per bedroom above the first bedroom
(Amended by Ordinance 04-10, passed July 13, 2004)
(Amended by Ordinance 05-13, passed October 25, 2005)
Subd. 4. Required Improvements. Developers shall be responsible for
making certain improvements to their developments for park, playground, and public
open space purposes:
(1) Developers must provide finished grading and ground cover for all park,
playground, and public open spaces within their development contract or
site plan approval responsibilities.
(2) Developers must construct and pave all proposed trails concurrently with
the roads in their development; i.e., grading with site grading and paving
with street or parking lot paving. City staff may recommend deviation from
this policy in the case of individual hardship in terms of the timing of
____________________________________________________________________________________
Rockford City Code
1008-4
installation of such trail facilities when they are identified in the City's Trail
Corridor Plan.
(3) Developers will not receive park dedication credit for trails which are not
identified in the City's Trail Corridor Plan, or for connecting these trails to
any existing or proposed trails which are identified in the City's Trail
Corridor Plan.
(4) Developers will not receive park dedication credit if sidewalks are
constructed in the street right-of-way in lieu of trails within the
development.
Subd. 5. Commercial and Industrial Dedication Requirements. A commercial
subdivision of property shall be required to pay a park dedication fee of $250 per acre.
Subd. 6. Definitions.
Sidewalk. A sidewalk is defined as a public walkway constructed within the
street right of way.
(Section 1008 added by Ordinance 87-6, passed July 28, 1987; Amended by
Ordinance 96-04, passed July 8, 1996.) (Amended by Ordinance 97-09, passed
April 28, 1997.)