


CHAPTER 1

Section 1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
1.06
1.07
1.08
1.09
1.10
1.11
1.12
 
Title

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Application Citation Titles
Rules of Construction
Definitions Severability
Reference to a Public Official Otherwise Unlawful
Violation a Misdemeanor or a Petty Misdemeanor Penalties for Each Offense
Payment into City Treasury of Fines and Penalties Code Enforcement
 
Page




1-1
1-1
1-1
1-1
1-1
1-4
1-4
1-4
1-4
1-4
1-4
1-4
 
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 1.01.   APPLICATION.   The provisions of this Chapter apply to all provisions in the City Code. The City Code applies to all persons and property within the City of Red Wing, Minnesota, and within adjacent areas  as stated in specific provisions.

SECTION 1.02.  CITATION.  This  codification  of  the  ordinances  of  the City of Red Wing shall be known as the City Code and cited thus: "CITY CODE, SECTION."

SECTION 1.03. TITLES. A title or caption in any  provision of the  City Code is for convenience only and shall not limit, expand, or otherwise alter or control the content, wording, or interpretation thereof.

SECTION 1.04.	RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.

Subd. 1. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law  or  implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of State law.

 
Subd. 2.
gender as well.
 
Words  importing one gender  include  and  apply to the  other
 

Subd. 3. Words in the singular include the plural and words in the plural include the singular.

SECTION 1.05. DEFINITIONS.  Words  and  phrases  shall  have  their plain, ordinary, and usual meaning. Technical words and  phrases,  however, having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import. For the purpose of this Code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

1.	"City" - the City of Red Wing, Minnesota, acting by or through its duly authorized representative.

2.	"Council" and "City Council" - the City Council of the City of Red Wing, Minnesota.

3.	"Council Administrator"  - the  person duly appointed  by the  City Council and acting in such capacity, or acting through a designee.
 
4.	"Finance Director", "City Clerk", "City Attorney", "Director of Engineering", "Police Chief', and "Fire Chief' - the persons duly appointed as "Officers" by the City Council and acting in such capacity.

5.	"Person"  includes  all  firms,  partnerships,   associations, corporations, and natural persons.

6.	"Written" and "In Writing" - any mode of representing words and letters in the English language whether by printing or otherwise.

7.	"Street" - the entire area dedicated to public use, or contained in an easement or other conveyance or grant to the City, and includes, but is not limited to roadways, boulevards, sidewalks, alleys, and other public property between lateral property lines  in which  a  roadway lies.

8.	"Public Property" and "Public Place" - any  place, property, or premises dedicated to public use.  Such public  property  or  public place may be owned by the City, occupied by the City as a lessee, dedicated to the City in a plat, or occupied by the City by reason of an easement,  including, but not limited to, streets, storm water drainage and utilities, parks, trails, or parking lots so owned or occupied.

9.	"Private Property" - all property not included within the definition of public property or public place.

10.	"Intersection" - the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb line or, if no curb, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways or streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining  at any other angle may come in conflict.

11.	"Roadway" - that portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. If a street includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.

12.	"Police Officer" and "Peace Officer" - every officer, including special police, authorized to direct or regulate traffic and keep the peace, and appointed or employed for the purpose of law enforcement.

13.	"Misdemeanor" - the crime for which a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $700, or both, may be imposed.
 

14.	"Petty Misdemeanor" - an offense, which does not constitute a crime, and for which a sentence of a fine of not more than $100 may be imposed.

15.	"Conviction" - either of the following accepted and recorded by a court:

(a)	A plea of guilty, or;

(b)	A verdict of guilty by a jury or a finding of guilty by a court.

16.	"Crime" - conduct prohibited by ordinance for which the actor may be sentenced to imprisonment and/or fined.

17.	"Ordinance" - an ordinance duly adopted by the City Council of Red Wing, Minnesota.

18.	"Ex Officio Member" - a person who is not counted for the purpose of determining a quorum, and has no right to vote, but shall have the right and obligation, at the person's discretion, to speak to any question coming before the board, commission, or other deliberative body of which the person is such member.

19.	"Advisory Member" - a a person that is appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council, who acts in an advisory capacity and provides input to a Board. An advisory member does not have the right to vote, make motions, or be counted for purposes of a quorum. An advisory member need not be a resident of the City.

20.	"May" - is permissive.

21.	"Shall" - is mandatory.

22.	"Violate" - includes failure to comply.

23.	"Premises" - any lot or parcel of land within a continuous boundary whether publicly or privately owned, occupied, or possessed.

24.	"Board and Commission" - the official advisory bodies established by the City Charter or by the City Council per the City Code.

25.	"Joint Powers Board" - legal partnerships between other governmental agencies that improve operational efficiencies through collaborative efforts.
 
SECTION 1.06. SEVERABILITY. If any subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or other portion of this Code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, in whole or in part, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed severable, and such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code that  can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.

SECTION 1.07.	REFERENCE  TO A  PUBLIC  OFFICIAL.	Wherever  an
appointed public official is referenced in the City Code, the reference shall include such public official or the official's designee.

SECTION 1.08. OTHERWISE UNLAWFUL. The City Code does not authorize an act or omission otherwise prohibited by law.

SECTION 1.09.	VIOLATION	A	MISDEMEANOR	OR	A	PETTY
MISDEMEANOR. A person who violates a section, subdivision, paragraph, or provision of this City Code, or amendment thereof, by performing an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or by failing to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful shall be punished for a misdemeanor, or a petty misdemeanor upon conviction thereof, except as otherwise stated in specific provisions or amendments thereto. Upon conviction for a crime, the actor may be convicted of either the crime charged if it is a misdemeanor, or a petty misdemeanor as an included offense necessarily proved if the misdemeanor charge were proved.

SECTION 1.10.	PENALITIES FOR EACH OFFENSE.  When a penalty or
forfeiture is provided for the violation of a provision of this City Code, such penalty or forfeiture shall be construed to be for each such violation.

SECTION 1.11.	PAYMENT  INTO  CITY  TREASURY   OF  FINES  AND
PENALTIES. All fines, forfeitures, and penalties recovered for the violation of any ordinance, charter, rule, or regulation of the City shall be paid into the City Treasury by the court or officer thereof receiving such monies. Payment shall be made in the manner, at the time, and in the proportion provided by law.

SECTION 1.12.	CODE  ENFORCEMENT.

Subd. 1.  Police  and  Peace  Officers.  Police  and   peace   officers appointed by the City may enforce the provisions of this Code. In connection with such authority, police and peace officers may make arrests and issue citations in lieu of arrest in the manner provided by law.

Subd. 2. Employees and Agents.  The  following  city  employees  and agents, and their designees, may issue notices of violations and citations in lieu of arrest for alleged violations of the Code. These employees  and agents shall not arrest or otherwise take persons into custody.   The City Council shall identify and
 
approve designees by name annually.

A.  Community Service Officers.

B.	Parking Enforcement Attendants.

C.	Fire Chief.

D.	Engineering  Director.

E.	Public Works Director.

F.	Community Development Director.
 
Title
 
Page
 

 
CHAPTER2
 
ADMINISTRATION
 

Section	2.01	Administration and Departmental Organization	2-1
	2.02	Elective Officers	2-2
	2.03	Signatories on Deeds	2-2
	2.04	Accounts, Claims or Demands	2-2
	2.05	Facsimile Signatures	2-3
	2.06	Workers'  Compensation	2-3
	2.07	Emergency Management	2-4
	2.08	Boards and Commissions Generally	2-5
	2.09	Advisory  Planning Commission	2-6
	2.10	Airport Board	2-7
	2.11	Harbor Commission	2-7
	2.12	Human Rights Commission	2-8
	2.13	Sister Cities Commission	2-9
	2.14	Sustainability  Commission	2-10
	2.15	Code of Conduct	2-11
	2.16	Fair Housing	2-11
	2.17	Human Rights and Domestic Partnerships	2-19
	2.18	Disposal of Abandoned  Motor Vehicles, Unclaimed
Property and Excess Property	
2-22
	2.19	Vacation of Real Property	2-29
	2.20	Deferred Special Assessments for Disabled and
Senior Citizens	
2-30
	2.21	Deferred Special Assessments for Green Acres	2-32
	2.22	Deferred Assessments for Unimproved Property	2-32
	2.23	Payment of Assessments	2-33
	2.24	Expense Reimbursement and Escrow System	2-34
	2.25	Violation a Misdemeanor	2-34
 
(Page Revised 09-17-2014)

CHAPTER2 ADMINISTRATION
 
SECTION 2.01. ORGANIZATION.
 
ADMINISTRATION	AND	DEPARTMENTAL
 

Subd. 1.  This  administrative  code  defines  the  authority   and responsibility of the Council Administrator and other officers and employees, provides for the coordination and control of activities, and creates lines of communication within the administrative services of the City.

 
Subd. 2.
following duties:
 
The  Council  Administrator   or  designee   shall   perform  the
 

A. Control and supervise all employees and affairs of the City government and to that end may investigate, examine or inquire into the affairs or operation of any department, division, or office of the City except as may be otherwise provided.

B.	Issue administrative manuals, orders, rules, directives and regulations consistent with the Charter, the City Code and State law. Such rules, manuals, orders, directives and regulations shall outline the procedures for City administration.

C.	Recommend to the Council such policies and procedures determined to be in the best interest of the City.

D.	Temporarily reassign personnel from one department  to  another  as needed.

E.	Make necessary purchases of material and supplies in accordance with the City's established purchasing policies and State law, provided that all purchases and expenditures are within budgetary limits.

F.	Provide administrative assistance to the mayor to perform or carry out mayoral duties.

G.	Perform all other duties prescribed by law, required by the City Charter, City Code, or assigned by the Council.



Subd. 3.   To provide for the economic and efficient service delivery, the City will be organized by departments and divisions. The organizational structure and   functions   of   each   department   and   division   will   be   represented   in  an
 
organizational chart that will be adopted by City Council.

Subd. 4. The City Charter identifies officers  appointed  by  the  City Council. Each officer shall perform all duties required by State law, the City Charter, the City Code, and the job description for the position as approved by the City Council. These officers will serve as a department or division head. All department/division heads including officers appointed by the City Council shall report directly to the Council Administrator.

Subd. 5. The City will be guided by City Council adopted organizational policies, including but not limited to the personnel policy, data practices policy, purchasing policy, and records  retention  schedule.  Departments  and  divisions may have additional  internal policies or procedures approved by the City Council Administrator or department heads.

SECTION 2.02.	ELECTIVE OFFICERS.

Subd. 1.	The elected officers shall be as provided by Charter.

Subd. 2.  Elective  Officer  Salary.  In  accordance  with   Minnesota Statutes, Section 415.11 subd. 2, no change in salary shall take effect until after the next succeeding municipal election. Effective January 1, 2017, Elective Officer salaries will be $307.70 biweekly/ $8000.20 annually.

Subd. 2.a.  Council Members shall receive a per diem of $75 per meeting for services performed for the Board of Equalization.

SECTION 2.03.	SIGNATORIES ON DEEDS.

Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to clarify required signatures on deeds of conveyance on behalf of the City. While the Charter addresses required  signators for City contracts, it is silent with respect to those signatories required for deeds.

Subd. 2.       Signatories.  That every deed of conveyance in which the City is a grantor shall be signed by the Mayor and the City Clerk, with the seal of the City affixed thereto.

SECTION 2.04.	ACCOUNTS, CLAIMS OR DEMANDS.

Subd. 1. Generally. Except as to an annual salary, fees of jurors or witnesses fixed by law, or wages or salaries of employees which have been fixed on an hourly, daily, weekly, or monthly basis by the Council and which by law are authorized to be paid on a payroll basis, any account, claim, or demand against the City which can be itemized in the ordinary course  of business, the  Council shall not audit or allow the claim until the person claiming payment, or his agent,
 
reduces it to writing, in items, and signs a declaration to the effect that  such account, claim, or demand is just and correct and that no part of it has been paid in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Section 471.38.

Subd. 2.  Discretionary  Exception.  The Council  may, in its discretion, allow a claim prepared by the City Finance Director prior to such declaration by the claimant if the declaration is made on the check or order-check by which the claim is paid as provided in Minnesota Statutes, Section 471.391, Subd. 2.

Subd. 3. Form of Declaration for Claim. The declaration provided for in Subdivision 1 hereof is sufficient in the following form as provided in Minnesota Statutes, Section 471.391, Subd. 1: "I declare under the penalties of law that this account, claim, or demand is just and correct and that no part of it has been paid. Signature of Claimant."

Subd. 4. Form and Effect of Declaration on Check.  The  declaration provided for in Subdivision 2 hereof shall be printed on the reverse side of the check, above the space for endorsement thereof by the payee, as follows: "The undersigned payee, in endorsing this check (or order-check) declares  that  the same is received in payment of a just and correct claim against the City, and that no part of it has heretofore been paid. When endorsed by the payee named in the check or order-check, such statement shall operate and shall be deemed sufficient as the required declaration of the claim in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Section 471.391, Subd. 2.

Subd. 5.   Signing Checks.  All checks shall be signed by the Mayor and City Finance Director.

Subd. 6. As an alternative  to  payment  of  claims  and  obligations  by check, the City Finance Director may make payment by electronic or wire funds transfer provided the declaration set forth in Subdivision 1 above has been made.

SECTION 2.05.	FACSIMILE   SIGNATURES.	The   Mayor   and   City
Finance Director are hereby authorized to request a depository of City funds to honor an order for payment when such instrument bears a facsimile of either signature, and to charge the same to the account designated thereon  or  upon which it is drawn, as effectively as though it were a manually written signature. Such authority is granted only for the purpose of permitting such officers an economy of time and effort.

SECTION 2.06.	WORKERS'	COMPENSATION.	No	person	shall
receive coverage for workers' compensation except as provided in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 176. Elected officials and appointed Board and Commission members shall be excluded from coverage.
 
SECTION 2.07.	EMERGENCY  MANAGEMENT.

Subd. 1.	Purpose.

A. This section shall be in accord with the Minnesota Emergency Management Act of 1996, Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 12, and is established to enable the City to perform local emergency management functions.

B.	Because of the possibility of the occurrence of natural and other disasters and in order to ensure that preparations of the City will be adequate to deal with such disasters, and generally to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and preserve the lives and property of the people of the City, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary: (1) to establish a local emergency management plan; (2) to provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies; and (3) to provide for the rendering of mutual aid between the City and other political subdivisions of this State and with other states to carry out emergency management	functions; and (4) to institute training and public information programs to ensure emergency  preparedness

C.	It is further declared to be the purpose of this Section and the policy of the City that all emergency management functions be coordinated to the maximum extent practicable with the comparable functions of the federal government, of this State, of other states and localities, and of private agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective  preparations and use may be made of the labor supply, resources and facilities for dealing with any disaster that may occur.

Subd. 2.	Definitions.  For the purpose of this Section:

1.	"Emergency Management" - the preparation for and the coordination of emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from natural disasters as well as those caused by enemy attack. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police  services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering,		warning services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from	stricken areas, emergency human services, emergency transportation,	existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection,		temporary restoration of public utility services, implementation	of energy supply emergency conservation and allocation	measures, and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to preparation for and coordination of these functions.
 

2.	"Declared Emergency" - a national security or peacetime emergency declared by the Governor pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section
12.31 or an emergency  proclaimed  by the  Mayor as authorized
under this Subdivision and, in addition, includes disasters caused by fire, flood, tornadoes, wind storms, or other natural causes.

Subd. 3. Emergency Management Fiscal Procedure. There is hereby established in the City Treasury a special account to be known as the Emergency Management Fund. This account shall contain the proceeds of taxes levied for emergency management, money transferred from other funds, gifts, and other revenues of the Emergency Management Division. These funds shall not be used for regular and ongoing costs of the Emergency Management Division, but only shall be used in case of an emergency.

SECTION 2.08.	BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY.

Subd. 1. Charter Authorization. As provided by Charter, all Boards and Commissions shall be established by ordinance, which shall set forth their powers and duties, including the handling of funds. Except as otherwise specifically provided, all Boards and Commissions shall be advisory to the Council and neither shall they handle their own funds or accounting nor have the authority to contract for the sale or purchase of goods or services or financially obligate the City in any way except as authorized in the City Charter. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all of the provisions of this Section shall apply to every Board and Commission.

Subd. 2. City Council Authority. The City Council has the authority to establish policies for Boards and Commissions. No Board or Commission, or any member thereof, may lobby, solicit, or attempt to influence any governmental entity on behalf of said Board or Commission or the City of Red Wing, for any purpose, without the prior approval of the City Council.

Subd. 3.  Membership.  All  Boards   and   Commissions   shall   be composed of three to fifteen members. Members may be removed by two-thirds vote of the Council; and terms of appointees to each Board or Commission shall be staggered to provide continuity. No appointed Board or Commission member shall be an employee of the City except those who are members by virtue of their office. Except as may be otherwise specifically provided by City Code, the City Charter, the Port Authority Enabling Resolution, or other law, no member of the Council shall serve on a Board or Commission. In addition to the regular members, the Mayor may appoint an honorary member to each Board or Commission on an annual basis to be known as the "Commissioner Emeritus." Such Commissioner Emeritus shall meet the same criteria for a regular member, set forth above, but shall not have a vote.
 
Subd. 4. Residency. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all appointees shall have been residents of the City for at least six months.  If questions arise concerning the continued residency of a Board or Commission member, the Council shall appoint a subcommittee of the Council to gather facts pertinent to the residency question. The subcommittee shall make a recommendation to  the Council as to its findings. In assessing residency, the Council shall consider whether the individual at issue votes or is eligible to vote in the City, whether the individual lives within the City limits, and the address listed on the individual's drivers license as predominant factors of residency, though the Council is free to consider other evidence it determines is relevant to the residency question.

Subd. 5. Vacancy. Any Board or Commission member removed by the Council or whose seat is declared vacant by a lack of residency shall have their position filled as any other vacancy. All vacancies shall be filled  in the  same manner as an initial appointment, but only for the unexpired portion of the term.

Subd. 6.   Procedures.   The  Chairman  of  each  Board  or  Commission shall be chosen from voting membership, and may serve two consecutive  one­ year terms. Each Board and Commission shall  establish  its rules of procedure and establish its regular meeting time, all of which shall be approved by  the Council.

Subd. 7.  Compensation.   The  Port Authority  Board of Commissioners shall be paid a per diem in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Section 469.050, Subd. 5. All other appointed Board and Commission members shall serve without remuneration, but may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses incurred in the performance of their duties when such expenses have been authorized by the staff liaison before they were incurred.

Subd. 8.   Joint  Powers Agreements.    The  Council  may, as the  needs and interests of the City dictate, enter into Joint Powers Agreements

Subd. 9. Mutual Aid Agreements. The Council may, as the needs and interests of the City dictate, enter into mutual aid agreements with other public entities.

SECTION 2.09.	ADVISORY  PLANNING COMMISSION.

Subd. 1. Establishment and Composition. An Advisory  Planning Commission is hereby established. The Commission shall be composed of seven members.
 
Subd. 2.	Powers and Duties.

A. The Advisory Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties defined or granted in Minnesota Statutes and the City Code relating to planning, zoning and subdivision regulation.

SECTION 2.10.	AIRPORT  BOARD.

Subd. 1. Policy. It is the policy of the  City to have an Airport Board pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 360.038.

Subd. 2.  Composition.  The  Board  shall  be  composed  of  seven members; four of whom shall be residents of the City of Red Wing, one of whom shall be a Goodhue County, Minnesota, resident and taxpayer of the City of Red Wing or hangar lessee, and two who shall be residents of Pierce County, Wisconsin. Preference shall be given to residents of the townships of Isabelle and Trenton.

Subd. 3.  Purpose.  To  recommend  policy  and  guidelines  for  the operation and maintenance of the airport. To encourage economic, recreational, and community development, and to enhance strong local and regional involvement in these actions.

Subd. 4. Powers and Duties. The Board shall advise the Council in all matters dealing with the airport and its operation. The Board shall recommend an annual operating budget, report on the adequacy of facilities, recommend capital improvements, and serve as a forum for citizen input on subjects relating to the airport and its operation.



SECTION 2.11.	HARBOR COMMISSION

 
Subd. 1.
Commission.
 
Policy.	It  is  the   policy   of  the   City  to   have  a   Harbor
 

Subd. 2. Composition. The Commission shall be composed of seven members. Members shall be residents of the City in accordance with Section 2.08, Subdivision 4, of this Chapter, except that one member may be a nonresident who either owns real property in the City or has a slip at a City marina. The nonresident member shall be subject to nomination by the Mayor and confirmation by the City Council and the Port Authority. In the event that the Mayor does not appoint a nonresident, the Mayor can appoint a City resident as the  seventh member of the Commission and that member will be subject to confirmation by the City Council and the Port Authority. With regard to the members who  are residents, three shall be appointed by the Port Authority President and confirmed by  the  Port Authority  Board,  and  three  shall  be  appointed  by  the  Mayor  and
 
confirmed by the City Council. All members shall have the right to vote. A representative of the Port Authority shall serve as a non-voting liaison between the Port Authority and the Harbor Commission. A representative of the Red Wing City Council shall serve as a non-voting liaison between the City Council and  Harbor Commission.

Subd. 3. Purpose. The purpose  of the Harbor Commission is to (1) recommend policy guidelines for commercial and recreational activities related to the City's riverfront and navigable waters, (2) advise the Planning  Commission, Port Authority, and/or City Council on new development or redevelopment along the riverfront or navigable waterways; (3) suggest policies as it relates to navigable waters within the City, (4) recommend operational policy for the marinas that are utilizing City property, and (5) assist with marketing and communications  related to the Commission's activities.

Subd. 4. Powers and Duties. The Harbor Commission shall have the following powers and duties:

A. Make recommendations related to all riverfront development or redevelopment  projects.


B.	Assist with review, analysis, and updating of recreational leases.


C.	Assist  with  developing  policies that  affect  recreational  issues,  including but not  limited  to,  marina  pricing,  marketing  recommendations,  gas sales, waiting lists, etc.


D.	Develop and assist  with the implementation of marketing recommendations for recreational aspects of the river and for Ole Miss Marina activities.


E.	Communicate with  residents  and  boaters  the  rationale  for  various Harbor related policies.


SECTION 2.12.	HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION.

 
Subd. 1.
Commission.
 
Policy.	It is the  policy of the  City to  have a  Human  Rights
 

Subd. 2.  Composition.   The  Commission  shall  be composed  of up to nine members. Members shall be residents of the City in accordance with Section 2.08, Subdivision 4, of this Chapter, or nonresidents of the City drawn from within the  boundary  limits of  Independent School  District No. 256.   Such  nonresidents
 
shall have resided within the boundary limits of the School District for at least six months.	The number of nonresident members must not constitute a quorum or more of the Commission. The Commission is not required to contain a minimum number of nonresidents as members.  All members shall have the right to vote.

Subd. 3. Purpose. The purpose of the Commission is to secure for all citizens equal opportunity in employment, housing, public accommodations, public services, education and full participation in the affairs of the City by supporting the Minnesota Department of Human Rights in implementing the Minnesota Human Rights Act and by advising the Council on long-range programs to improve community relations in the City.

Subd. 4.	Responsibilities.  The Human Rights Commission shall have the following responsibilities:

A. Create and collaborate with individuals, agencies, and organizations to provide the community with opportunities for educational and cultural events and activities.

B.	Advise and inform the Mayor, the Council and other departments of City government on human rights and civil rights issues.

C.	Promote education and understanding within the Red Wing community regarding the Minnesota Human Rights Act.

D.	Provide information and referral services to people in Red Wing  who need assistance from the Minnesota Department of Human Rights.

SECTION 2.13.	SISTER CITIES COMMISSION.

Subd. 1.	Policy.	It  is the  policy  of  the  City  to  have  a  Sister  Cities Commission.

Subd. 2.     Composition.   The Sister  Cities Commission  shall consist of up to 15 members. Members shall be residents of the City in accordance with Section 2.08, Subdivision 4,  of this Chapter, or nonresidents  of the  City drawn from within the boundary limits of Independent School District No. 256.Such nonresidents shall have resided within the boundary limits of the School District for at least six months. The number of nonresident members must not constitute a quorum or more of the Commission. The Commission is not required to contain a minimum number of nonresidents as members. All members shall have the right to vote.
Source:  Ordinance 8, Fourth Series
Effective Date:  07-16-2011

Subd. 3.	Purpose.   The purpose of this Commission  is to promote the interests  of  the  City  and  the  United  States  by  encouraging  and  fostering  the
 
development of sister city relationships of a long-term nature between this City and cities of other countries. The establishment of this Commission will benefit everyone and enable the Sister Cities Commission to:

A.  Exchange ideas and personal visits with their counterparts;

B.	Develop a way for the many and diverse elements of every community to come together to enjoy and profit from a cooperative program;

C.	Open  new  dialogues  with  other  cultures  to  find  unique  solutions  to improving the quality of life; and

D.	Further global understanding and world peace.

 
Subd. 4.
powers and duties:
 
Powers and Duties.  The Commission shall have the following
 

A. Coordinate the establishment of official sister city relationships between the City of Red Wing and cities of other countries through Sister Cities International.

B.	Establish official contacts with our sister cities, collect and disseminate information	on these cities and host official visits of sister city delegations.

C.	Promote cultural, economic and educational understanding between the City of Red Wing and its sister cities and citizen exchanges.

D.	Provide contacts and liaisons for  the business community, public schools, and other interested groups with our sister cities.

E.	Address  the  Mayor and  City Council on all aspects of the City's sister city relationships.

F.	Promote internship programs, leadership development programs, newsletters, workshops and trade and economic development.

SECTION 2.14.	SUSTAINABILITY  COMMISSION.

 
Subd. 1.
Commission.
 
Policy.	It is the  policy  of the  City  to  have a  Sustainability
 

Subd. 2. Composition. The Commission  shall  be  composed  of  a minimum of nine members and a maximum of fifteen members. Members must be residents of the City in accordance with Section 2.08, Subdivision 4, of this Chapter,  or  nonresidents  of  the  City  drawn  from  within  the  boundary  limits  of
 
Independent School District No. 256. Such nonresidents shall have resided within the boundary limits of the School District for at least six months. The number of nonresident members must not constitute a quorum or more of the Commission. The Commission is not required to contain a minimum number of nonresidents as members.  All members shall have the right to vote.

Subd. 3. Purpose. The purpose of the Sustainability  Commission is to provide advice to the City Council concerning environmental issues and initiatives confronting the City. The Commission shall work with citizens, government, businesses and local community organizations to protect and preserve the ecological resources of the community so that they are in balance with the cultural, historic, recreational, and economic resources of our river and land for generations to come.

Subd.  4.	Powers and Duties.

A. Draft and recommend a sustainability action plan for City Council consideration and approval.

B.	Assist and advise the City Council, Advisory Planning Commission and other city staff in assessing the environmental impact of proposed undertakings that fall in part or in total under the City's jurisdiction and recommend changes that would lesson or eliminate the environmentally detrimental effects of such undertakings.

C.	Recommend to the City Council additional environmental policy provisions and ordinances for enactment, as well as actions and programs that will maintain  or improve environmental quality and conservation of natural resources.

D.	Request that the City Council authorize studies on matters pertaining to environmental quality and natural resources and recommend, when necessary, the employment of  professional  qualified  persons  to  carry out such studies.

E.	Establish educational programs and public forums that provide information to community residents, businesses, and other institutions about environmental issues and initiatives.

F.	Establish environmental  programs,  volunteer  opportunities  and initiatives in which community residents can take part.

SECTION 2.15. CODE OF CONDUCT.

Subd. 1. Purpose. The Mayor and City Council of the City of Red Wing determines that a code of conduct for its members, as well as the members of the
 
various advisory boards and commissions of the City of Red Wing, is essential for the public affairs of the city. By eliminating conflicts of interest and providing standards for conduct in city matters, the city council hopes to promote the faith and confidence of the citizens of Red Wing in their government and to encourage its citizens to serve on its council and boards and commissions.

Subd. 2.	Standards of Conduct.  No elected official or a city advisory board or commission member may knowingly:

a.	Violate the open meeting law.
b.	Participate in a matter that is before the city council or relevant board that affects the person's financial interests or those of a business with which the person is associated, unless the effect on the person or business is no greater than on other members of the same business classification, profession, or occupation.
c.	Use the person's public position to secure special privileges or exemptions
for the person or for others.
d.	Use the person's public position to solicit personal gifts or favors.
e.	Use the person's public position for personal gain.
f.	Except as specifically permitted pursuant to Minnesota Statute 471.895, accept or receive any gift of substance, whether in the form of money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, promise, or any other form, under circumstances in which it could be reasonably expected to influence the person, the person's performance of official action, or be intended as a reward for the person's official action.
g.	Disclose to the public, or use for the person's or another person's personal
gain, information that was gained by reason of the person's public position if the information was not public data or was discussed at a closed session of the city council or committee.
h.	Disclose information that was received, discussed, or decided in conference
with the city's legal counsel that is protected by the attorney-client privilege unless a majority of the city council has authorized the disclosure.

Except as prohibited by the provisions of Minnesota Statute Section 471.87, there is no violation of item b. of this section for a matter that comes before the council, board, or commission, if the member of the council, board, or commission publicly discloses the circumstances that would violate these standards and refrains from participating in the discussion and vote on the matter.  Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit a contract with an elected or appointed official under the circumstances described under Minnesota Statute Section 471.88, if proper statutory procedures are followed.

Subd. 3.	Complaint, Hearing. Any person may file a written complaint with the City Clerk alleging a violation of the aforementioned standards of conduct. The complaint must contain supporting facts for the allegation. The city council  may hold a hearing after receiving the written complaint or upon the council's own
 
volition. A hearing must be held only if the city council determines (1) upon advice of the city attorney, designee, or other attorney appointed by the council, that the factual allegations state a sufficient claim of a violation of these standards or rise to the level of a legally-recognized conflict of interest, and (2) that the complaint has been lodged in good faith and not for impermissible purposes such as delay. The city council's determination as to whether to hold a hearing must be made within 30 days of the filing of the allegation with the city clerk, if possible.  The council may grant an extension to this 30-day timeline if additional time is needed to adequately investigate the complaint.  If the council determines that there is an adequate justification for holding a hearing, the hearing must be held within 30 days of the city council's determination.  The purpose of the hearing is to provide the person accused with the opportunity to be heard. If, after the hearing, the council finds that a violation of a standard has occurred or does exist, the council may, at the same meeting or a future meeting, censure the person, refer the matter for criminal prosecution, request an official not to participate in a decision, remove an appointed member of a board or commission from office, and/or any other action within the council's authority that the council deems appropriate.

SECTION 2.16.	FAIR HOUSING.

Subd. 1.  Purpose.  Discrimination in housing and  real property based upon race, color, creed, religion, national origin,  sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial status, disability, and status in regard  to  public  assistance adversely affects the health, welfare, peace, and safety of the community. People subject to such discrimination suffer depressed living conditions, poverty and hopelessness, which injures the public welfare, and places a burden  upon the public treasury  to improve these conditions. It is the  purpose of this Section to foster equal opportunity for all  to obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial status, disability, and status in regard to public assistance.

Subd. 2.  Definitions.  The following terms, as used in this Section, shall have the following meanings:

1.	"Commission" - the Red Wing Human Rights Commission.

2.	"Commissioner"  - refers to a member of the  Red Wing  Human Rights Commission unless the context otherwise indicates.

3.	"Complainant" - an individual who is aggrieved by an alleged unfair discriminatory practice and who has filed a grievance either with the Minnesota Department of Human Rights or with the Commission.

4.	"Disability" - any condition or characteristic that renders a person disabled.	A disabled person is any person who 1) has a physical, sensory, or mental impairment which materially limits one or more
 
major life activities; 2) has a record of such an impairment; or 3) is regarded as having such an impairment.

5.	"Familial Status" - the condition of one or more minors being domiciled with a) their parent or parents or the minor's legal guardian or b) the designee of the parent or parents or  guardian  with  the written permission of the parent or parents or guardian. The protection afforded against discrimination on the basis of family status apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of an individual who has not attained the age of majority.

6.	"Marital Status" - whether a person is single, married, remarried, divorced, separated, or a surviving spouse.

7.	"National Origin" - the place of birth of an individual or of an individual's lineal ancestors.

8.	"Person" - an individual, partnership, association, corporation, municipal	corporation, school  or school district, county, legal representative, trustee, trustee in bankruptcy, and receiver.

9.	"Real Estate Broker and Salesman" - a real estate broker as defined by Minnesota Statutes, Section 82.17, Subd. 4, and a real estate salesperson as defined by Minnesota Statutes, Section 82.17, Subd. 5.

10.	"Real Property" - real estate, lands, tenements, and hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal.

11.	"Respondent" - a person against whom a complaint has been filed or issued for alleged unfair discriminatory practices.

12.	"Sex" - includes, but is not limited to, pregnancy, childbirth, and disabilities related to pregnancy or childbirth.

13.	"Sexual Orientation" - having or being perceived as having an emotional, physical, or sexual attachment to another person without regard to the sex of that person or having or being perceived as having an orientation  for such attachment, or  having or being perceived	as having a self-image or identity not traditionally associated with one's biological maleness or femaleness. "Sexual orientation" does not include a physical or sexual attachment to children by an adult.
 
14.	"Status with Regard to Public Assistance" - the condition of being a recipient of federal, state, or local assistance, including medical assistance, or of being a tenant receiving federal, state or local subsidies, including rental assistance or rent supplements.

15.	"Unfair Discriminatory Practice" - any act described in Subdivision 3.
The word "discriminate" includes segregate or separate.

 
Subd. 3.
practice:
 
Unfair  Housing  Discrimination.	It is an  unfair discriminatory
 

A.	For an owner, lessee, sublessee, assignee, or managing agent of, or other person having the right to sell, rent or lease any real property, or any agent of any of these:

1.	To refuse to sell, rent, or lease or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group of persons any real property because of their race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial status, disability, or status in regard to public assistance;

2.	To discriminate against any person or group of persons because of their	race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial status, disability, or status in regard to public assistance in the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any real property or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; or

3.	In any transaction involving real property, to print, circulate or post or cause to be printed, circulated, or posted any advertisement or sign, or use any form of application for the purchase, rental or lease of real property, or make any record or inquiry in connection with the prospective	purchase, rental or lease of real property which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial status, disability, or status in regard to public assistance, or any intent to make any such limitation, specification, or discrimination.

B.	For a real estate broker, real estate salesman or employee, or agent thereof:

1.	To refuse to sell, rent, or lease or refuse to offer for sale, rental, or lease any real property to any person or group of persons or refuse to negotiate for the sale, rental or lease of any real property to any person  or  group  of  persons  because  of  their  race,  color,  creed,
 
religion, national ong1n, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial status, disability, or status in regard to public assistance, or represent that real property is not available for  inspection,  sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or otherwise deny or withhold any real property or any facilities of real property to or from any person or group of persons because of their race, color, creed, religion, national origin,  sex,  sexual  orientation,  marital  status, familial status, disability, or status in regard to public assistance;

2.	To discriminate against any person because of race, color, creed, religion, national origin,  sex,  sexual  orientation,  marital  status, familial status, disability, and status in regard to public assistance, in the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of real property or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; or

3.	To print, circulate, or post or cause to be printed, circulated or posted any advertisement or sign, or use any form of application for the purchase, rental or lease of any real property or make any record or inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or lease of any real property, which expresses directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, color, creed, religion, national origin,  sex,  sexual  orientation,  marital  status, familial status, disability, and status in regard to public assistance, or any	intent to make any such limitation, specification, or discrimination.

C.	For a person, bank, banking organization, mortgage  company, insurance company, or other financial institution or leader to whom application is made for financial assistance or for the purchase, lease, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or  maintenance  of  any real property or any agent or employee thereof:

1.	To discriminate against any person or group of persons because of their	race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial status, disability, or status in regard to public assistance, or of the prospective occupants or tenants	of such real property in the  granting,  withholding, extending, modifying or renewing, or in the rates, terms, conditions, or privileges of any such financial assistance or in the extension of services in connection therewith;

2.	To use any form of application for such financial assistance or make any record or inquiry in connection with  applications  for  such financial assistance  which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation,  specification,  or  discrimination  as  to  race,  color,  creed,
 
religion, national ong1n, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial status, disability, or status in regard to public assistance, or any intent to make any such limitation,  specification,  or discrimination.

D.	For any real estate broker or real estate salesman, for the purpose of inducing a real property transaction from which such person, that person's firm, or any of its members may benefit financially, to represent that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the composition with respect to  race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, familial status, disability, or status in regard to public	assistance, of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood, or area in which the real property is located, and to represent, directly or indirectly, that this change will or may result in undesirable consequences in the block, neighborhood, or area in which the real property is located, including but not limited to the lowering of property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or a decline in the quality of schools or other public facilities.

Subd. 4. Unfair Discrimination - Aiding and Obstructing. It is unfair discriminatory practice for any person:

A. Intentionally to aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce a person to engage in any of the practices forbidden by this Chapter;

B.	Intentionally to attempt to aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce a person to engage in any of the practices forbidden by this Chapter;

C.	To intentionally obstruct or prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this Chapter, or any order relating to discrimination issued under state law, or to resist, prevent, impede, or interfere with the State Commissioner	of Human Rights or any of the Commissioner's employees or representatives in the performance of duty under state law relating to discrimination.

Subd. 5. Reprisals. It is an  unfair  discriminatory  practice  for  any employer, labor organization, employment agency, lessor, public accommodation, public service or educational institution or owner, lessor, lessee, sublessee, assignee or managing agent of any real property, or any real estate broker, real estate salesman or employee or agent thereof to intentionally engage in any reprisal against any person because that person:

A. Opposed a practice forbidden under this chapter or has filed a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any matter in an investigation proceeding or hearing under this Chapter; or
 
B. Associated with a person or group of persons of a different race, color, creed, religion, sexual orientation, or national origin.

Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to limit the right of any person to file a complaint with the Minnesota Commissioner of Human Rights or to limit the right of any person concerned or affected to a hearing of the facts and issues in any court having jurisdiction of cases involving discriminatory practices.

Subd. 6.	Exemptions.

A.	The provisions of Subdivision 3 shall not apply to:

1.	Rooms in a temporary or permanent residence home run by a nonprofit organization, if the discrimination is by sex; or

2.	The rental by a resident owner or occupier of a one-family accommodation of a room or rooms in such accommodation to another person or persons if the discrimination is by sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance, sexual orientation or disability.		Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require any person or group of persons selling, renting or leasing property  to modify the property in any way, or exercise a higher degree of care for a person having a disability than for a person who does not have a disability; nor shall this Chapter be construed to relieve any person, regardless of any disability, in written lease, rental agreement, or contract of purchase or sale, or to forbid distinctions based on the inability	to fulfill the terms and conditions, including financial obligations of such lease, agreement or contract.

3.	The rental by a resident owner of a unit in a dwelling containing not more than two units, if the discrimination is on the basis of sexual orientation.

B.	The provisions of Subdivision 3 prohibiting discrimination because of familial status shall not be construed to defeat the applicability of any local, state or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling unit and shall not apply to:

1.	An unoccupied dwelling unit in any building in which at least a majority of the dwelling units are occupied by elderly persons or are unoccupied and available for occupancy solely by households of which at least one member is an elderly person; or

2.	Any owner occupied building containing four or fewer dwelling units; or
 
3.	An unoccupied dwelling unit in any building which is the subject of a valid certificate filed with the State Commissioner of Human Rights pursuant to the provisions  of  Minnesota  Statutes,  Section  363.02, Subd. 2 (as amended).

Subd. 7.  Filing with Building Official.   Owners of dwelling units exempt from the provisions of Subdivision 3 prohibiting discrimination because of familial status pursuant to Subdivision 68(3) shall file a copy of the election or certificate with the housing inspector for the City.

Subd. 8.   Grievance  Procedure.   The  Commission  shall  develop  rules and regulations for the establishment of a procedure to address grievances pursuant to this chapter. Said rules and regulations  shall  include,  but  not  be limited to, application for grievance hearing, information required, Commission response, deadlines, notification of result, and denial of services.

Subd. 9.    Notice to State.  The Commission may, in its discretion, notify the Minnesota Department of Human Rights of any unfair discriminatory practice which has come to its attention either by grievance or otherwise.

Subd. 10.	Construction.  Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to:

A.  Mean the  City of Red Wing  condones  homosexuality  or bisexuality or any equivalent lifestyle; or,

B.	Authorize the recognition of or the right of marriage between persons of  the same sex.

Subd. 11. Criminal Code; Effect. Nothing in this chapter alters the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 609 or, any other law relating to criminal penalties.

SECTION 2.17.  HUMAN RIGHTS AND DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIPS.

Subd. 1.	Statement of Legislative Purpose and Intent.  The City of Red Wing  recognizes that  nationwide  debate  has advanced  an expanded  concept of familial relationships beyond traditional marital and blood relationships.  This ordinance  creates  a  process  to  provide  two  non-married  but  committed  adult partners	to	declare	themselves	domestic	partners,	thereby	providing	a government-based  foundation  to  such  committed  relationships  which  positively contributes to the health, safety and welfare of the community as a whole.

This ordinance does not create or confer rights or privileges that are available to married persons under state or federal laws. The City of Red Wing does not provide legal advice concerning domestic relationships. Applicants and registrants  should  consult  with  attorneys  or  other  advisors  for  advice  on  such
 
matters  as  wills,  durable  powers  of  attorney,  health  care  directives,   medical matters, health care finances, or employment benefits.

Subd. 2.  Definition.  For   the  purpose  of  this  Section,  the   term "Domestic Partner'' means two persons 18 years of age or older, who:

A.	Are not related by blood closer than permitted under the marriage laws of the State;

B.	Are not married in a manner recognized in Minnesota;

C.	Are competent to contract;

D.	Have no other domestic partner;

E.	Affirm that they are jointly responsible to each other for the necessities of life;

F.	Affirm that they are committed to one another to the same extent as married persons are to each  other,  except  for  the  traditional  marital status and solemnities; and,

G.	At least one of the partners either resides or works  in the City of Red Wing.

Subd. 3.	Registration of Domestic Partners.

A. The city clerk shall accept an application to register  as  domestic partners from persons who state in such application that they meet the definition of domestic partners set out in Subd. 2.

B.	For all applications received in 2011, the city clerk will charge an application fee of $50 for the registration of a domestic partnership. After 2011, the application fee may be increased or decreased on an annual basis and will thereafter be set forth in the City's fee ordinance. The city clerk shall also charge a reasonable fee per document for providing certified copies or registrations, amendments or notices of termination. There shall be no charge for filing amendments or notices of termination.

C.	The city clerk shall provide each  domestic partner with a registration certificate. The registration certificate shall not be issued prior to the third working day after the date of application.

D.	This application and certificate may be used as evidence of the existence of a domestic partners relationship.
 
E.	The city clerk shall keep a record of all registrations of domestic partnership, amendments to registrations  and  notices of termination  received  by the city clerk. The records shall be maintained so that amendments and notices of termination are filed with the registration of domestic partnership to which they pertain.

F.	Upon production of valid, government-issued documentation and only to the extent of the rights and responsibilities established therein or elsewhere in this Code, the terms "domestic partnership" and "registered domestic partnership" shall include, in addition to domestic partnerships registered with the City of Red Wing, and regardless of whether partners in either circumstance have sought further registration with the City of Red Wing:

1.	Any person who has a currently registered domestic partnership with a	governmental  body  pursuant  to  state,  local,  or   other   law authorizing such registration. The term domestic partnership should be construed broadly to include same-sex civil unions or other such same-sex unions in which two same-sex individuals are committed to one another to the  same  extent  as  married  persons  are  to  each other, except for the traditional marital status and solemnities; and

2.	Marriages that would be legally recognized as a contract of lawful marriage in another local, state, or foreign jurisdiction.

Subd. 4.   Amendments.   The  city  clerk  may  accept  amendments  for filing from persons who have a domestic partnership application on file except amendments which would change the identity of the partners.

Subd. 5.	Termination of Domestic Partnerships.

A. Either person in a domestic partnership may initiate termination of the domestic partnership, by written notification to the city clerk on a form provided by the city clerk's office.
B.	A Domestic Partnership terminates when the earlier of the following
occurs:

1.	One of the partners dies; or

2.	Forty-five days after one partner sends the other a written notice of termination that he or she has terminated the partnership by filing a notice of termination with the city clerk.

Source:  Ordinance 7, Fourth Series Effective Date:  07-02-2011
 
SECTION	2.18.	DISPOSAL	OF	ABANDONED	MOTOR	VEHICLES, UNCLAIMED PROPERTY AND EXCESS PROPERTY.

Subd. 1.	Disposal of Abandoned  Motor Vehicles.

A.	Definitions.

1.	"Abandoned Motor Vehicle" - a motor vehicle, as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 169.01, Subd. 3, that has remained illegally for a period of more than 48 hours on public property  or lacking vital component parts, or has remained for  more  than  48 hours on private property without the consent of the person in control of such property, and lacks vital component parts, or is in an inoperable condition such that it has no substantial potential for further use consistent with its usual function, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building. It shall also mean a  motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered by its owner to and accepted by the City. A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 168.10, shall not be considered an abandoned motor vehicle within the meaning of this Section. Vehicles on the premises of junk yards or automobile graveyards, which are licensed and maintained in accordance with the City Code, shall not  be  considered abandoned motor vehicles within the meaning of this Section.

2.	"Vital Component Parts" - those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the motor, drive train and wheels.

3.	"Garage Keeper" - is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles.



B.	Custody. The City may take into custody and impound any abandoned motor vehicle.

C.	Notice of Taking Within Ten Days. When an abandoned  motor vehicle is taken into custody, the City shall give notice of the taking within ten days. The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any, and to all readily identifiable lienholders of record. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lienholders, the notice shall be published once in the official newspaper of the City. The notice shall set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make, model and serial number of the impounded	motor   vehicle,   if  such   information   can   be   reasonably
 
obtained, and the place where the vehicle is being held,  inform  the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the vehicle, and state that failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle, shall be deemed a waiver by them of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle and contents and a consent to the transfer or title to and disposal or sale of the vehicle and contents.

D.	Right to Reclaim.

1.	Payment of Charges. The owner or any lienholder of an abandoned motor vehicle shall have a right to reclaim such vehicle from the City upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 days after the date of the notice required by this Subdivision

2.	Lienholder. Nothing in this Subdivision shall be construed to impair any lien of a garage keeper under the laws of this State, or the right of the lienholder to foreclose.

E.	Public Sale After 15 Days.

1.	An abandoned  motor vehicle  is eligible for disposal or sale  15 days after notice to the owner  under this section.	An  abandoned  motor vehicle and contents taken into custody and not reclaimed under this Subdivision  shall  be sold to the  highest bidder at public auction or sale or electronic selling process following notice required under this Subdivision.	The  purchaser  shall  be  given  a  receipt  in  a  form prescribed   by  the   Registrar  of   Motor  Vehicles   which   shall   be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle.  The receipt shall also entitle the  purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership.  Before such a vehicle  is  issued a  new certificate  of title,  it must  receive a motor vehicle safety check.

2.	From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the City shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative, notice and  publication costs incurred pursuant to this Subdivision. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the  vehicle  or entitled lien holder for  90 days and then shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City.

F.	Disposal of Vehicles Not Sold. Where no bid has been received for an abandoned motor vehicle, the City may dispose of it in accordance with this Subdivision.
 
G.	Contracts and Disposal.

1.	The City may contract with any qualified person for collection, storage,	incineration, volume reduction, transportation or other services necessary to prepare abandoned motor vehicles and other scrap metal for recycling or other methods of disposal.

2.	Where the City enters into a contract with a person duly licensed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, the Agency may review the contract to determine whether it conforms to the Agency's plan for solid waste disposal. A contract that does so conform may be approved by the Agency. Where a contract has been approved, the Agency may reimburse the City for the costs incurred under the contract which have not been reimbursed.

3.	If the City utilizes  its own equipment  and personnel for disposal of the abandoned motor vehicle, it shall  be entitled to  reimbursement for the cost thereof along with its other costs as herein provided.

Subd. 2.	Disposal of Unclaimed Property Other Than Motor Vehicles.

A. Scope. Except as otherwise provided in Minnesota  Statutes,  this Section provides the procedure for the  disposition  of  abandoned personal property, including found property.

B.	Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:

1.	"Abandoned Property" - is personal property of any type; the owner of which has failed to make satisfactory claim and proof of ownership within 60 days after notice has been provided as described below.

2.	"Finder" - is a person who finds lost or discarded personal property belonging to another and gives the property to an officer.

3.	"Found Property" - is personal property which appears to have been lost or discarded and then subsequently found by another. Found property does not include property left in the care of an individual which is subsequently unclaimed by its owner.

4.	"Officer" - is any officer, agent or employee of the City acting within the scope of his or her employment.

5.	"Unclaimed Property" - is personal property of any type where the owner or his or her whereabouts is unknown, or which is unclaimed
 
for more than seven days.

C.	Notice of Official Possession.

1.	Any officer having  in  his  or  her  official  possession  unclaimed property and wishing to dispose of such property at a public auction or  sale, including an electronic selling process, shall from time  to time  prepare and publish  written  notice  containing  the  information required in Subdivision 2.

2.	The written notice shall contain the following information:

(a)	The name, designation and office address of the officer giving the notice;

(b)	The description of the unclaimed property, individually or by lot, that has come into the possession of the officer since the issuance of the last notice;

(c)	A demand that all owners of the property described in the notice make claim and proof of  ownership  satisfactory  to  the  officer named in the notice within 60 days from the date of the notice;

(d)	A statement that any of the unclaimed property not so claimed within the 60-day period shall be deemed to be abandoned, and that the same may be disposed by the City; and

(e)	The date of the notice.

3.	The notice shall be published in the City's official newspaper at least once, a copy of the notice shall be posted at City Hall, and a copy of the notice shall be mailed to the owner, if the owner's name and address is known.

4.	Nothing in this Section shall prevent an officer from disposing of unclaimed property by a private sale through a nonprofit organization that has a mission of community service after the property has been in the possession of the municipality for a period of at least 60 days.

D.	Claim and Proof of Ownership. Except as  provided  in  Subdivision 2.C.4., if unclaimed property remains in the possession of the officer without any person making satisfactory claim and proof of ownership for a period of 60 days from the date of the notice describing it, the personal property shall be deemed to be abandoned, and title  to  the  property shall be deemed to be in the City  by reason of abandonment by the owner and possession by the City.
 

E.	Found Property.

1.	When dealing with property which is lost and found by a finder, and then turned over to an officer, the finder shall be deemed to have made satisfactory claim and proof of ownership to be entitled to possession of the unclaimed property at the end of 60 days ("the waiting period") from the date of the notice. However, the finder's claim and proof of ownership under this Subdivision shall be inferior to and subject to a satisfactory claim and proof of ownership by any owner of the property.

2.	After the expiration of the waiting  period, the  City  shall  notify the finder, in writing, of the expiration of the waiting period and the disposition of the found property.  If  the  property  has  not  been returned to the owner, the notice shall include the statement that the finder  must take  possession  of the  property within  30 days  of the date of the notification, and that failure to  take  possession  of the property shall result in the title of the property vesting in the City.

3.	In the event that the finder fails to take possession of the property as provided above, or the owner fails to take possession of the property within 30 days of the owner's satisfactory claim and proof of ownership, the property shall be considered abandoned, and title of the property shall vest in the City for disposition according to this Section.

4.	Upon delivery of the unclaimed property to the finder as provided in this Subdivision, the City shall have no further interest or obligations with  respect to the  property.	The  City shall,  however,  provide the name and address of the finder, and the location of the property, if known,  to  any  person  making  a  satisfactory  claim  and  proof  of ownership subsequent to the delivery of the property to the finder.

F.	Disposal.

1.	The City shall have the right to sell or otherwise dispose of abandoned property to the highest bidder at public auction or sale, or by sale to the highest bidder using an electronic selling process. Alternatively, the City may deliver abandoned property at no charge to any community, non-profit organization.

2.	Abandoned property need not be sold for less than the cost  of advertising and selling. The City reserves the right to reject any and all bids.   If abandoned property cannot be disposed of at an amount greater than the cost of advertising and selling, the City may destroy
 
the property or otherwise dispose of it as it sees fit.

3.	The officer or entity conducting the sale  shall maintain a complete and accurate record of the sale, which shall include the description of the abandoned property sold, the name and the address of the purchasers, the sale price of each item sold, and the costs of the sale.

4.	The officer or entity conducting the sale shall execute and deliver a certificate of sale or a receipt to the purchaser of each item of property. The certificate shall describe the item sold, the purchase price, the name and address of the purchaser, and the date of purchase.	The certificate shall pass the title of the item to the purchaser.

5.	The Chief of Police is authorized to administer the disposal of bicycles lawfully coming into the possession of  the  City  and remaining unclaimed by the owner after a 60-day waiting period. In addition to the disposal methods provided herein, disposal  of unclaimed bicycles may be by donation to a nonprofit organization that has a  significant mission of community service or to another public corporation for public use. A notice specifying the date of the donation, the identity of the donor, and a general description of the bicycles shall be published in the official newspaper of the City at least eight months prior to such donation. At any time prior to the donation date, and upon satisfactory proof of ownership, the bicycle shall be returned to its owner.

G.	Disposition of Proceeds.

1.	All  monies  received  from  the  disposal  of abandoned  property,  less the costs of advertising and selling, shall be immediately paid to the Finance Director and retained in a separate fund  for  at  least  six months.

2.	Should any person within six months from the date of disposal of any abandoned property make claim to it and establish ownership,  the sum of money paid over to the Finance Director shall be paid to that person. In no event shall any claim be considered  unless it shall be presented to the Finance Director in writing before the expiration of six months from the date of the disposal of the item claimed.

3.	After  expiration  of six  months from the date of the disposal  of the item claimed, the monies received from the disposal of abandoned property shall be transferred into the City's general fund.
 
H.	Contraband. Personal property which is illegal to possess may not be sold at auction or returned to a finder.

Subd. 3.	Disposal of Excess Property.

A. Declaration of Surplus and Authorizing Sale of Property. The Council Administrator may, from time to time, recommend to the Council  that certain property (chattels) owned by the City is no longer needed for a municipal purpose and should be sold. Pursuant to Section 5.15 of the City Charter, the Council may declare said property to be surplus, estimate	the value of the property, and authorize the Council Administrator to dispose of said property in the manner stated herein.

B.	Surplus Property With a Total Estimated Value of Less than $100. The Council Administrator may authorize the sale of surplus property with a total value of less than $100 through negotiated sale or by an electronic selling process.

C.	Surplus  Property  With  a  Total  Estimated  Value  Between  $100  and
$10,000.	The Council Administrator shall offer for public sale, to the highest bidder, surplus property with a total estimated value of $100 to
$10,000.  Such sale shall be by quotation, competitive bids, or by public
auction, including an electronic selling process. In the event that sale is by competitive bids, notice of such public sale shall be given stating time and place of sale and generally describing the property to be sold at least ten days prior to the date of sale by publication once in the official newspaper.

D.	Surplus Property With a Total Estimated Value Over $10,000.  The Council Administrator shall offer for public sale, to the highest  bidder, surplus property with a total estimated value over $10,000. Notice of such public sale shall be given stating time and place of sale and generally describing property to be sold at least ten days prior to the date of sale by publication once in the official newspaper. Such sale shall be to the person submitting the highest bid by means of publically advertised sealed bids or public auction, including an electronic selling process.

E.	Receipts from Sales of Surplus Property. All receipts from sales  of surplus property under this Section shall be deposited in the Fund disposing of such surplus property.

Subd. 4.	Persons Who May Not Purchase - Exception.

A. No employee of the City who is a member of the administrative staff, department  head, a member of the  Council, or an advisor  serving the
 
City in a professional capacity, may be a purchaser of property under this Section. Other City employees may be purchasers if they are not directly involved in the sale, if they are the highest responsible bidder, and if at least one week's published or posted notice of sale is given.

B. It is unlawful for any person to be a purchaser of property under this Section if such purchase is prohibited by the terms of this Section.

SECTION 2.19.	VACATION OF REAL PROPERTY.

Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of this  Section  is  to  clarify  the procedure for vacation of streets, real property, or utility easements by the City Council, set forth at Sections 8.01 and 8.02 of the Red Wing City Charter.

Subd. 2.  Vacation of Real Property by City Council.   The City Council may, by resolution approved by at least a majority of all members of the Council, vacate any street or other interest in real property owned by the City or by the public, and located within the City, except for public utility easements. No vacation shall be made unless it appears in the interest of the public to do so after a hearing preceded by ten days published notice.

After such resolution is adopted, the City Clerk shall file a certified copy of the resolution in the Office of the County Recorder. Any failure to file said certified copy of resolution shall not invalidate any such vacation proceedings. The action shall take effect upon filing.

Subd. 3. Vacation of Public Utility Easements by City Council. The City Council may, by resolution approved by a majority of all members of the Council, vacate any public utility easement owned by the City or by the public, and located within the City.

After such resolution is adopted, the City Clerk shall file a certified copy of the resolution in the Office of the County Auditor and in the Office of the County Recorder. Any failure to file said certified  copy of resolution shall not invalidate any such vacation proceedings.  The action shall take effect upon filing.

Subd. 4.  Vacation  of  Real  Property  Upon  Petition.  The  City  Council may, by resolution approved by a majority of all members of the Council, vacate any street or other interest in real property owned by the City or by the public, and located within the City, upon the following:

A. Filing of a verified petition signed by or on behalf of any and all owners, natural or corporate, of any real estate abutting thereon; and

B. Presentation and filing proof of ownership of said property abutting the real property to be vacated, in a form  subject to approval by the City Attorney.
 

After such resolution is adopted, the City Clerk shall file a certified copy of the resolution in the Office of the County Auditor and in the Office of the County Recorder. Any failure to file said certified  copy of resolution shall not invalidate any such vacation proceedings. The action shall take effect upon filing.

SECTION 2.20.  DEFERRED  SPECIAL   ASSESSMENTS   FOR DISABLED AND SENIOR CITIZENS.

Subd. 1. The council may at its discretion and pursuant to  Minnesota Statutes, Sections 435.193 through 435.195 defer payment of certain special assessments in accordance with the following guidelines and procedures.

Subd. 2.        Qualifications  For Deferment.   Persons seeking deferment of a special assessment  imposed by the City shall meet the following qualifications:
(1)	own  a  homestead;  (2)  be  65  years  of  age  or  older,  retired  by virtue  of  a
permanent and total disability, or a member of the  Minnesota National Guard or other military reserves who is ordered into active military service, as defined in Minnesota Statutes,  Section 190.05, Subds. 5b or 5c, as stated in the person's military orders; (3) demonstrate that payment of the assessment would be a hardship; (4) be obligated to pay an assessment set by Council resolution; and (5) be willing to provide the City with such information as the City may require to make a proper determination as to eligibility.

Subd. 3.	Procedure.

A.	A person seeking deferment must be the owner of the property, which shall have homestead status, and shall make application to the City on forms prescribed by the City. An application shall  be made  not later than 15 days prior to the certification of assessments to the County Auditor.

B.	The application shall be filed with the City Clerk. An application shall be dated and shall contain a certification by the applicant  that  the information therein or made a part thereof is true and correct. The application shall contain a financial statement in form customarily used by a lending institution in the City. It shall also contain a copy of the previous year's Minnesota income tax return if one was prepared and/or submitted to the State.

C.	The City Clerk shall consider the application and make a written report.
The City Clerk may interview the applicant and may request additional information from the applicant or others. A report shall be filed on or before October 31. The report shall contain a  recommended  interest rate on any deferred assessment.  A copy of the report shall be mailed to or given to the applicant by the Clerk.
 
D.	Any  unusual  circumstances  pertaining  to  an applicant  not covered  by the standards and guidelines herein set forth may be referred to the City Council for its final determination. The determination shall be made in a nondiscriminatory	manner, and the City Council will not  give  the applicant	an unreasonable preference or  advantage  over  other applicants.

E.	If a deferment is granted, the City Clerk shall make the proper certification to the County Recorder which shall set forth the amount of the assessment and the amount of interest, if  any,  pursuant   to Minnesota Statutes, Section 435.194.

Subd. 4.	Determination of Hardship.

A.  For the purpose of the Section, the word "hardship" means: financial suffering, privation or trouble that is extremely hard to bear.

B.	To determine whether or not there is hardship, the City Clerk shall carefully examine the financial status of the applicant. The Clerk shall determine the applicant's net  income, and consider any relevant and special facts concerning the applicant's financial  condition.  The  City Clerk shall not grant a deferment for a person with a monthly income exceeding the income limits established by the Department of Housing and Urban Development Section 8 Income Guidelines for Goodhue

County, and as approved by Council resolution.  For the  purposes of this Section, net income is the previous year's Minnesota income tax adjusted gross income plus tax exempt income. In the event no income tax form was prepared and/or submitted to the State, the City Clerk shall require the applicant to submit the information which would have been used to determine net income. If the determination of net income does not correctly reflect the present financial status of the applicant, other facts may be considered.

C.	The City Clerk shall include in the report exceptional or unusual circumstances pertaining to hardship together with a recommendation respecting the same.

Subd. 5.	Termination of Deferred Assessments.

A.	The option to defer the payment of Special Assessments shall terminate and all amounts accumulated plus applicable interest and the amount of any recording fees paid by the city in connection with the deferred assessment shall become due upon the occurrence of any one of the following:
 
1.	Death  of  the  owner  when  there  is  no  spouse  who  is  eligible  for deferment.

2.	Sale, transfer or subdivision of all or any part of the property.

3.	Loss of homestead status on the property.

4.	Determination by the Council for any reason that there would be no hardship to require immediate or partial payment.

B. If the eligibility for deferment is lost, the entire amount of the Special Assessment shall be due within 60 days. If the Special Assessment is not paid within 60 days, the City Clerk shall add interest thereto at the rate originally certified from the due date through December 31 of the following year and the total amount of principal and interest shall be certified to the County Auditor for collection with taxes for the following year or equal annual installments for the remaining years of the original special assessment time period, whichever is longer.

 
SECTION 2.21. ACRES.
 
DEFERRED SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS  FOR GREEN
 

Deferrals of special assessments are required for certain agricultural or specialized use property in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Section 273.111, commonly known as the green acres law.  The City will follow the requirements of that statute.  Deferred assessments governed by this Section shall be subject to an interest rate set by council resolution if allowed by Minnesota Statute, Section
273.111	or other applicable law.  The amount of any recording fees paid by the
City in connection with the deferred assessment will be added to the assessment amount.

 
SECTION 2.22. PROPERTY.
 
DEFERRED ASSESSMENTS  FOR UNIMPROVED
 

Subd. 1. Criteria for Deferment. The City Council  may,  in  its discretion and pursuant to Minnesota  Statutes, Section 429.061, Subd. 2, defer payment of certain special assessments for unimproved property in accordance with the following guidelines.

A.	Assessments on commercial property that is marginally buildable may be deferred for up to ten years.

B.	Assessments on residential property that is unplatted and has undeveloped frontage in excess of 200 feet may be deferred up to a maximum of ten years.
 
Subd. 2. Interest. All  deferred  assessments  shall  be  subject  to  an interest rate set by Council resolution. The interest will be compounded annually until the assessment is activated.

Subd. 3.	Activation of Deferred Assessments.   Deferred assessments pursuant to this Section will be activated when the land is sold, transferred, subdivided, combined, developed, a building permit is issued, utility services are connected, or the deferment period expires, whichever occurs first.  When the assessment becomes active, the term and rate will be as set forth in the original assessment  resolution.

Subd. 4. Recording of Deferred Assessments. The  City  shall  record deferred assessments for unimproved property in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Section 429.061, Subd. 2. The amount of any recording fees paid by the City in connection with the deferred assessment will be added to the assessment amount.

SECTION 2.23.	PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS.

Subd. 1.	Payment of Whole Assessment before Initial Certification. The owner of property assessed may, at any time prior to initial certification of the assessment to the County Auditor, pay the whole of the assessment on such property with interest accrued to the date of payment to the City, except that no interest shall be charged if the entire assessment is paid within 30 days from the adoption of the assessment resolution.

Subd. 2.	Payment of Whole Assessment after Initial Certification.  After the initial certification of the assessment to the County Auditor, prepayment will be accepted for the total amount still owing, with interest accrued to December 31 of the year in which such payment is made.  Such payment must be made by November   15  or  interest  will  be  charged  through  December  31  of  the  next succeeding year.

Subd. 3. Partial Prepayment of Assessment. Within 30 days from the adoption of the assessment resolution, a property owner may make a partial prepayment of the principal to the City interest free. Such partial prepayment must be at least $100.

Subd. 4.	Multiple special assessments.   If a parcel has two or more separate special assessments, payment, as described in the preceding paragraphs of this Section, may be made on one or more assessments.

Subd. 5.	Certification of Assessment.   If the assessment is not paid in its entirety, the City will certify each year's collection of principal and interest to the County Auditor in November.  Certification to the County Auditor will result in the principal and interest appearing on the property tax statements of those assessed.
 

Subd. 6.	This Section is adopted pursuant to the authority of Minnesota Statutes, Section 429.061.

 
SECTION 2.24. SYSTEM.
 
EXPENSE	REIMBURSEMENT	AND	ESCROW
 

Subd. 1. Expense Reimbursement Required.  All  applicants  for  any licenses and permits of any kind and description from the City, along with all applicants for any land use approvals, including, without limitation, rezoning, conditional use permits and variances, subdivision approval, or planned development of all kind and description shall reimburse the City for all expense incurred by the City in processing the application, including, without limitation, reimbursement of staff time and consultant fees.

Subd. 2.	Escrow Deposit Required.  Before any application is accepted by the City for any of the foregoing, the applicant shall pay a minimum base fee and provide an escrow deposit (in a non-interest  bearing account)  in an amount determined  by the City as necessary to  reimburse the City for all staff time and expense and consultant fees that are incurred in the processing of the application. The  City  Council  shall, by ordinance,  set all fees  and  initial escrow  amount for each type of license and permit.   The determination  of the amount of the escrow shall be based upon the wage and benefit rates of staff members anticipated to be involved in the processing and approval process, and anticipated consultant fees. If the applicant fails to make the escrow deposit, the application shall be deemed incomplete and shall not be processed by the City.  In the event the amount in the escrow deposit  is deemed  insufficient, the Finance Director, or a designee,  shall notify the  applicant.		The  applicant  shall  be required to  immediately  deposit  an additional amount deemed sufficient to cover all staff and consultant expense as determined  by the  Finance  Director.	The failure  to  make such  a deposit  upon request shall be grounds for denial of the land use approval  sought.	Upon final disposition of the application, the applicant  shall be reimbursed for any amounts that are not used for reimbursement of expense to the City.  The City shall make said reimbursement within 45 days of final action.

SECTION 2.25.	VIOLATION	A	MISDEMEANOR	OR	A	PETTY
MISDEMEANOR. Upon conviction of violating this Chapter, a person shall be punished for a petty misdemeanor, except for  violations of Section 2.14, which constitute a misdemeanor.
 
Title	Page

 
CHAPTER 3



Section 3.01
3.02
3.03
3.04
3.05
3.06
3.07

3.08

3.09
3.10
3.11
3.12
3.13
 
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES - RULES AND REGULATIONS, RATES, CHARGES AND COLLECTIONS
Definitions	3-1
Fixing Rates and Charges for Utilities	3-1
Contractual Contents	3-2
Rules and Regulations Relating to Utilities	3-2
Rules and Regulations Relating to Water Service	3-4
Special Water Connection Charges	3-8
Rules and Regulations Relating to Sanitary
Sewerage Service	3-11
Controls on Use of Public Sewers and Pretreatment
of Industrial Wastewater	3-16
Stormwater Management	3-45
Drainage Ditch Charges for the Pioneer Watershed Area 3-45 Rules and Regulations Relating to Stormwater Service 3-46 Special Sewer Connection Charges	3-49
Violation a Misdemeanor and/or Will Result in a Fine
and/or a Bill	3-49
 
CHAPTER 3

MUNICIPAL UTILITIES - RULES AND REGULATIONS, RATES, CHARGES AND COLLECTIONS

SECTION 3.01.	DEFINITIONS.	As  used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated:

1.	"Utility" - any City-owned utility system that provides, including, but not by way of limitation, water, sanitary sewerage, stormwater, solid waste, and communication service.

2.	"Consumer" or "Customer" - the owner of the property being served by the municipal utility.

3.	"Utility System" - infrastructure that produces, transports, or delivers service from a publicly or city-owned property.

4.	"Service" - providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer.

5.	"Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)" - a National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit requirement that describes mandatory Best Management Practices (BMPs) for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems in order to discharge municipal stormwater into the waters of the state.

6.	"Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)" - the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° Centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/I).

7.	"Suspended Solids (SS)" - the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids and which is removable by a standard glass fiber filter.

SECTION 3.02.	FIXING RATES AND CHARGES FOR UTILITIES.   All
rates and charges for utilities, including, but not by way of limitation, rates for service, annual area fee, special stormwater sewer  connection  charge,  permit fees, deposit, connection and meter testing fees, service repair charges, disconnection fees, reconnection fees including penalties for non-payment if any, shall be  fixed, determined and amended by the City Council and adopted by ordinance. Such ordinance, containing the effective date thereof, shall be kept on file and open to inspection in the office of the City Clerk and shall be uniformly enforced. For the purpose of fixing such rates and charges, the City Council may categorize  and  classify  under the  various  types  of  service,  provided,  that  such
 
categorization  and classification shall be included  in the ordinance  authorized  by this Section.

SECTION 3.03.  CONTRACTUAL  CONTENTS.   Provisions   of   this Chapter relating to utilities shall constitute portions of the  contract  between the City and all consumers of utility services, and every such consumer shall be deemed to assent to the same.

 
SECTION 3.04. UTILITIES.
 
RULES AND REGULATIONS RELATING TO
 

Subd. 1.  Application,  Connection  and Sale of Service.   Application for utility services shall be made upon forms supplied by the City, and strictly in accordance therewith. No connection shall be made until consent has  been received from the City to make the same, and all fees and charges required by this Chapter have been paid in full. All utilities shall be sold and delivered to consumers under the then applicable rate applied to the amount of such utilities taken as metered or ascertained in connection with such rates.

Subd. 2. Discontinuance of Service.  Utilities  that  do  not  affect  the primary heat source for a residential unit may be shut off or discontinued whenever it is found that:

A. The consumer or customer of the premises served, or any person working on any connection with the utility systems, has violated any requirement of the City Code relative thereto, or any  connection therewith, or,

B.	Any charge for a utility service, or any other financial obligation imposed on the present consumer or customer of the premises served, is unpaid after due notice thereof, or,

C.	There is fraud or misrepresentation by the consumer or customer in connection with any application  for service or delivery or charges therefore.

Subd. 3. Cold  Weather  Rule.  Utilities  that  affect  the  primary  heat source for a  residential unit may not be disconnected between October 15 and April 15 except in accordance with the Cold Weather Rule contained in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 2168, as it may be amended.

A. The consumer or customer shall be responsible for notifying the City in writing that their primary heat source or residential unit is dependent on City utility connection for operation.
 
Subd. 4.    Right of Entry.  With consent of the owner or occupant or in the event of an emergency, the City has the right to enter in and upon private property, including buildings and dwelling houses, in or upon which is installed a utility, or connection therewith, at all times reasonable  under the circumstances, for the purpose of reading utility meters, for the purpose of inspection and repair of meters or a utility system, or any part thereof, and for the purpose of connecting and disconnecting service.

Subd. 5.	Unlawful Acts.

A. It is unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure, mar, deface, disturb, or in any way interfere with any buildings, attachments, machinery, apparatus, equipment, fixture, or appurtenance of any utility or utility system, or commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the use of any utility.

B.	It is unlawful for any person to make any connection with, opening into, use, or alter in any way any utility system without first having applied for and received written permission to do so from the City.

C.	It is unlawful for any person to turn on or connect a utility when the same has been turned off or disconnected by the City for non-payment of a bill, or for any other reason, without first having obtained a permit to do so from the City.

D.	It is unlawful for any person to "jumper" or by any means or device fully or partially circumvent a utility meter, or to knowingly use or consume unmetered utilities or use the services of any utility system, the use of which the proper billing authorities have no knowledge.

Subd. 6.	Utility Services and Charges a Lien.

A. Payment for all utility service and charges shall be the primary responsibility of the consumer or customer of the premises served and shall be billed to the owner of the premises on or after October 1, 2011. The City may collect the same in a civil action or, in the alternative and at the option of the City, as otherwise provided in this Subdivision.

B. Each such charge, including those termed "special" charges, is hereby made a lien upon the premises served by a connection to or utilization of a municipal utility system or service of the City and located within the City.	All such charges not paid and becoming delinquent may be recovered by assessing the property. The unpaid balance shall be placed on the assessment roll as provided by the City Charter  and Statute provisions.
 
SECTION 3.05. SERVICE.
 
RULES AND REGULATIONS RELATING TO WATER
 

Subd. 1. Use Requirements. Where the public water supply system is accessible, no person shall maintain a water distribution system which is not connected to the public water supply system without authorization by the City Council. Where the public water supply system is accessible, no person shall use private well water for domestic use without authorization by the City Council.

 
Subd. 2.
Customers.
 
Additional Application Procedures For Water Consumers or
 

A. When the consumer or customer desires to terminate City water service, five business days written notice to the Public Works Office must  be given.	Said notice shall state therein the date of the requested termination. Unless the notice provision is complied with, the consumer or customer shall continue to be responsible for charges and fees incurred because of the City supplying water to the premises.

B.	After water has been introduced into any building or upon any premises, no  person shall make any tap or connection with the pipes upon such premises, for alteration, extensions or attachments, unless  the  party ordering such tapping  or other works  shall exhibit the proper permit for the same from the City.

C.	All persons taking the water shall keep their own service pipes, service corporations, stopcocks or curb stops and apparatus in good repair and protected from frost, at their own risk and expense.  All water taken or used from the City water system, unless otherwise ordered by the City Council, must be metered and paid for, except water used in putting out fire.

D.	All expenses relating to the introduction of water into buildings or private premises shall be paid by the applicant. No charge, however, shall be made for the services of the City in directing where and in what manner the mains shall be tapped and excavations made in the streets for laying pipe.

E.	It is expressly stipulated by the City that no claim shall be made against it by reason of the breaking or freezing of any service pipe, service cock or curb stop; nor, if from any cause the supply of water should fail; nor from damage arising from shutting off water to repair mains, making connections, or extensions; nor for any other purpose that may be necessary. The right is hereby reserved to cut off the supply of water at any time, for the purpose of repairs or any other necessary purpose, any permit granted, or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding.  Whenever
 
it becomes necessary to shut off the water supply within any area of the City, the City shall, if practicable, give  notice to each and every consumer or customer within said area of the time when such supply will be shut off.

F.	Water will not be turned on to any building or private service pipe except upon the order in writing of the City. When the water has been turned off by the order of the City, no consumer or customer shall turn it on, nor permit it to be turned on, without the written consent of the City.

 
Subd. 3.
and Appliances.
 
Tapping of Main Water Lines and Installation of Service Pipe
 

A. No persons, except those having special permission from the City or persons in their service and approved by them, will be permitted, under any circumstances, to tap the mains or distributing pipes or altering any service of appurtenances. The kind and size of the connection with the mains shall be that specified in the permit or order from the City.

B.	Mains must always be tapped midway (in the upper quadrant) between the horizontal and perpendicular lines drawn through the center of the main, and not, in any case, at or within 14 inches of the hub.

C.	Copper pipe, in size not less than one inch, shall be used from the main to the curb stop near the property line. Any pipe allowed under law may be used from the curb stop to the inside of the building and water meter. If such pipe is not capable of being heated by electrical current,  a warning must be permanently posted by the water meter and point of entry of the pipe into the building stating "warning - frozen - cannot be thawed electrically." The sign shall be of substantial size to be readily noticed and in a form approved by the City. The sign shall be maintained by the property owner and it shall be unlawful to remove the sign. Every pipe shall be laid sufficiently waving and in such manner to prevent rupture by settling. Non-conductive materials used for  water services in lieu of copper pipe shall require that a locator wire be installed for location of utilities. The contractor will furnish and install a coated, solid copper tracer wire on all non-conductive water/sewer service lines in the trench alongside the pipe. Wire color will be blue for water and green for sewer. The tracer wire shall daylight at the point of entry at the foundation of the building through PVC conduit and a blank box as a future contact point to locate the service.

D.	All service pipes must be laid to a depth of eight feet below the surface of  the finished  grade.    In all  cases they  must  be so  protected  as to prevent rupture by settling.
 
E.	Every service pipe must be provided with two stopcocks for each consumer or customer, easily accessible; the one to the consumer or customer, the other to the City, and so situated that the water can be conveniently shut off. Stopcocks must be of the pattern known as the "round water way or full flow."

F.	Unless otherwise permitted, the City stopcocks or curb stops shall be placed on the property line and protected by a box or iron pipe reaching from the stopcock or curb stop to the surface and of suitable size to admit a stop key or curb stop key for turning on and off the stop. Such protecting box or pipe shall have a cover with the letter "W" thereon, visible and even with the pavement of finished grade.

G.	Automatic pressure regulators may be provided by the consumer  or customer	in every service  pipe  entering  buildings  to  reduce  the excessive		pressure from  the  mains.  Stopcocks  and  other appurtenances must be sufficiently strong to bear the pressure and ram of  the water  in the  mains.   All  house boilers shall be constructed  with one  or more air holes near the top of the inlet pipe, and be sufficiently strong to bear the pressure of the atmosphere under the vacuum.

H.	All lateral  or  service  pipes,  for  public  or  private  uses,  and  all necessary fixtures connected therewith shall be subject to the approval and laid under the supervision of the City or the authorized agent; and the  right is reserved to said City to decline to connect with plumbing not done in accordance with the existing rules and regulations, or the orders of the City pertaining thereto.

Subd. 4.	Repair or Replacement of Service Lines or Appurtenances.

A. The City shall have the sole authority to repair or replace, at the owner's expense, any service lines or appurtenances thereto on public property that due to damage or faulty condition are leaking or inoperable. The City need not obtain a property owner's permission to make such repairs.

B. In the event a service line on private property is damaged or in faulty condition resulting in leaks, said private property owner shall have a maximum of 72 hours to repair said leak. In the event said repairs are not made within the 72 hour period, the City shall have the right to turn off the water.
 
Subd. 5.	Water Meters And Meter Appurtenances.

A. All water meters and meter appurtenances used  in the  City  for  City water shall be owned, furnished and kept in ordinary repair by the City. The original installation must be accomplished by a licensed plumber or the City.

B. All such water meters and meter appurtenances must be so set up and maintained that they can be easily examined and read, and be provided with suitable protection so as to make them safe  from frost or other damage; and the consumer or customer of such meter and meter appurtenances, at the consumer or customer's expense, must furnish such	protection. In case any such water meter and/or meter appurtenances are injured, by frost or otherwise damaged by the carelessness	of the consumer or customer, or the consumer or customer's agent or servant, or because the consumer or customer neglects or fails to furnish a safe and suitable place for the meter and/or meter appurtenances or the protection thereof, or such meter  and/or meter appurtenances should be damaged by the consumer or customer, then such meters and/or meter appurtenances may be repaired or replaced by the City at the expense of the consumer or customer, or property owner, as the City may determine. In case of neglect or refusal by the consumer or customer to furnish safe and suitable protection so as to make such meter and/or appurtenances safe from frost or other damage, the City or its authorized agent shall refuse to  turn on  City water, or until the consumer or customer shall have complied with such requirement, said City shall install all such water meters and/or meter appurtenances and replace and keep the same in ordinary repair at the expense of the City, provided such repair or replacement is not caused by the negligence of the consumer or customer, or his refusal to comply with the terms of this Chapter, or the rules of the City.

Subd. 6.	General Provisions.

A. Where City water is used or furnished for purposes not specified in the ordinance adopting rates, the charges shall be fixed by the City Council and where different or larger water meters than are specified are used, such service charges shall be made therefore as the City Council may determine.

B.	Persons wishing to obtain bulk amounts of water must obtain the water from the Public Works Department at designated facilities with loading to be supervised by City personnel.
 
C.	Person(s) shall be charged actual costs of labor and equipment supplied by the City in addition to the water charges. In no event  shall  any person obtain water from any City hydrant other than provided herein.

D.	Any person desiring to use City hydrants for the purpose of filling a swimming pool shall contact the Public Works Department. The Public Works Department shall arrange for the provision of  services  for  the filling of the pool and shall attach a meter to the hydrant to measure the water usage, and certify the meter reading to the Public Works Department office for billing purposes. The charges made therefor to be contained on the regular billing as sent to the consumer or customer.

E.	A consumer or customer who  wishes  to  connect  to  the  City's  water system for the purpose of supplying water to a fire suppression sprinkler system or private fire hydrant for use as firefighting protection, shall be permitted to connect to the street main at the consumer  or customer's own expense upon application to the City and upon approval thereof. Construction of said main to be supervised by an authorized agent of the  City. The  use of such water to be restricted  solely to firefighting purposes. All valves admitting water to such pipes must be sealed. In the event a seal is broken or damaged, the consumer or customer must notify the Public Works Department of such damage or breakage.

F.	All water supplied for emergency firefighting purposes shall be furnished at no cost to the consumer or customer.

G.	All sprinkler and private fire hydrant annual charges  not paid  and becoming delinquent may be recovered by assessing the property. The unpaid  balance shall be placed on the assessment  roll as provided  by the City Charter and Statute provisions.

 
Subd. 7.
Maintenance.
 
Cross Connection Device Installation, Testing and
 

A.  The terms "Administrative Authority," "cross-connection," "backflow preventer," "testable backflow prevention assembly" shall have the same meanings as set forth in the Minnesota Plumbing Code.  The City Council or its designee shall act as the Administrative Authority for purposes of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance.

B.	All plumbing connections to the City's water distribution system shall be installed in accordance with the Minnesota Plumbing Code, as it may be amended.   If in accordance with the Minnesota Plumbing Code, or if in the judgement of the Administrative Authority, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water system, the Administrative Authority will give notice to the water customer to
 
install such an approved device immediately.  The water customer shall, at his own expense, install such an approved device immediately at a location and in a manner that is compliant with the Minnesota Plumbing Code.

C.	The Administrative Authority must be notified prior to the installation of any testable backflow prevention assembly.

D.	Any cross-connection control devices, including but not limited to Reduced Pressure Backflow Preventers (RPZ) or other testable backflow prevention assemblies, shall be inspected, maintained and overhauled at intervals not exceeding those identified in the Minnesota Plumbing Code.  A test and inspection tag that includes the test date, and tester signature and identification number, shall be affixed to the device.  Written records of testing and maintenance shall be maintained
and submitted to the Administrative Authority.  The City may designate a
process or outside entity to monitor and track reporting requirements.

E.	No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established, or maintain or permit to be maintained, any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the City may enter the supply or distribution system of the City unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall be approved by the Administrative Authority and the Minnesota Department of Health.

F.	The Administrative Authority shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the City for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross connections or testing backflow devices
or assemblies or for verifying information submitted by the customer
regarding the required cross-connection control inspection. Such requirement shall be a term and condition related to the privilege of receiving water from the City public water supply.  In the event that the person in ownership or control of the property should refuse or prevent entry or inspection, the City may seek the issuance of an administrative search warrant.  On demand, lessees or occupants of any property served by the City public water supply shall furnish to the Administrative Authority any information requested regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the Administrative Authority, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided by this ordinance and shall require that backflow protection be installed on the service line to the premise.
 
G.	The Administrative Authority after reasonable notice to the property owner and lessee or occupant, if applicable, may discontinue the water service to any property wherein any condition in violation of the cross­ connection control requirements outlined in this ordinance or the Minnesota Plumbing Code is known to exist and to take such other precautionary measures as it may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains.
Water service to any property that has been disconnected from the
public water supply shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with this section and the reconnection charge identified in the fee schedule is paid to the City. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be affected when the Administrative Authority  reasonably believes that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply exists.  Such action shall be followed by written notification of the cause for disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be affected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in the opinion of the Administrative Authority or the Minnesota Department of Health, such action is required to prevent contamination or pollution of the public water supply.  Neither
the public water supply, the Administrative Authority, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages, or lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer water supply in accordance with the terms of this section, whether or not said termination was with or without notice.

H.	Any person who has knowledge of a backflow into any potable water system or to the public water system must report that backflow to the City's Utility Department immediately upon becoming aware of the backflow.  Any person responsible for any substance that enters the potable water system through backpressure or back-siphonage, or contamination of the public water supply system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device or a device that has been bypassed, must bear the cost of the cleanup of the potable water supply system.

Subd. 8.	Regulations governing nonessential water usage upon critical water deficiency as authorized by Minn. Stat.§ 103G.291, Subd. 1. and 2.
A.  This Subd. establishes water conservation restrictions; and the plan will
be in effect at any time the governor declares by executive order a critical water deficiency, pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 103G.291.

B.	Application
1.	This rule applies to all entities, including residential, commercial, industrial and institutional customers that acquire water from the City
 
of Red Wing's municipal water supply system who own or control water use on any premise.
2.	No person shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water received from a the City of Red Wing municipal water supply system for residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, or any other purpose in any manner contrary to any provision in this ordinance.
3.	Mandatory emergency conservation measures shall be implemented based upon the declaration of a critical water emergency by the governor.

C.	Declaration of Critical Water Deficiency - Upon the declaration of a critical water deficiency by the governor, the public water supplier shall immediately post notice of the emergency declaration at the usual meeting place of the City Council, or the official city bulletin boards. The city shall provide notification to the public as quickly as possible or through established water supply plans emergency response plans or procedures.

D.	Mandatory Emergency Water Conservation Measures - Upon declaration of a water emergency and notification to the public, the following mandatory restrictions upon nonessential water use shall be enforced:
1.	Outdoor irrigation of yards, gardens, golf courses, parklands, and
other non-agricultural land, except for those areas irrigated with reclaimed water, is prohibited. Reclaimed water means water collected from rooftops, paved surfaces, or other collection devices and all water utilized more than once before re-entering the natural water cycle.
2.	Washing or spraying of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis
courts, patios, or other paved areas with water from any pressurized source, including garden hoses, except to alleviate immediate health or safety hazards, is prohibited.
3.	The outdoor use of any water-based play apparatus connected to a
pressurized source is prohibited.
4.	Restaurants and other food service establishments are prohibited from serving water to their customers, unless water is specifically requested by the customer.
5.	Operation of outdoor misting systems used to cool public areas is prohibited.
6.	The filling of swimming pools, fountains, spas, or other exterior water features is prohibited.
7.	The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, and other types of mobile equipment is prohibited, except at facilities equipped with wash water recirculation systems, and for vehicles requiring frequent washing to protect public health, safety, and welfare.
 
E.	Variances - The Council Administrator or their designee is authorized to grant variances to this ordinance where strict application of its provisions would result in serious hardship to a customer. A variance may be granted only for reasons involving health or safety. An applicant may appeal the denial of a variance within five (5) days of the decision by submitting a written appeal to the City Clerk. The City Council shall hear the appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of the City Council is final.

F.	Violation - Violations shall be determined and cited by the Council Administrator or his/her designee. A violator may appeal the citation within five (5) days of its issuance by submitting a written appeal to the City. The City Council shall hear the appeal at the next City Council meeting. The decision of the City Council is final. Violators may be granted an administrative waiver if evidence is provided that equipment failure was the cause of the violation. A letter from a qualified vendor or equipment invoice will be required to show proof of equipment failure.
1.	Upon discovery of a first violation, the violator shall be issued, either
personally or by mail, a warning letter that sets forth the violation and which shall describe the remedy and fines for future violations.
2.	Upon subsequent violations at the same location, the violator shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the violation and shall describe the remedy.
3.  Fines shall be invoiced or added to the monthly water bill of the
owner or current occupant of the premises where the violation occurred. The imposition of the fine shall in no way limit the right of the City to pursue other legal remedies.

G.	Enforcement - The Council Administrator or his/her designee is authorized to designate city employees or law enforcement personnel to enforce the provisions of this ordinance.

H.	Severability - If any provision of this ordinance or the application of any provision to a particular situation is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions of the ordinance and the application of the ordinance to any other situation shall not be invalidated.

SECTION 3.06.	SPECIAL WATER CONNECTION CHARGES.   In
addition to water service and water installation costs, whenever a connection is made to the public water supply system, the property owner shall pay a special water connection charge in an amount determined from time to time by ordinance of the City Council.  Payment shall be made at the time the building permit is taken out.  Whenever the use of a parcel intensifies from residential to commercial or industrial, the special water connection charge shall be recalculated at the higher
 
rate corresponding to the intensified use, with credit for the previously assessed residential rate.

SECTION 3.07.	RULES AND REGULATIONS RELATING TO SANITARY SEWERAGE SERVICE.

Subd. 1. For the purpose of providing funds to meet  the  cost  of operating and maintaining the sewage disposal system  and  the  facilities connected therewith, the payment of capital charges represented  by bonds, certificates of indebtedness, or otherwise and the payment of reasonable requirements of replacement and obsolescence thereof, there is hereby charged, levied and assessed upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises having a connection with the sewerage system, or otherwise discharging sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids directly or indirectly into the sewerage system and there is hereby charged against the consumer or customer, sewer user charge determined and payable as hereinafter provided.

Subd. 2. The sewer user charge shall be determined by measuring by means of water meters or special sewer metering devices connected at each lot, parcel of land, building or premises, the quantity of water used, and applying the flow rate fee as set forth herein in this Section. In cases where the City requires the installation of suitable measuring, sampling and analyzing devices to measure suspected high levels of BOD, SS, or other pollutants, an additional sewer use surcharge shall be made to cover the additional costs of treatment according to the rates set forth herein in this Section for BOD, SS and other pollutants.

Subd. 3. In the event any lot, parcel of land, building or premises discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water, or other liquids into the sanitary sewerage system either directly or indirectly, is supplied  in whole  or in part with water not obtained from the City, the consumer or customer shall cause to be installed at their own expense necessary metering equipment as approved by the Public Works Department  to measure the quantity  of water  pumped  or used and the charge shall be based on the quantity of water so measured. Whenever the consumer or customer fails to install such metering equipment, or where it is not practicable to measure the water consumed on any premises by a meter or meters, the City shall cause to be determined in such manner and by such methods as may be practicable, considering conditions and attendant circumstances in each case, the estimated volume of water from private sources which discharge into the sanitary sewerage system, and such estimate shall be used in lieu of the meter volume of water from private sources to determine the sewer user charge therefor.

Subd. 4. The  City  Council  shall  annually  determine  and  fix  the  unit costs for use of the sewerage system on the basis of flow (including Infiltration/Inflow), BOD, SS and any other pollutant, taking into consideration the cost of treatment of such sewage, and may increase or decrease such unit cost as
 
often  and  in such  amounts  as  may  reasonably  be  required  to  accomplish  the purposes of this Subdivision.

Subd. 5. The City shall  compute  the  amount  due  for  charges  and render a statement thereof, at periodic intervals, as directed by the City Council to the consumer or customer.  All amounts due shall be payable to the City.

Subd. 6. The City Finance Department shall once each year provide an internal audit report that will address specific areas of concern including the need to generate sufficient revenue through sewer user charges to cover total operation and management costs, the necessity of maintaining  a proportionate system of sewer user charges pursuant to 40 Code of Federal Rules Regulations Section 35.935-13(b), the need to review the replacement account to determine its proper level of funding.

Subd. 7. Property outside the City which is served by and uses the sewerage system shall pay the same amount of sewer user charge as set forth in the above unit costs for property inside the City. Additional costs may be applied for providing such service to properties outside the City if such extra costs are specifically related to serving those properties. Charges for sewer service  to property outside the City which is served by a collection system maintained by another governmental subdivision shall be the subject of agreements between the City and such other governmental subdivision, such agreement to be approved by the City Council.

Subd. 8. The amounts due to the City for sewer user charges will be computed in accordance with the provisions of this Section and statements will be rendered at the same time and on the same bill with other City services.

Subd. 9.   Nothing in this Section shall be held or construed  as in any way prohibiting the City's right to levy taxes against any premises affected.

Subd. 10. Any charges levied by and pursuant to this Section, not paid and becoming delinquent, may be recovered from the consumer,  customer,  or owner occupant of the premises served in a civil action by the City in any court of competent jurisdiction at the City's election.

Subd. 11. Funds received from the charges herein established for the payment of bond principal and interest shall be transferred to the related debt retirement fund of the City.

Subd. 12.  The costs to  be recovered  pursuant to this Section and the unit cost to be fixed by the City Council as defined hereinbefore, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be determined and allocated  to cover operation and maintenance of the City's wastewater collection, conveyance and treatment facilities.    This  shall  include  the  annual  cost  of  administration,  operation  and
 
maintenance for the City's wastewater collection, conveyance and treatment facilities, including sludge disposal costs, and shall be deposited in the Sanitary Sewer Fund. Funds received for replacement costs of equipment  and  real property shall be deposited in the Sanitary Sewer Replacement Fund. Replacement costs shall  be defined as expenditures  for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the  useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance  for which such works were designed and constructed.

Subd. 13. Monitored User Charges. For those  users  that  the  City requires installation of suitable measuring, sampling and analyzing devices to measure BOD, SS, or other pollutants, the unit costs for Flow, BOD, SS, or other pollutants shall be calculated by apportioning each cost to Flow, BOD, SS, or other pollutants, and then dividing each cost so apportioned by the total estimated Flow, BOD, SS, or other pollutants to be received from the users at the wastewater treatment plant in that year.

A. Monitored user charges shall be the sum of the products obtained by multiplying the unit costs as determined above by the user's actual flow volume in cubic feet, BOD per 100 pounds, SS per 100 pounds or other pollutants during the billing period; however, in no case shall the charge be less than that determined by applying the prevailing flow rate charge to the user's actual flow volume measured in cubic feet.

B		In addition to the sewer user charge set  forth  herein,  the  City  may impose  a  sewer   user  surcharge  for  other  pollutants  which require special  treatment at any of the City's wastewater   conveyance   or treatment	facilities.   The  surcharge   may   consist   of   unit charges, reimbursement of documented expenses or a combination thereof.

C. The sewer user surcharge may also include the annual interest and principal	cost necessary to retire any bonds issued to pay for construction to the sewage treatment facilities made necessary to provide special treatment, with such debt retirement costs to be determined and allocated in the same manner as described for annual operation and maintenance costs.

Subd. 14.  Monitoring  of Strength  and Volume.  When  required  by the City, a user shall install suitable measuring, sampling and analyzing devices in compliance with this Section.

A. The City shall not require installation of such devices where the City determines that such user has concentrations of BOD, and suspended solids no greater than the concentration of such constituents in the general municipal flow and a satisfactory method and access exist for sampling and determining the total daily sewage  flow.    In such cases,
 
the charges to those users shall be based on the flow rate as determined and on BOD and SS loads equal to the average load of the general municipal flow.

B.	Each user required by the City to install and maintain sewerage monitoring facilities shall submit to the City a  monthly  report  of flow, BOD and SS or other pollutants on a form approved by the City. This report shall be used for billing purposes and shall be submitted prior to the 15th day of the subsequent month.

C.	The City shall have the right to periodically or continuously  inspect the monitoring facilities, to  measure,  sample  and  analyze  the  monitored user's flow, and to analyze the samples obtained by the monitored user.

D.	In the event of any discrepancy between the flows or loads determined by the City and the monitored user, the values determined by the City shall be used for billing purposes.

E.	All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of sewage concentration	shall be determined in accordance with procedures established by  United  States  Environmental  Protection  Agency  in 40 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 136 or the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published  by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control   manhole  provided  or  upon  suitable   samples  taken  at  said manhole.   In the event that no special manhole is available, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.

F.	A 24-hour composite sample of the sewage shall be taken by the City at least twice each year on those customers being assessed a surcharge. Additional sampling by the City will be taken upon written request by the user, with one-half of the cost of said sampling to be borne by the user.

Subd. 15. Charges for Non-Monitored Users. The charge for  non­ monitored users for this Section shall be set by determining the total annual cost of the operation and maintenance of the system and subtracting therefrom the total fees collected from other municipalities, contract users and monitored users which are applied to such costs. The balance remaining divided by the total annual estimated volume of wastewater less the estimated volume for municipalities, contract users, and monitored users shall be the unit cost per volume of wastewater.
 
A. The charges to non-monitored users shall be the product of the unit cost obtained in accordance with this Subdivision and the quantity of water used by such user as measured by the City water meter on the premises; provided, however, that in determining the charge to be paid for premises used exclusively for residential purposes, the water meter readings from the first quarter of each year may be used as the basis for the computation of such user charges for each billing  period  for  that year.

B.	In the event a non-monitored user is not supplied with City water or the water so used is not measured, the user charge shall be fixed and determined by the City in such methods as it may find just, equitable and practicable.

C.	In the event sewer service is disconnected by the City during  any quarter for any reason, the sewer service charge shall be reduced proportionately in the same manner  that water service rates   are reduced.

D.	If a substantial portion of the water utilized by any user is not discharged into the sewerage system, the volume of water shall be deducted in computing the sewer use charge provided a separate meter is installed to measure each volume. The user desiring to install  such  separate meter shall make application and payment for the meter to the City and engage, at his own expense, a plumber to effect the necessary piping changes and install the couplings so the meter can be serviced.

Subd. 16. Availability Charge.  Administrative costs, insurance and contingencies shall be recovered by an availability  charge  which  shall  be computed in the following manner: The total cost of administrative expenses, insurance, contingencies and other fixed costs as may be determined by  City Council are to be divided by the number of users and the resulting figure would be the availability costs charged to each user having a service connection.

Subd. 17. Expenses. All expenses relating to installation, repair, or maintenance of lateral sewer service lines shall be paid by the applicant for such improvements and services.



SECTION 3.08. CONTROLS ON USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS AND PRETREATMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER.

Subd. 1.	General Provisions.
 
A. Purpose and Policy. This Section sets forth uniform requirements for discharges into the wastewater disposal system and enables the City to comply with all State and Federal laws.

B.	The objectives of this Section are: (1) to prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater disposal system which will  interfere with the operation of the system or the use or disposal of the sludge; (2) to prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater  disposal system which will pass through the system inadequately treated into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; and, (3) to improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system.

C.	This Section provides for the regulation of discharges into  the wastewater disposal system through the issuance of permits to certain users and through enforcement of the general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for   the  equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.

D.	This Section shall apply to the City and to persons outside the City who are, by contract or agreement with the City, users of the wastewater disposal	system. That wastewater system includes all structure, connections, and processes used in the treatment of municipal sanitary and industrial wastewater. This Section is also applicable to the Bench Street	Industrial WWTP, which is an integral component of the wastewater disposal system.

Subd. 2.	Definitions Related to Pretreatment.	The following terms, as used in this Section, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:

1.	"Clean Water Act" - the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33. U.S.C. 1251, et seq.

2.	"Bench Street Wastewater Pretreatment Facility" - an industrial wastewater treatment works located at 1877  Bench  Street  owned and operated by the City whose purpose is to treat industrial wastewater before that waste is pumped into the general collection system for transport and further treatment.  This facility is considered a part of the "Wastewater Disposal System."

3.	"Director/Superintendent" - the director/superintendent of wastewater disposal system/of water pollution control/of public works or the person's duly authorized representative.
 
4.	"Industrial User" - a person who discharges to the wastewater disposal system liquid wastes resulting from the processes employed in industrial, manufacturing, trade, or business establishments,  or from the development of any natural resource.

5.	"Interference" - the inhibition or disruption of the wastewater disposal system	processes or operations which causes or significantly contributes to a violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES or State Disposal System Permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the City in accordance with published regulations providing guidelines under Section 405 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) or any regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances  Control Act, or more stringent State criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the City.

6.	"National  Pollutant  Discharge  Elimination  System   (NPDES) Permit" - any permit or requirements issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.); for the purpose of regulating the discharge of sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes under the authority of Section 402 of the Clean Water Act.

7.	"Non Contact Cooling Water" - the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or during which the only pollutant added to the water is heat.

8.	"pH" - the logarithm of the  reciprocal  of  the  concentration  of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

9.	"Pretreatment" - the process of reducing the amount of pollutants, eliminating pollutants, or altering the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the wastewater disposal system. The reduction, elimination, or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or other means, except as prohibited by this Section.

10.	"Significant Industrial User" - any industrial user of the wastewater disposal system which (i) has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day, or (ii) has a flow greater than  five percent of the flow in the wastewater disposal system, or (iii) has in its wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Clean  Water  Act  or  Minnesota  Statutes  and  Rules,  or  (iv)  has  a
 
significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater disposal system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system.

11.	"State Disposal System Permit" - any permit (including any terms, conditions and requirements thereof), issued by the MPCA pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 115.07 for a disposal system as defined by Minnesota Statutes, Section 115.01, Subd. 8.

12.	"Stormwater" -  any flow  occurring  during  or following  any  form  of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.

13.	"User" - any person who discharges, causes  or  permits  the discharge of wastewater  into the wastewater disposal system.

14.	"Wastewater" - the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged into or permitted to enter the wastewater disposal system.

15.	"Wastewater Disposal System" or "System" - any devices, facilities, structures, equipment or works owned or used by the City for the purpose of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of industrial and domestic wastewater or necessary to recycle or reuse water, including intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping, power, and other equipment, and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled water supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works, including land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment.

16.	"Waters of the State" - all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, aquifers, irrigation	systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the State or any portion thereof.

17.	"Best Management Practices (BMPs)" - Activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices that reduce the discharge of fat, oil and grease (FOG) to the wastewater disposal system.
 

18.	"FOG" - Acronym for Fats, Oils and Grease.  These include any substance, such as a vegetable or animal product, that is used in or is a byproduct of, the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidify with a change in temperature or as a result of the conditions found in a sanitary sewer.


19.	"FOG Control Program Manager" - The individual designated by the Director of Public Works to administer the FOG Control Program.
The FOG Control Program Manager is responsible for all
determinations of compliance with the program, including approval of discretionary variances and waivers.


20.	"Food Service Establishment (FSE)" - All food service facilities including, but not limited to: full-service restaurants, fast food establishments, delicatessens, cafeterias, school cafeterias, church kitchens, hospitals and medical facilities, boarding houses, clubhouses, adult daycare facilities, assisted living facilities, convalescent homes, meat distributors and processing facilities, food processing facilities, grocery stores with food preparation/service areas, bakeries, caterers, and/or other similar types of operations with commercial kitchen equipment.


21.	"FSE Grease Control Responsible Party" - The entity named on the sewer account for the FSE.


22.	"Grease Interceptor" -A device designed to separate and retain FOG from normal wastes while permitting sewage or liquid wastes to  discharge into the drainage system.


23.	"Gravity grease interceptor'' - Grease interceptor identified by volume, detention time and gravity separation.  For purposes of this ordinance, a gravity grease inceptor shall have a minimum volume of 1000 gallons, minimum 2-compartment tank, and typically located underground, usually outside of a building, that reduces the amount of FOG in wastewater prior to its discharge into the sewer.


24.	Hydro-mechanical grease interceptor'' - A grease inceptor that ncorporates air entrainment, hydro-mechanical separation, interior baffling, and.for barriers in combination or separately. For purposes
 
of this ordinance, a hydro-mechanical grease interceptor is a small grease capturing device, usually located within a building.


25.	"Non-routine Inspection" - Impromptu, unscheduled inspection of an FSE made without prior notification or arrangement.


26.	"Routine Inspection" - Inspection of an FSE which is scheduled in advance or according to a pre-arranged schedule.


27.	Terms not otherwise defined shall be as given in Minnesota Statutes, chapters 115 and 116 as amended.



Subd. 3.	Regulations and Effluent Limitations.

A.	General Discharge Prohibitions. No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, any of the following substances into the wastewater disposal system or to any public sewer:

1.	Any liquids, solids or gases which by  reason  of  their  nature  or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to  cause fire  or explosion  or be injurious  in any other way to the wastewater  disposal  system or to the operation of the system. At no time, shall waste streams  with  a  closed  cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60  degrees Centigrade be introduced  into the wastewater disposal system. Prohibited	materials include, but  are  not  limited  to,  gasoline, kerosene,	naphtha, benzene,  toluene,  xylene,  ethers,  alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides.

2.	Solid or viscous substances which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones,  hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, gas tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes.

3.	Any wastewater having a pH  less  than  6.0  or  more  than  9.0  or having any other corrosive  property  capable  of causing damage  or
 
hazard  to  structures,  equipment,  and  personnel  of the wastewater disposal system.

4.	Any  wastewater  containing  toxic  pollutants  in  sufficient  quantity, either singly or by  interaction  with  other  pollutants,  to  inhibit  or disrupt any wastewater treatment process, constitute  a  hazard  to humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater disposal system. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the   Clean Water Act. Prescription drugs and other over-the­ counter pharmaceuticals shall be considered toxic pollutants.

5.	Any noxious or  malodorous  liquids,  gases,  or  solids  which  either singly or by interaction with other wastes are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair.

6.	Any  wastewater  with  objectionable  color  not  removed  in  the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes  and vegetable tanning solutions.

7.	Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the wastewater disposal system which violate any statute or any rule, regulation or ordinance of any public agency or State or Federal regulatory body.

8.	Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65.6°C), or causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater, the influent at the wastewater treatment plant  to have a temperature exceeding  104°F (40°C).

9.	Any slug load, which shall mean any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants, released in a discharge of such  volume  or strength as to cause inhibition  or  disruption  in  the  wastewater disposal system. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentrations or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than 5 times the average 24  hour concentrations, quantities, or flow of the user during normal operation.

10.	Non-contact cooling water or unpolluted storm or groundwater.

11.	Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of +150 mg/I or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures  between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and 65.6°C); and any wastewater containing oil and
 
grease  concentrations  of mineral  origin  of greater than  +100 mg/I, whether emulsified or not.

Introduction of any additives into the wastewater disposal system for the purpose of emulsifying FOG or biologically or chemically treating any substance introduced into any wastewater facility for purpose of treatment or pretreatment of wastewater unless a specific written authorization by the FOG Control Program Manager is obtained.

Discharge of any FOG or any other solid materials removed from the grease control device to the wastewater disposal system.



12.	Wastewater containing inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate) in such quantities that they would cause disruption with the wastewater disposal system.

13.	Any wastewater  following  pretreatment  or  directly  discharged containing	the  following  described   elements   in   concentrations greater than those included in the following list:

Maximum Daily Concentrations Cd	0.20 mg/I
Cr	2.80 mg/I
Cu	3.38 mg/I
Pb	0.40 mg/I
Hg	0.10 mg/I
Ni	2.98 mg/I
Ag	0.43 mg/I
Zn	2.61 mg/I

All discharge shall comply with the above limits unless the City has applied for a pollutant removal credit or exception and a pollutant removal credit or exception has been granted to a user or category of users that permits discharge in excess of the  Maximum  Daily Limits referenced in this Subdivision This exception shall only apply so long as the removal credit remains valid, and only so long as the discharge subject to the pollution removal credit or exception does not interfere with the operation of the System or pass through the System inadequately treated contrary to the purpose statement in Subdivision 1(B) of this Section.

B.	In addition to these  prohibitions,  no user shall discharge to any public sewer  any  discharge  which  causes  interference,  as  defined,  with  the
 
wastewater disposal system. Pollutants in the effluent from an industrial user shall not be considered to cause interference where the industrial user is in compliance with specific prohibitions or standards developed by Federal, State, or local governments. Where the industrial user is in compliance with such specific prohibitions or standards and pollutants in the effluent from the industrial user's facility nevertheless are determined to have caused or significantly contributed to a violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES or State Disposal System Permit, and are likely to cause such a violation in the future, the City must take appropriate action to develop and enforce specific effluent limits for that industrial user to ensure renewed and continued compliance with  the City's NPDES or State Disposal System Permit.

C.	It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City limits or City jurisdiction any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Section.

D.	It is unlawful to either construct, maintain, use, or permit to be used any cesspool, privy, or privy vault on any part of any lot or parcel of land in the City abutting both on a public sanitary sewer and a water main with which water and  sewer connections may  be made, if said privy, privy vault or cesspool be within 500 feet of said public sanitary sewer and also within 500 feet of said water mains. The City shall have power whenever there is both a public sewer and a water main in the public highways or grounds upon which any premises in the City abuts  to cause the owner or occupant of such parcel of land to connect said premises with said public sewer by sufficient sanitary sewer whenever, in the City's opinion, the same may be necessary for the preservation of the public health. The City shall serve upon such owner or occupant ten days' notice in writing specifying the time when such sewer connection or connections must be made and completed and if the said owner or occupant neglects to complete the same  within the time specified, in addition to the penalties imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this Section, the City may cause it to be done and shall either recover the whole amount of the expense thereof by an action  against  the owner, in the name of the City, before any court having jurisdiction thereof,	or assess the same against said premises pursuant  to Minnesota State Statutes. Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted to require the service of sewage wastes at published sewer  rates when such waste may  impair the sewer or cause a higher-than-normal expense in operation of the sewerage system. Nor shall this Section be interpreted to prohibit the handling of deleterious wastes, requirements for pretreatment, or sewer service  rates higher than published rates on an agreement  basis.   Such agreements  may be approved  by the  City
 
after considering  the  problems  in handling the  effect  on the  sewerage system and the cost of handling the waste.

E.	New connections to the City's sewer system may be restricted and/or not allowed in the event that such connection would increase  flows and/or loads above available capacity existing in either the collection or treatment system.

F.	Duly authorized City employees bearing proper identification shall, at reasonable times, be permitted to enter upon properties served by sanitary sewers for the purpose of inspection, measurement, sampling, and testing in connection with operation of the sewer system.

G.	Persons engaged in construction or maintenance activity where there is connection to or danger of damage to the sewer system shall exercise particular care to protect the sewer system, and shall at all times protect, keep foreign materials out, and accomplish  construction or connections in a neat and workmanlike manner.  Failure to do so shall be a violation of this Section and shall not stop the City from correcting the damage or removing the foreign material, if necessary on an overtime basis, and collecting the costs therefor.  For other than immediate necessary repair or removal, a five-day written notice shall be deemed adequate notice to the party to repair damage, correct faulty construction or remove material from the sewerage system.

H.	Roof, groundwater or surface drain connections to the sanitary sewer system	are prohibited. All sewer service connections shall be constructed in accordance with requirements of the Minnesota Plumbing Code in effect at the time of construction and such work shall only be done by a contractor licensed to perform such connection. Prior to construction of any sewer connection, the proper  permit shall be obtained from the Building Official.

Subd. 4.	Limitations on Wastewater Strength.

A. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. National categorical pretreatment	standards promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Clean Water Act shall be met by all users which are subject to such standards in any instance where they are more stringent than the limitations in this Section unless the Director has applied for and obtained from the MPCA approval to modify the specific limits in the national categorical pretreatment standards. When	requested, an application for modification of the national categorical pretreatment standards will be considered  for  submittal  by the Director when the wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of the pollutants.  "Consistent removal" shall be defined as in 40
 
CFR 403.7 (a) (1) of the "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution." Conditional revisions of national categorical pretreatment standards may be made by the City in accordance with 403.7 (b) (2) (i-iv) of the "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution" if requested by the industry(ies) in accordance with requirements of 403.7 (b) (1) (i).

B.	State Requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges shall be met by all users which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are more  stringent  than  Federal  requirements and limitations or those in the City Code.

C.	Right of Revision. The City reserves the right to  establish  more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives of this Section.

D.	Dilution. No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations in this Section, in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or in any State requirements.

E.	Accidental Discharges. Each user shall  provide  protection  from accidental	discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this Section. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's  own  cost  and  expense.  Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to  provide  this protection shall be submitted to the Director for review, and shall be approved by the Director before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this Section. Users shall notify the Director immediately upon having a slug or accidental  discharge of substances or wastewater in violation of this Section in order to enable countermeasures to be taken by the Director to minimize damage to the wastewater disposal system and the receiving waters. Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the wastewater disposal system or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the City on account thereof under any State or Federal law. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin  board  or other prominent place advising new employees whom to  call  in  the event of a slug or accidental discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge are advised of the emergency  notification procedure.
 

Subd. 5.	Fees.

A.	Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to provide for the recovery of costs	from users of the wastewater disposal system for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the Schedule of Charges and Fees, to be prepared, from time to time, by the Director and approved by the City Council.

B. Charges and Fees. The City Council  shall  adopt  charges  and  fees which may include: (1) fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; (2) fees for permit applications; (3) appeal fees; and,  (4) other fees as the Director may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this Section.

Subd. 6.  Administration-General  User  Reports.   The   Director   may require that any person discharging or proposing to discharge wastewater to the wastewater disposal system file a period discharge report. The discharge report may include, but not be limited to, nature of process, rates of flow, mass discharge rate, raw material and production quantities, hours of operation, number and classification of employees, compliance status with any State or Federal pretreatment standards, or other information which relates to the generation  of waste, including wastewater constituents and concentrations in the wastewater discharge. Such reports may also include sludge disposal practices and the chemical constituents and quantity of liquid or gaseous materials stored on site, even though they may not normally be discharged. At a minimum, a summary of such data indicating each industrial user's compliance with this Section shall be prepared quarterly and submitted to the Director. In addition to discharge reports, the Director may require information in the form of Wastewater Discharge Permit applications, self-monitoring  reports and compliance schedules.

Subd. 7.	Wastewater  Discharge Permits.

A.  Mandatory Permits.  All industries proposing to connect or to commence a new discharge to the wastewater disposal system shall obtain a Wastewater Disposal Permit before connecting to or discharging into the wastewater disposal system if the discharge would result in the industry being classified as a significant industrial user. All existing significant industrial	users or industrial users subject to national categorical pretreatment standards under Section 307 (b) and (c) of  the  Clean Water Act connected to or discharging into the wastewater disposal system shall obtain a Wastewater Discharge Permit within 180 days after the effective date of this Section.
 
B.	Permit Application. Users required to obtain a Wastewater Discharge Permit shall complete and file with the Director, an application  in the form prescribed by the Director, and accompanied by the applicable fee. Users shall apply at least 180 days prior to connecting or discharging to the wastewater  disposal system. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:

1.	Name, address and location (if different from the address).

2.	SIC number according  to  the  Standard  Industrial  Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.

3.	Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those governed by Subdivisions 3 and 4 of this Section as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304 (g) of the Clean Water Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended.

4.	Time and duration of discharge.

5.	Average daily and 30-minute  peak wastewater  flow  rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.

6.	Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation.

7.	Description of activities, facilities and plant  processes  on  the premises including all materials, which are or could be discharged, including sludges, floats, skimmings, etc.

8.	Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or national categorical pretreatment standards, and (for an existing discharge) a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment  is required for the  user to meet applicable pretreatment  standards.  If additional  operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment will be required, a proposed schedule by which the changes will be completed shall be submitted. The completion date in  this schedule shall not be later than the compliance	date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events
 
leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standard. No increment shall exceed nine months in length, and progress reports concerning each increment shall be submitted within 14 days following each increment date.

9.	Each product produced by type, amount, and rate of production.

10.	Type	and	amount	of	raw	materials	processed	(average	and maximum per day).

11.	Number of full and part-time employees, and hours of work.

12.	Any  other  information  as  may  be  deemed  by  the  Director  to  be necessary to evaluate the permit application.

C.	The Director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and  may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance  of the data furnished, the Director may issue a Wastewater Discharge Permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.

D.	Permit Conditions. Wastewater Discharge Permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this Section and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees.  Permit may contain the following:

1.	The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the wastewater disposal system.

2.	Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics.

3.	Limits on average and maximum rates and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.

4.	Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities.

5.	Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of pretreatment facilities.

6.	Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule.

7.	Compliance  schedules.
 
8.	Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports.

9.	Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the Director,  but in no case less than three years, and affording Director access thereto.

10.	Requirements for notification to and acceptance by the Director of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or of any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system.

11.	Requirements for notification of slug or accidental discharges as provided in this Section, and reporting of permit violations.

12.	Requirements for disposal of sludges, floats, skimmings, etc.

13.	Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure compliance with this Section.

E.	Permit Duration. Permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed 5 years. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the Director during the term of the permit as  limitations  or requirements as stated in this Section are modified or other just cause exists.	The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in  his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of  change.  Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.

F.	Permit Modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the Wastewater Discharge Permit of users subject to such standard shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical  pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a Wastewater Discharge Permit as required by this Section, the user shall apply for a Wastewater Discharge Permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical  pretreatment  standard.  In addition, the user with an existing Wastewater Discharge Permit shall submit to the Director within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable national categorical pretreatment standard the  information  required  by this Section. If the information previously submitted in an application is still current and adequate, only a letter from the user certifying such is required.
 

G.	Permit Transfer. Wastewater  Discharge Permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A Wastewater  Discharge Permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the Director.	Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with  the terms and conditions of the existing permit.

H.	Monitoring Facilities. Monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building  sewer and/or internal drainage systems shall be provided and operated by users where the City determines that monitoring is necessary due to the content and/or amount of flow being placed into the system by the user. The monitoring facility should normally be situated  on the  user's premises, but the Director may, when such a location would be  impractical  or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.  There  shall  be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and compositing of samples for analysis. The facility and sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of  the  user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Director's requirements	and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the Director, unless a time extension is otherwise granted by the Director.

I.	Inspection and Sampling. The Director shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this Section is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the Director ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The Director, MPCA and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct  sampling,  inspection,  compliance  monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user  has security  measures  in force which would require proper identification and clearance  before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with	any security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, the Director, MPCA and EPA will be permitted to enter, without	delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
 
J.	Pretreatment. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this Section and shall achieve compliance with all national categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the Federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater shall be provided, operated, and maintained	at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating  procedures  shall  be submitted  to the Director for review, and shall be acceptable to the Director before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the Director under the provisions of this Section. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the Director prior to the user's initiation of the changes. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available by the Director to officials of the EPA or MPCA upon request. Any user subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of the commencement of a new discharge to the wastewater disposal system, shall submit to the Director during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the Director, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported. The Director may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted.

K.	Final Compliance Date Reporting Requirements. Within 90  days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of the commencement of a new discharge to the wastewater disposal system, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow  for these process units in the user's facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards	or requirements. The report shall state  whether  the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment technology is necessary to bring the facility into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall also include a schedule for the implementation of the technology, apparatus, and operational changes necessary to meet compliance standards. This statement shall be signed by the user, and certified to by a qualified professional.
 

L.	Confidential Information. Information and data on a user obtained from applications, permits, monitoring programs and inspections shall be available to the public or other government agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. When requested by the person furnishing a report, and until such time as the information is determined not to be confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this Section, the NPDES Permit, State Disposal System permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the State or any State agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. Information accepted by the Director as confidential,  shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the Director until and unless a ten  day notification is given to the user.

M.	Sludges Generated. Sludges, floats, skimmings, etc., generated by an industrial or commercial pretreatment system shall  not be placed  into the wastewater disposal system. Such sludges shall be contained, transported and disposed  of in accordance with all Federal, State, and local regulations.

Subd. 8.	Enforcement.

A. Slug or Accidental Discharges. The Director may  suspend  the wastewater treatment service of a user and/or a Wastewater Discharge Permit (after informal notice to the discharger) when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Director, in order to stop an actual  or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, or to the wastewater disposal system, or would cause the City to violate any condition of its NPDES or State Disposal  System Permit. Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the Wastewater Discharge Permit shall immediately stop the discharge. In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Director shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the wastewater disposal system or endangerment	to   any   individuals.  The   Director   shall   reinstate  the
 
Wastewater Discharge Permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the  causes  of the slug or accidental discharge and the measures taken to  prevent  any future occurrence shall be submitted to the Director within 15 days of the date of occurrence.

B.	Revocation of Permit. In accordance with the procedures of this Section, the Director may revoke the permit of any user which fails to factually report  the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; which fails to report significant changes in wastewater constituents or characteristics; which refuses reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring or for violation of conditions of its permit, this Section, or applicable State or Federal regulations.

C.	Notification of Violation. Whenever the Director finds  that  any person has violated or is violating this Section, Wastewater  Discharge  Permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein, the Director may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice,  unless a shorter time frame is necessary due to the nature of the violation, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the City by the user.

Subd. 9.	Show Cause Hearing.

A. Notice of Hearing. If the violation is not corrected by timely compliance, the Director may order any user which causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to show cause before the City Council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the City Council regarding the violation, the reason why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the City Council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 20 days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.

B.	Hearing Officials. The City Council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the Public Utilities Department to: (1) issue in the name of the City Council notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the  protection of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; (2) take the evidence; and, (3) transmit
 
a report of  the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the City Council for action thereon.

C.	Transcripts. At any hearing held pursuant  to  this  Section,  testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefor.

D.	Issuance of Orders. After the City Council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless	adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed or existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.

E.	Legal Action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes  or other wastes into the wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this Section, Federal or State pretreatment requirements or any order of the City, the City Attorney may, following the authorization of such action by the City Council, commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief.

F.	Annual Publication. A list of the users which were significantly violating applicable		pretreatment requirements  or  national  categorical pretreatment standards during the 12 previous months shall be annually published	in the official  newspaper.  The  notification  shall  also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same 12 months. For the purposes of this subparagraph, significant violations would  be those violations which  remain uncorrected 45 days after notification of noncompliance; which are part of a pattern of noncompliance over a 12-month period; or which involve a failure to accurately report noncompliance.

G.	Appeal to the City Council. Any interested party shall have the right to request in writing an interpretation  or ruling on any matter covered by this Section and shall be entitled to a written reply from the City. Any decision of the Director in the enforcement of this Section may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written petition with the City Clerk within 30 days of the Director's ruling. Said petition shall specify in detail the matter or matters involved and every ground or basis on which objections are made. Said  petition shall  show the  names, addresses and telephone numbers of all objectors and their attorney at law or spokesman. The filing of a petition in accordance with the requirements herein shall stay all proceedings  unless the Director shall file within 72
 
hours after the filing of a petition a certificate stating that a stay would cause peril to life or property or specifying other good reason. The City Council shall fix a reasonable time for hearing of the petition or appeal and give due notice of the time and place of said hearing to parties named in the petition as attorney or spokesman. The hearing shall be open to the public. Petitioners shall be given full opportunity to present evidence in support of their petition after which the Director may present evidence in support of his decision. The City Council shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time and notify the attorney or spokesman. The minutes of the City Council shall constitute the official record of the petition, hearing, and decision. Any party desiring a transcript of the proceedings shall furnish a qualified court reporter at their own expense.

Subd. 10.	Penalties.

A. Civil Penalties. Any user who is found to have violated an order of the City Council or who has failed to comply with any provision of this Section,	and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense, as determined by the City Council. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue, or causes a violation of the Red Wing NPDES effluent limitation, shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.		In addition to the penalties provided herein, the City may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by an appropriate action against the person found to have violated this Section or the order, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.

B.	Costs of Damage. Any user violating any of the prov1s1ons of this Section or who has a discharge which causes a deposit, obstruction, damage or other impairment to the wastewater disposal system shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage caused by the violation or discharge. The Director may add to the user's charges and fees the costs assessed for any cleaning, repair, or  replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Any refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this Section.

C.	Falsifying Information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this Section or Wastewater Discharge  Permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this Section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless a more severe penalty is provided by state or federal law.
 
Subd. 11.	Grease Interceptors.

A.	Grease interceptors required. -  FSEs shall discharge all wastewater containing FOG from fixtures or sources in food preparation or cleanup areas into a properly maintained and functioning grease interceptor that complies with the installation and sizing requirements of the Minnesota Plumbing Code as adopted by the City of Red Wing.  Water closets, urinals and other plumbing fixtures conveying human waste shall not drain into or through the grease interceptor.
Food disposal units or dishwashers shall not drain into or through the grease interceptor unless specifically permitted, in writing, by the FOG Control Program Manager.

1.	Except as otherwise provided in Para. 3 or 4 below, new FSEs shall be equipped with an exterior gravity grease interceptor that complies with the requirements of the Minnesota Plumbing Code prior to commencement of any discharge.  Any permitted construction shall be deemed
compliant upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such
construction by the City Building Official or designee.


2.	Except as otherwise provided in Para. 3 or 4  below, existing FSEs that are not equipped with a grease interceptor or that are equipped with a grease interceptor that does not comply with the most recent edition of the Minnesota Plumbing Code, shall install a compliant grease interceptor on a date deemed appropriate by the FOG Control Program Manager when any of the following applies:

a.	An expansion, renovation or modification is constructed that requires that a building or plumbing permit be issued.  The grease interceptor shall be installed prior to requesting the final inspection.

b.	The FSE sewage discharge necessitates increased maintenance on the wastewater disposal system in order to minimize the number of blockages occurring and/or to minimize interferences  with the normal operation of pumps and other equipment, as determined by the FOG Control Program Manager; or

c.	A FSE is not adequately retaining FOG.  This occurs when quantities above FOG discharge limits of 150 mg/Lare found, according to Standard Methods for the
 
Examination of Water and Wastewater, Oil and Grease, method 5520.



3.	Any FSE that wishes to be exempt from a grease interceptor installation or maintenance requirement must file for an exemption from FOG Control Program Manager who has the authority to approve the exemption if:

a.	Only catered meals are distributed and consumed and all dishes, pans, utensils, etc. are removed and cleaned at an approved facility with properly operating and sized grease interceptors; or

b.	Only pre-packaged foods are served and no oil, grease, or other products containing grease are washed down sinks or drains.

4.	If an FSE demonstrates to the satisfaction of the FOG Control Program Manager that installation of a gravity grease interceptor is not feasible, the Manager may grant an exception allowing such owner to install hydro-mechanical grease traps, or other alternative treatment technology which will, in the FOG Control Program Manager's discretion, adequately control the release of FOG from the FSE or the structure into the wastewater system. The FSE bears the burden of demonstrating that the installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible.


a.	The request for an exemption shall include the following information, if relevant:

1.	Evidence of a lack of available exterior space necessary to place an interceptor relative to the location of sewer main and easement;

11.     Evidence of a lack of adequate slope for gravity flow between  kitchen  plumbing fixtures  in the  FSE and the  wastewater   facilities;

111.    Description and specifications of the alternative grease control equipment that will be installed.
 
b.	Hydro-mechanical and alternative treatment technologies must remove FOG to the extent that the waste discharge does not exceed the maximum allowed concentration.   FSE must make any modifications required to achieve the FOG discharge requirements even if an exemption was granted.

B.	Grease Interceptor Installation Requirements - In addition to the requirements herein, all grease interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the Minnesota Plumbing Code.

1.	Exterior gravity grease interceptor must be constructed on the property occupied by the structure in a location which allows unrestricted access to city representatives for the purposes of inspection, sampling and testing.

2.	Gravity grease interceptors shall not be installed inside a building where food is handled.

3.	Interceptors shall be placed as close as practical to the fixtures they serve.

4.	Interior hydro-mechanical or grease traps must be installed in an easily accessible location.  City representatives must have unrestricted access for purposes of inspection, sampling and testing during normal business hours.

5.	Each FSE that requires a grease interceptor shall have an interceptor that serves that establishment unless otherwise approved by the FOG Control Program Manager and Plumbing Inspector.

6.	Plumbing shall be such that dishwasher discharge shall not be directed into or pass through the grease interceptor trap.

7.	Any wastewater discharges with temperatures  in excess of 140° F shall not be directed into or pass through the grease interceptor trap.

C.	Grease inceptor inspection and Maintenance - The following maintenance and cleaning practices shall be implemented by all FSEs:
 
1.	Exterior gravity grease interceptors shall be pumped /cleaned out a minimum of once every 90 days, or more frequently if the unit has accumulated waste, both floatable and settleable accounting for 25% of its wetted depth, as measured from the static water level to the interior tank bottom.

a.	Grease interceptor cleaning verification shall be submitted to the FOG Control Program Manager within 14 days after the interceptor is cleaned.

b.	The FOG Control Program Manager will establish a procedure for submitting this information.

2.	Interior grease traps and hydro-mechanical grease interceptors must be pumped/cleaned out completely a minimum of once every 30 days, or more frequently if the unit has accumulated waste, both floatable and settleable accounting for 25% of its wetted depth, as measured from the static water level to the interior tank bottom.

a.	Grease trap maintenance and cleaning activities shall be recorded on a log that must be kept on file for a period of three years and be available to the FOG Control Program Manager during inspections.  The log shall include date, time, volume of waste removed, disposal site and signature.

b.	If a grease hauler is hired to pump out the grease trap, the haulers receipts shall be submitted to the FOG Control Program Manager.

c.	Decanting or discharging of removed waste liquid back into the interceptor or trap from which the waste was removed, for the purposes of reducing the volume to be disposed is strictly prohibited.

3.	Any person who cleans a grease interceptor shall do so in accordance with the following procedures and requirements.

a.	Measure and record the depths of solids on the bottom and FOG on the top of the grease interceptor. Also record the total percent of FOG and solids compared to the design liquid depth.  These records must be maintained for three years.
 

b.	Completely empty and remove the contents (liquids and solids) of all vaults of the grease interceptor, and remove the grease mat and scrapings from the interior walls.

c.	Dispose of waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor at a facility approved for disposal of such waste. Waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor shall not be discharged to any public or private sanitary or storm sewer system.

d.	Not deposit waste and wastewater removed from a grease interceptor back into the grease interceptor from which the waste or wastewater was removed or into any other grease interceptor, for the purpose of reducing the volume of waste and wastewater to be disposed of.

e.	Not introduce enzymes, emulsifying chemicals, hot water or other agents into a grease interceptor to dissolve or emulsify grease or as a grease abatement method. Introduction of bacteria as a grease degradation agent is permitted only with prior written approval by the FOG Control Program Manager.

f.	Not use an automatic grease removal system to clean a grease interceptor without prior written approval of the FOG Control Program Manager. If the use of an
automatic grease removal system is approved, the user
shall operate the same in a manner that the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the system's outlet, is consistently achieved.

g.	Verify that the grease interceptor or trap is good operating condition by checking the following:

1.	Check that the sanitary "tees" on the inlet and outlet sides of the grease interceptor are not obstructed, loose, or missing.

11.	Verify  that the  baffle is secure and in place.
 
111.		Inspect the grease  interceptor for any  cracks or other  defect

1v.		Check that lids are securely and properly seated after completion of cleaning.

v.	Check that the flow restrictor is secure.


4.	The FOG Control Program Manager may also implement additional maintenance and cleaning verification procedures.

D.	Best Management Practices to minimize amount of grease that is disposed of in the sewer. - FSEs shall incorporate the following BMPs into their kitchen and dishwashing procedures:

1.	Train all kitchen and dishwashing staff on proper FOG management.

2.	Scrape dishes and pans or "dry wipe" before putting them int eh sink or dishwasher.   Place food scraps from dishes into trashcans and garbage bags and dispose of properly.

3.	Never pour greases, oils, oily sauces, syrups, or dressing down the drain. Never "hot flush" oil or grease down sinks or drains.

4.	Dispose of FOG in covered collection containers.   Have FOG picked up by a certified hauler for disposal.

5.	Allow FOG to cool before it is skimmed, scraped or wiped off of all preparation and servicing surfaces.

6.	Cover the kitchen sink drains and floor drains with screening and empty debris into garbage as needed.

7.	Recycle used fryer oil.


8.	Do not pour chemicals or additives into the grease interceptor.


E.	Record Keeping - The building owner or operator of an FSE which is required to pass wastewater through a grease interceptor shall maintain a written record of grease interceptor maintenance.
 
1.	Include the dates upon which the grease interceptor was inspected and the dates upon which FOG waste and wastewater was removed from the grease interceptor and disposed of along with the percentage of FOG and solids of the design liquid depth.

2.	The log shall also contain the location and means of such disposal of waste and wastewater, the name and employer or the person or persons performing each of said tasks and any maintenance issues that required correction.

3.	FSE owners shall also record inspection of the grease interceptor to check for maintenance and cleaning issues and keep records in the same log.

4.	The log shall at all times be kept at the premise and maintained, so as to show a record of inspections and waste
and wastewater removal and disposal for a continuous period of three years.

5.	The log shall be made available for non-routine inspection by the City at any time during normal business hours.

6.	The FOG Control Program Manager may include other data submittal requirements for compliance verification.

F.	FOG interceptor inspections.- FSEs which are required to pass its wastewater through a grease interceptor shall allow for an inspection by City personnel and shall:

1.	Provide, operate and maintain, at its expense, safe and accessible monitoring facilities for sampling of the wastewater discharged from the grease interceptor or building sewer or internal drainage systems. There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling.

2.	Allow personnel authorized by the FOG Control Program Manager or by the City Building Official or designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, to enter upon or into any building, facility or property housing an FSE at any reasonable time and without prior notification, for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing or record review, in accordance with this division.
 
3.	Upon request by the FOG Control Program Manager, open any grease interceptor for the purpose of confirming that maintenance frequency is appropriate, that all necessary parts of the installation are in place, including but not limited to, baffles, influent and effluent tees, and that all grease interceptors and related equipment and piping is maintained in efficient operating condition.

4.	Accommodate  compliance inspections and sampling events by the FOG Control Program Manager or of the City Building Official. The FOG Control Program Manager may conduct routine inspections and sampling events of any FSE. Non­ routine inspection and sampling events shall occur more frequently when there is a history of noncompliance with this
ordinance or if excessive amounts of FOG are observed in the collection system downstream of the FSE.

G.	Charge for remedial maintenance or repair of the city wastewater disposal system

1.	In the event an FSE is found to have contributed to the partial or complete obstruction of a wastewater facility resulting from the discharge of wastewater or waste containing FOG and that the city is required to act immediately to control a public health hazard because of such blockage, the FSE Grease Control Responsible Party shall be required to reimburse the city for all costs of abating such condition.

2.	In the event that sewer or lift station cleaning is required more frequently than the normal cycle due to documented accumulations of FOG, the FSE responsible for the discharge of the FOG may be assess a fee equal to the additional costs incurred to remove and dispose of the FOG. Such costs will include the scheduled costs of any equipment used, the manpower costs and any disposal costs.

3.	In situations where there are multiple owners identified as contributing to FOG causing such obstruction or required additional cleaning, the FOG Control Program Manager will apportion the cost of the cleanup, maintenance or repair costs on a prorated basis, based on each FSE Grease Control Responsible Party's percentage share of the average total sanitary sewer charges for all such owners.
 

4.	Should further inspection, testing or other sampling activity by the city confirm that any user is contributing excessive FOG (including other harmful ingredients) and is causing the repair or extraordinary maintenance activity to maintain the integrity of the wastewater disposal system, the FOG Control Program Manager may require retrofitting of the structure with grease interceptors or grease traps, including testing facilities and access thereto sufficient to resolve the problem;

5.	The costs for curing any private sewer lateral failures, including cleaning and other maintenance, caused in whole or in part by FOG introduced into the wastewater treatment facilities by any FSE, alone or in conjunction with any other party, are the responsibility of the FSE Grease Control Responsible Party contributing the FOG to wastewater system is located.

H.	Penalties and assessments for FOG program noncompliance.

	
1.	Any person found in violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as fully outlined in
		Section 3.13, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by
penalty established in that section or in Minnesota law for a
		misdemeanor as may be amended from time to time. Any
person convicted of a violation of this ordinance shall be
		required to pay the reasonable costs of prosecution.

2.		
The City may, in its discretion, seek any civil remedies available to it including remedies at law, in equity or other
		relief. In the event that a civil remedy is pursued, the City may
seek reimbursement of any and all costs, disbursements,
		witness or other fees, as well as reasonable attorney's fees
expended by the City in order to enforce this Ordinance.

3.		
For failure to maintain records as required by the FOG
		program for any FSE, or failing or refusing to timely comply
with any request for records required to be provided to the
		FOG Control Program Manager, a fine of up to $250.00 per
day until such records are provided.

4.		
Other Remedies
 
a.	City may disconnect water and sewer service to the FSE and to the structure in which the FSE is located if continued violations persist.

b.	City may impose a fine of not more than $1,000 per month until such owner demonstrates that they are in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.

c.	For failure to pass the FOG inspection due to lack of or ineffective FOG equipment, the FOG Control Program Manager may require the subject FSE to install additional FOG equipment, as necessary, to resolve the problem.

5.	To the extent that the provisions of subdivision 11, clauses G­ H conflict with subdivisions 8 -10 of this Section, subdivision 11, clauses G-H will apply.

SECTION 3.09.	STORMWATER  MANAGEMENT.  All stormwater
within the City of Red Wing shall be managed to comply with the most recent City Council approved Stormwater Management Plan and also the current National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems. The requirements of the NPDES permit are mandatory Best Management Practices and are described in Red Wing's Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. That plan, which is administered by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, has been adopted by the City Council in order to manage and minimize the discharge of stormwater pollution into the waters of the state to the maximum extent practicable.

SECTION 3.10.	DRAINAGE  DITCH  CHARGES  FOR  THE  PIONEER
WATERSHED AREA. Each property owner contributing runoff to the Pioneer Watershed Area shall pay a special charge for stormwater management and maintenance.	The City Engineer will make a final determination regarding the property's contribution of runoff to the Pioneer Watershed Area and the amount to be charged, if any. The amount of the special charge to be determined from time to time by ordinance of the City Council.

Subd. 1.  Surface drainage charges for improved land in the watershed (Unit "A" Charges)  shall be based on units or increments for every 2500 square feet of impervious surface area. Payment shall be made at the time the building permit is taken out or, at the option of the property owner, assessed against the property on the property tax roll to be collected with other taxes and to run over a period of five years at a rate of interest to be determined annually by resolution of the City Council.
 
Subd. 2. Unimproved land drainage charges for unplatted land in the watershed (Unit "B" Charges) shall be based on units or increments of 0.25 acres. Tracts of land greater than 2.5 acres in size shall be assessed a maximum of 10.0 units until such tracts are subdivided or platted. At the time of platting or subdivision, the area greater than 2.5 acres shall be charged and payment made prior to recording of any plat or subdivision, with credit given for the area already assessed.

SECTION 3.11.	RULES	AND	REGULATIONS	RELATING	TO STORMWATER SERVICE.

Subd. 1.  General  Stormwater  Discharge  Prohibitions.   The  fact  that some stormwater in a separated sewer system receives no water treatment before discharge into waters of the state requires special vigilance and  prohibitions.  It shall be illegal to pollute the waters of the state by throwing, discharging, or otherwise allowing materials or substances onto City streets, storm sewers, or into public drainage areas where they can be transported by runoff into stormwater conveyances that will degrade stormwater and thereby add to the impairment of waters of the state. These materials and substances are described in City Code Sec. 3.08 ("Controls on the Use of Public Sewers and Pretreatment of Industrial Wastewater") and are further described in City Code Sec. 7.07 ("Obstructions in Streets"),  and further referenced in City Code Section 10.09 (Animal Waste)  and
10.18	(Public Parks), which list prohibitions concerning pet waste and public park behavior.

Subd. 2.	Establishment.   Stormwater management services shall be operated as a public utility pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 444.075 from which revenues will be derived subject to the provisions of this Chapter and Minnesota Statutes.

Subd. 3.	Purpose.  The City desires to improve the quality of stormwater runoff, its delivery of stormwater related services, long term financial sustainability and maintenance of infrastructure and compliance with regulatory requirements. The stormwater utility is established for the purpose of achieving these goals.

Subd. 4.	Surface Water Management Fund.  The funds collected by the City stormwater utility shall be maintained in a fund dedicated for the purposes for which it is collected.

Subd. 5.  Stormwater Utility Fees.  The surface water management fund shall be funded through two charges, an annual area fee and a stormwater system connection charge.

Subd. 6.	Annual Area Fee.  The annual area fee shall be determined through the use of a residential equivalent factor (REF). A residential equivalent factor is the ratio of the volume of runoff generated by one acre of a particular land
 
use to the volume of runoff generated by one acre of residential land use based upon average annual rainfall.

A.	Determination of Residential Equivalent Factor for Land Uses.

Land Use	REF
All residential	1.00
Community commercial	1.91
Downtown	3.89
Industry	1.74
Institutional	.87
Mixed Use Commercial	3.34
Regional  Commercial	2.83
Golf Courses	.50
Utility	1.73
HRA and Port Authority	1.00

B.	Establishing Unit Fee (UF). The City Council shall, annually, by ordinance establish a Unit Fee.

C.	Calculating Annual Area Fee.  The annual area fee for each non­ residential parcel of land shall be determined by multiplying the REF for the parcel's land use classification times the parcel's acreage times the Unit Fee (UF).  The City Council shall, annually, by ordinance establish any minimum Annual Area Fee for each land use category.  The City Council may establish, by ordinance, a cap on
the Annual Area Fee charged for any land use category.

D.	Standardized Residential Annual Area Fee.  For the purpose of simplifying and equalizing charges against residential property, each of such properties shall be charged the annual Unit Fee.

E.	Other Land Uses.  Land uses not listed in the table set forth in Section 3.34, Subd. 5.A. shall be classified by City Staff comprised of the Engineering, Community Development and Public Works Directors by assigning them to the most similar classes from the standpoint of probable hydrologic response.

F.	Exempt Land.  The following land uses are exempt from all stormwater utility fees: City owned and operated property, public rights-of-way, parks, open space, vacant, tribal land, natural areas of golf courses that are not mowed and maintained, agricultural
cropped land, and non-farmed agricultural land (except for the homestead which shall be treated as a residential property).
 
G.	Adjustments of Acreage.  The total parcel acreage will be used to calculate the annual area fee.  It is the responsibility of the owner of any parcel to supply the City with any necessary information required to determine if a parcel or portion of a parcel qualifies as an exemption or should be classified as a different land use and is eligible for an acreage adjustment.  The City will review the proposed adjustment upon receipt of a complete submittal package.  The
owner or occupant of any parcel requesting an adjustment shall
supply the City with such information as the City may reasonably request related to the use, development and area of the parcel. Failure to provide the requested information shall result in an estimated acreage with billing based on that estimate.  Any adjustments must be approved by City Staff comprised of the Engineering, Community Development, and Public Works Directors and will become effective at the beginning of the next billing cycle.

H.	Credits for Best Management Practices (BMP).  The council may adopt policies recommended by City Staff comprised of the Engineering, Community Development and Public Works Directors by resolution, for adjustment of the stormwater annual area fee for parcels employing best management practices that significantly reduce the quantity or significantly improve the quality of stormwater runoff from their property that enters the stormwater system.  Such adjustments of the annual area fee shall not be made retroactively.

I.	Newly Platted Lots.  Newly platted lots shall not be billed an annual area fee until the public improvements described in the developer's agreement have been installed and approved by the City Engineer. In addition, the annual area fee shall not be activated until the Stormwater System Connection Charge has been charged to the parcel.

Subd. 7.	Stormwater System Connection Charges.

A.  A one time stormwater system connection fee shall be charged for new development and redeveloping properties.  The fee shall be charged whenever a building permit application is made that requires a sanitary sewer and water connection fee be charged, or whenever a permit is taken out on a parcel for the construction of the principle structure in cases where there is no sanitary sewer and water
service available.  Payment shall be made at the time the building permit is issued.  Whenever the use of a parcel intensifies by a change in land use, the stormwater system connection charge shall be recalculated at the higher rate corresponding to the intensified use.
 
B.  The City Council shall, annually, by ordinance establish a connection fee to be charged.

SECTION 3.12.	SPECIAL	SEWER	CONNECTION	CHARGES.	In
addition to sanitary sewer installation costs, and sanitary sewer service costs, whenever a connection is made to the public sanitary sewer system, the property owner shall pay a special sewer connection charge in an amount determined from time to time by ordinance of the City Council.  Payment shall be made at the time the building permit is taken out. Whenever the use of a parcel intensifies from residential to commercial or industrial, the special sanitary sewer connection charge shall be recalculated at the higher  rate  corresponding  to  the  intensified use, with credit for the previously assessed residential rate.

SECTION 3.13.	VIOLATION	A	MISDEMEANOR	AND/OR	WILL
RESULT IN A FINE AND/OR A BILL.    Upon conviction of violating this Chapter, a person may be punished for a misdemeanor, unless a more severe penalty is provided by state or federal law. In addition, or in the alternative,  any  such violation may result in a civil fine not to exceed $2,000 and/or may result in the violator being billed for the actual cost of redressing any harm which is attributable to the violation.
 
Title	Page

CHAPTER 4	CONSTRUCTION	AND	HOUSING	REGULATIONS	AND PERMITS

 
Section 4.01
4.02
4.03
4.04
4.05

4.06
4.07
 
Building Code Adopted Building Permits Required Housing Maintenance Code
Rental Dwelling Licensing Code Unsafe and Hazardous Buildings, Structures and Excavation Manufactured Home Parks Violation a Misdemeanor
 
4-1
4-1
4-1
4-16

4-28
4-31
4-47
 
CHAPTER4

CONSTRUCTION AND HOUSING REGULATIONS AND PERMITS



SECTION 4.01.	BUILDING  CODE  ADOPTED.	The Minnesota State
Building Code (SBC), including Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080 - Individual Sewage Treatment Systems, is hereby adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein. One copy of said Code shall be marked CITY OF RED WING - OFFICIAL COPY and kept on file in the office of the Building Official and open to inspection and use by the public.

Source:  Ordinance No. 349, Third Series Effective Date:  3-26-04

SECTION 4.02.	BUILDING  PERMITS  REQUIRED.	It is unlawful for
any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure, or any part or portion thereof, including, but not limited to, the plumbing, electrical, ventilating, heating or air conditioning systems therein, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate building or mechanical permit for each such building, structure or mechanical components from the City. (Also see City Code Section 11.70, Subdivision 3).

Source: City Code Effective Date: 5-1-85

SECTION 4.03.	HOUSING MAINTENANCE CODE.

Subd. 1. Title.  This section may be known, cited, and referred to as the "Red Wing Housing Maintenance Code" or "the HMC."

Subd. 2.    Purpose.   The  purpose  of the  HMC  is to  protect,  preserve, and promote the public health, safety, and the general welfare of the people of the City, to prevent housing conditions that adversely affect or are likely to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare, and health, including the physical, mental, and social well-being of persons occupying dwellings within the City, to provide, to the extent permitted by state law, for the enforcement of minimum standards for components or systems of residential structures; to provide for the use and location and amount of space for human occupancy; and to preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the City.

Subd. 3. Discrimination and Privacy. The HMC is to be enforced in a nondiscriminatory manner and exclusively for the purpose of promoting public as opposed to private welfare. Except as may be specifically provided herein or incidental  to the  enforcement  hereof, the  HMC is not  intended  to  interfere with
 
personal privacy or with private legal rights and liabilities, including without limitation landlord/tenant and lessor/lessee relationships, and in enacting and enforcing the HMC, the City neither expressly nor by implication assumes any obligations or liabilities respecting such private rights or disputes, including those which involve or arise out of the non-conformity of any premises in the City to the provisions of the HMC.

Subd. 4.	Definitions.

A.	For purposes of Section 4.03, the definitions below apply.

1.	"Abandonment of a Building or Structure" - the consequence of ceasing to assert or exercise an interest, right, or title to that building or structure, with the intent of never again resuming or reasserting it.

2.	"Accessory Structure" - a structure not greater than 3,000 square feet in floor area and not over two stories in height, the use of which is customarily accessory to and incidental to that of the dwelling(s) and which is located on the same lot.

3.	"Adequate" - sufficient.

4.	"Basement" - that portion of a Building or Structure located partly underground, but having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.

5.	"Building" - a constructed edifice designed to stand more or less permanently, covering a space of land, designed for occupancy, and intended for use in one place.

6.	"Common Areas" - halls,  corridors, passageways, utility rooms, recreational rooms and extensively landscaped areas in or adjacent to a multiple dwelling, not under the exclusive control of one person or family.

7.	"Component" - a constituent part.

8.	"Condominium" - a form of individual ownership within a multifamily building which entails joint responsibility for maintenance and repairs; in the condominium each apartment or townhouse is owned outright by its occupant.

9.	"Corrected" - brought into conformance with all applicable standards of the HMC.
 
10.	"Cooperative Housing" - a multiple family dwelling owned and maintained by the residents: the entire structure and real property is under common ownership as contrasted to a condominium dwelling where	individual units are under separate individual occupant ownership.

11.	"Damage" - injury or harm.

12.	"Degradation" - impairment in respect to some physical property, including Damage by weakening or loss of some property, quality, or capability.

13.	"Dilapidation" - a condition of decay or partial ruin.

14.	"Disaster" - a sudden or great misfortune.

15.	"Dwelling Unit" - a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

16.	"Exclude Dampness" - to shut out moisture.

17.	"Exit" - a continuous and unobstructed means of egress to the outdoors	and includes intervening doors, doorways, corridors, ramps, stairways, smoke-proof enclosures, horizontal exits, exit passageways, exit courts and yards.

18.	"Extermination" - the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Health Officer.

19.	"Fire Hazard" - a thing or condition that might operate against Safety from fire, including a possible source of peril, danger, duress, or difficulty, or that tends to create or increase the possibility of loss due to fire.

20.	"Garbage" - putrescible animal and vegetable wastes, including those	resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.

21.	"Habitable Room" - a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, but excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, utility rooms, foyers, corridors, stairways, closets,
 
storage	spaces, workshops, hobby and recreation areas, and Basements lacking required ventilation, required electrical outlets, or required Exit facilities.

22.	"Hazard" - a thing or condition that might operate against Safety, including a possible source of peril, danger, duress, or difficulty, or that tends to create or increase the possibility of loss.

23.	"Health Officer" - the legally designated health officer of the City of Red Wing or his or her authorized representative.

24.	"Hotel or Motel" - a building or structure or enclosure, or any part thereof, kept, used as, maintained as, or advertised as, or held out to the public to be an enclosure  where sleeping accommodations are furnished to the public and furnishing accommodations for periods of less than one week.

25.	"Inadequate" - means not Adequate.

26.	"Infestation" - the presence, within or around a Dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or pests.

27.	"Kitchen" - a space used or intended to be used for food preparation, which contains a sink, adequate space for installing cooking and refrigeration equipment, and space for the storage of cooking utensils.

28.	"Maintenance" - preservation from failure or decline.

29.	"Maintained" - preserved from failure or decline.

30.	"Nuisance"-:

(a)	A public nuisance which may prove detrimental  to  children whether in a Building, on the premises of a Building, or upon an unoccupied	lot. This includes, but is not limited to, the abandonment	of any well, cistern, shaft, Basement, or excavation; the abandonment of any refrigerator or freezer in a hazardous condition; an unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicle; or any lumber, Garbage, Rubbish, or debris which may become a hazard for inquisitive minors; or

(b)	Overcrowding a room or portion of a Dwelling with long-term storage so as to prevent upkeep, maintenance or regular housekeeping.	A room may be considered overcrowded when storage covers an excessive amount of the floor area of a room,
 
constitutes a potential excessive fire load, prevents access to windows or doors, prevents access to or obstructs mechanical systems or air movement, effectively eliminates  use and access to required electrical devices, impedes access and movement of emergency personnel, blocks hallways, limits the operation of doors or provides potential pest harborage.

31.	"Obsolescence" - the process of becoming neglected or the condition of being nearly neglected or worn out.

32.	"Occupant" - any person, over one year of age, (including owner or operator) living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of, a Dwelling Unit or rooming unit.

33.	"Operator or Resident Agent" - the Owner or Owner's agent who has charge, care, control, or management of a Building, or part thereof, in which Dwelling Units or rooming units are let or offered for occupancy.

34.	"Owner" - a person who alone, jointly, or severally with others:

(a)	shall have legal title to any Dwelling or Dwelling Unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or,

(b)	shall have charge, care or control of  any  Dwelling or  Dwelling Unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee  or guardian of the estate of the owner.  Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this Section, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner.

35.	"Owner-Occupied Dwelling" - a dwelling unit occupied by the property owner, including for purposes of the HMC, a single-family dwelling or the discrete portion of a two-family or multi-family dwelling where the owner resides in one unit.

36.	"Premises" - platted lot(s) or unplatted parcel(s) of land, or any portion thereof, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or non-dwelling structure, including such building, accessory structure, or other structure thereon.

37.	"Public Areas" - those areas which are normally open to the general public or the occupants of more than one dwelling unit of a multiple family dwelling.
 
38.	"Rental Dwelling or Rental Dwelling Unit" - any dwelling unit not occupied by the primary homestead owner of record. Such a unit may be a single-family dwelling, a separate and independent housekeeping unit within a single-family dwelling, a group home, one unit of a two-family dwelling or a portion of a multi-family dwelling, any of which are provided or available  for actual or potential occupancy whether occupied or vacant by lease, by use, by rent or for any other good and valuable consideration, excluding the portion of a homestead property occupied by a qualified  relative,  or residential	property seasonally occupied by what is commonly referred to as a "house sitter" while the owner of the property is residing elsewhere for a period not to exceed six (6) months. Manufactured homes that are occupied by the owner of the home do not constitute rental Dwelling Units even though the underlying lot may be leased by the owner occupant.

39.	"Rodent Harborage" - a place where rodents are living, nesting, or seeking shelter, or likely to live, nest, or seek shelter.

40.	"Rodent-Proof" - a condition where a structure and all parts thereof are	protected from rodent, insect and vermin Infestation by eliminating ingress and egress openings such as cracks in walls and holes in screens. For the purpose of the HMC the term  "rodent­ proof' shall be construed as though it included "insect-proof' and "vermin-proof."

41.	"Rooming Unit" - a room or group of  rooms  forming  a  single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking and eating purposes.

42.	"Rubbish" - non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, grass and shrubbery clippings, wood, glass, brick, plaster, bedding, crockery, and similar materials.

43.	"Safe" - secure from threat of danger, harm or loss, including but not limited to the treat of Unsafe conditions as defined below.

44.	"Safety" - the condition of being Safe.

45.	"Sanitary" - free from or effective in preventing or checking an agent (such as filth or infection) injurious to health.

46.	"Supplied" - paid for, furnished, or provided, by or under the control of, the owner or operator.
 
47.	"System" - a group of devices or artificial objects or an organization forming a network especially for distributing something or serving a common purpose.

48.	"Unsafe" - not Safe, and includes but is not limited to the following applications:

(a)	when referring to a building or structure, one that is structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate  egress, that constitutes  a Fire Hazard, or that is otherwise dangerous to human life.

(b)	when referring to a use of a building or a structure, a use that constitutes a Hazard to  Safety,  health,  or  public  welfare  by reason of  Inadequate  Maintenance,  Dilapidation,  Obsolescence, Fire Hazard, Disaster, Damage, or Abandonment.

(c)	when referring to parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary, or other appendages or structural members that are supported by, attached to, or a part of a building, one that is in deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads that are specified in the Guidelines for  Rehabilitation  of Existing Structures as modified by Minn. R. Chapter.

49.	"Yard" - all ground, lawn, court, walk, driveway, or other open space constituting part of the same premises.

B.	If a term used in Section 4.03 Subd. 8 is not defined in Section 4.03, but is defined in an applicable Minnesota Building  Code,  that  term  shall have the meaning as defined in that Code.

C.	Terms that are not defined in Section 4.03 or (for Subd. 8) in an applicable Minnesota Building Code shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context in which they are used, as determined in the following manner:

1.	For undefined terms in Section 4.03 Subd. 8, Webster's Third New International	Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, copyright 1986, shall be considered  as providing ordinarily accepted meanings.

2.	For undefined terms in any other subdivision of  Section 4.03, the on-line	version of the Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary, available	at	www.m-w.com,	shall	be   considered	as	providing ordinarily accepted meanings.
 
Subd. 5.   Applicability.   A Building and its Premises used in whole or in part as a residence, or as an Accessory Structure thereof except rest homes, convalescent homes, nursing homes, Hotels, and Motels, must conform to the requirements of this code. Licensing and inspections of Rental Dwellings and their premises are governed by Section 4.04. Enforcement action, under the HMC, against Owner Occupied Dwellings is limited to violations of Paragraphs (B) through (F) of Subdivision 9. This limit does not apply to Rental Dwellings, rented portions of Dwellings, Common Areas, or areas that are under  the  exclusive control of a Rental Dwelling Owner, such as mechanical rooms, storage rooms, or vacant rental units. These Rental Dwellings, portions  of  Dwellings,  Common Areas, areas under the exclusive control of a Rental Dwelling Owner, and vacant Rental Dwelling Units, shall comply with this section in its entirety. Condominium and Cooperative Housing public areas shall be subject to the requirements applicable to Rental Dwellings if one or more Dwellings in such a building is a Rental Dwelling. Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, the HMC establishes minimum standards for erected Dwelling Units, Accessory Structures, and related Premises.

Subd. 6.	General Responsibilities of Owners.

A. The owner of a Structure is responsible for ensuring that it meets the applicable provisions of the HMC. The duty to comply with the HMC cannot be transferred to another person. A contract purporting to transfer the duty of compliance with the HMC to another person does not relieve the owner, operator or occupant of any duty imposed by the HMC.

Subd. 7.	Smoke and Carbon Monoxide Detection.

A.	Definitions.

1.	Those terms defined in Minn. Stat. § 299F.362, Subd. 1 shall also carry those meanings when they appear below in smoke detector regulations.

2.	Those terms defined in Minn. Stat. § 299F.50 shall also carry those meanings when they appear below in carbon monoxide detector regulations.

3.	For purposes of Subd. 7 only, the phrases "single-family home" and "single-family dwelling unit" mean a dwelling unit occupied by:

(a)	A person living alone, or any of the  following  groups  living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit and  sharing common living, sleeping, cooking, and eating facilities:
 
(1)	Any  number  of people  related  by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or other duly-authorized custodial relationship;

(2)	Three unrelated people; or

(3)	Two  unrelated  people  and  any  children  related  to  either  of them.

4.	When inspecting for compliance with Subd. 7, City inspectors shall presume	that any dwelling with only one dwelling unit is a single-family home and a single-family dwelling unit for purposes of Subd. 7, and will not inquire regarding the relationships between occupants, but this presumption may be rebutted by information volunteered by an owner or occupant.

B.	In Single-Family  Homes or Single-Family Dwellings.

1.	Single and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in the following  locations:

(a)	In each room used for sleeping purposes.

(b)	On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms.

(c)	In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements, but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on  the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level.

2.	Smoke detectors improperly located or mounted may be required to be relocated or remounted.

3.	The dwelling must have an approved and operational  carbon monoxide alarm  installed within ten feet of each room lawfully used for sleeping purposes.

C.	In Residential Structures Other Than Single-Family Homes.

1.	For every other dwelling unit within an apartment house or within a dwelling that is not a single-family home:
 
(a)	Each dwelling unit must be provided with a smoke detector meeting the requirements of the  State  Fire  Code,  Minn.  R. Ch. 7511.

(b)	Smoke detectors must be mounted in the location or locations set forth in section (b) (i) of this subdivision.

(c)	When actuated, the detector must  provide  an  alarm  in  the dwelling unit.

(d)	Where the occupant is not the owner of the dwelling unit, the owner is responsible for maintenance of  the  smoke  detectors. The occupant of a dwelling unit must inform the owner of the dwelling unit of a nonfunctioning smoke detector within 24 hours of discovering that the smoke detector in the dwelling unit is not functioning.

2.	Effective	August	1,   2009,	the	following	regulations	apply	to multifamily dwellings:

(a)	Subject to the exception in subpart 2 below, Every dwelling unit in a multifamily dwelling must satisfy at least one of these two standards:

(1)	It must have an approved and operational carbon monoxide alarm installed within ten feet of each room lawfully used for sleeping purposes; or

(2)	It must have approved and operational carbon monoxide alarms installed between 15 and 25 feet of carbon monoxide­ producing central fixtures and equipment, provided there is a centralized alarm system or other mechanism for responsible parties to hear the alarm at all times.

(b)	An owner of a multifamily  dwelling that contains minimal or no sources	of carbon monoxide may be exempted from the requirements of subpart 1 above, provided that such owner has certified to the commissioner of public safety that such multifamily dwelling poses no foreseeable carbon monoxide risk to the health and safety of the dwelling units.

 
Subd. 8.
Structures.
 
Conditions of Components or Systems of Existing Residential
 

A.  Scope.	Subd.  8  shall  govern  the  conditions   of  Components   and Systems of existing residential Structures.
 
B.	Certified Historic Structures.  In a Certified Historic Structure as defined in Minn. R. 1311.0301, the requirements of this subdivision are subject to modifications specifically set forth in Chapter 6 of the Guidelines for Rehabilitation	of  Existing  Buildings  as  modified  by   Minn.   R. Chapter 1311.

C.	Modifications. Where there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of Subd. 8, the City may accept  compliance alternatives or grant modifications for individual cases.  The City shall first find that a special individual reason makes the strict letter of Subd. 8 impractical, and that the compliance alternative or modification is in conformance with the intent and purpose of Subd. 8 and that such compliance alternative or modification does not lessen  health,  life and the intent of any fire-safety requirements or any degree of structural integrity.	The details of any action granting modification or the acceptance of a compliance alternative shall be recorded and entered in City files.



D.	Safe and Sanitary Condition Required. All buildings and structures and all parts thereof shall be Maintained in a Safe and Sanitary condition.

E.	Additional Requirements  Applicable  to  Electrical  Components  or Systems.

1.	The electrical service, lines, switches, outlets, fixtures, and fixture coverings, and supports in every building or structure  shall  be  in good repair.

2.	Broken, loose, frayed, inoperative, defective, or  missing portions of Electrical Components or Systems shall be repaired or replaced.

3.	All Unsafe conditions shall be Corrected.

F.	Additional Requirements  Applicable  to  Plumbing  Components  or Systems.

1.	Leaking drain or supply lines shall be repaired or replaced.

2.	All Unsafe conditions shall be Corrected.

3.	Any cross-connections or siphonage between  fixtures  shall  be Corrected.

G.	Additional Requirement Applicable to Mechanical Systems. Mechanical systems shall have any Unsafe conditions Corrected.
 
H.	Means of Egress. The Structure must meet those requirements of Sections 403.1 through 403.18 of GREB as modified by Minn. Rules Chapter 1311 that, by their wording or phrasing, apply to existing structures without regard to whether alteration, repair or other work is being performed on the Structure.

I.	Boiler/Central Heating Plant Equipment Rooms and Storage Rooms. In residential	occupancies containing more than two dwelling units (including apartment  buildings):

1.	Rooms containing boilers or central heating plants, and storage rooms with floor area exceeding 100 square feet in size, shall be separated from the rest of the building by not less than a one-hour occupancy  separation.

2.	When approved by a building official, existing wood lath and plaster in  good condition  or    inch (12.7 mm) gypsum wallboard  may  be accepted where one-hour occupancy separations are required.

(a)	In a Certified Historic Structure as defined in Minn. R. 1311.0301, where the existing wall and ceiling finish is wood lath and plaster, 1-hour fire-resistant construction is not required and need not be provided.

3.	A separation need not be provided for such rooms with equipment serving only one dwelling unit.

J.	Structural Safety.

1.	The minimum design loads for the structure shall be the loads applicable at the time the building was constructed, provided that no dangerous  condition is created.  Structural members that are found to be unsound or dangerous shall comply with  the applicable requirements	of the Minnesota State Building Code for new construction.

2.	A building, structure, or an individual structural member that has any of the conditions or defects described below, as determined by a licensed design professional, shall be replaced or strengthened when:

(a)	The stress in any materials, member, or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half the working stress or stresses allowed in the Minnesota State Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location.
 
(b)	Any portion of the building, structure, or member has  been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to   such  an  extent  that  its  structural  strength  or  stability  is materially less than it was before the catastrophe and is less than the  minimum requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location.

(c)	Any portion of the building, structure, or member has wracked, warped, buckled, or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes	than is required in the case of similar new construction.

(d)	The building or structure, or any portion of it, is likely to partially or completely collapse  because of (i) dilapidation,  deterioration, or decay; (ii) faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the deterioration, decay, or Inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause.

(e)	The exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base.

(f)	The building or structure,  exclusive  of  the  foundation,  shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls, or coverings.

(g)	Any building or structure, which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member, or portion less than 50 percent, or in any supporting part, member, or portion less than 66 percent of the  (i)  strength,  (ii)  fire-resisting  qualities  or  characteristics,  or
(iii) weather-resisting  qualities  or  characteristics  required  by  law
in the case of newly constructed building or like area, height, and occupancy in the same location.

K.	Weather  Protection.

1.	Every building shall be weather  protected to provide shelter for the occupants against the elements and to Exclude Dampness.

2.	The   roof  of   every   building   or   structure   shall   provide  weather protection for the building.
 
3.	All devices that were provided or are required to prevent ponding or flooding or to convey the roof water shall be capable of fulfilling that purpose.

4.	All weather-exposed  surfaces of every existing building or structure shall provide weather protection.

L.	Maintenance and Degradation.

1.	All systems, devices,  or  safeguards  that  were  required  by  a Minnesota Building Code under which the building was constructed shall be Maintained in conformance  with  the  requirements  of that Code.

2.	Failure to correct Degradation of any system, device or equipment that	a Minnesota Building Code required at the time of its construction is prohibited.

 
Subd. 9.
and Systems.
 
Conditions  of  Residential  Housing  Other  than  Components
 

A.  Scope.  Subd. 9 shall govern the conditions in residential housing other than components and systems of a Structure.

B.	Accumulation of Dirt, Filth, Rubbish, or Garbage.

1.	An  Owner,  Operator  or Occupant  of a Dwelling Unit may  not allow the accumulation of dirt, filth, Rubbish, or Garbage on the Premises occupied or controlled in a manner that could create a health hazard to the Dwelling Occupants or the general public.

C.	Rodent Harborages in Occupied Areas.

1.	Joint Responsibility. An Owner, Occupant or Operator may not allow formation of Rodent Harborages in or about the premises he or she occupies or controls.

2.	Occupant Responsibility for Extermination. The occupant of a Dwelling containing a single Dwelling Unit is responsible for the Extermination of rodents, insects or vermin on the premises. Every Occupant of a Dwelling unit in a Dwelling containing more than one Dwelling Unit is responsible for such Extermination whenever the Dwelling Unit is the only one Infested.

3.	Owner Responsibility for Extermination. Whenever Infestation is caused  by  the  failure  of  the  Owner  to  maintain  a  Dwelling  in  a
 
reasonable Rodent-Proof condition, Extermination  is also the responsibility of the Owner. Whenever Infestation exists in two or more of the Dwelling Units in any Dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any Dwelling containing two or more Dwelling Units, Extermination thereof is also the responsibility of the Owner.

4.	Standard: Where subparts b or c of this subdivision give rise to a duty to undertake Extermination, it is a violation of this code if the inspection does not demonstrate that such Extermination has been undertaken at least to a degree that is proportionate to the need for it.

D.	Nuisance. An Owner, Operator or Occupant of any Dwelling Unit may not allow the formation or presence of any Nuisance in or about the Premises.

E.	Yard Cover. Exposed areas surrounding (or within) a principal or Accessory Structure, including street boulevards which are not devoted to parking, drives, sidewalks, patios or other such uses, must be landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees, or other ornamented landscape material.	Such landscaping shall be maintained in good condition and free of noxious weeds. Weeds, including tall grass, may not exceed six inches in height.

F.	Snow, Ice, and Stormwater Management.

1.	Property Owners and Occupants shall be responsible to abate the snow and ice from the public sidewalk located on the City boulevard that abuts or fronts their property within 12 hours after such snow or ice has ceased to be deposited.

2.	In no case may storm water be channeled into the sanitary sewer system.	Storm water, ice, or snow may not be directed onto, or channeled across walkways or streets where it is likely to be a safety hazard.

G.	Minimum Temperature Standards for Rental Properties.

1.	When the temperature outside the structure is below 60 degrees Fahrenheit, it is the responsibility of the Owner that a minimum temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit be maintained in a Dwelling Unit at a point 3 feet above the floor and 2 feet from exterior walls in all habitable rooms, unless the Occupant of that unit chooses to maintain a lower temperature. The installation of one or  more portable space heaters shall not be used to achieve compliance with this section.
 
H.	Electrical Cords in Rental Properties. Temporary  w1nng,  extension cords or drop cords may not be used as permanent wiring.

I.	Discontinuance of Basic Services or Utilities in Rental Properties. An Owner, Operator, or Occupant may not permit any service or utility needed for a furnace to provide heat to be shut off from or discontinued for any occupied Dwelling or Dwelling Unit let or occupied, except for such temporary interruptions as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies.

J.	Occupancy  Standards.   The  maximum  permissible  occupancy  of  a rental Dwelling Unit is determined as follows:

1.	Minimum space. For the first two Occupants, 220 square feet of Habitable Room floor space and for every additional Occupant thereof, at least 100 square feet of Habitable Room floor space.

2.	Maximum occupancy. The total number of Occupants may  not exceed two times the number of Habitable Rooms, less Kitchen, in the Dwelling Unit.

SECTION 4.04.	RENTAL DWELLING LICENSING CODE.

Subd. 1.	Inspection and Licensing of Rental Dwellings.

A.	Rental dwellings license. No person may operate, let, or cause to be let, a rental Dwelling Unit without first having obtained an operating license or temporary permit to do so from the City as hereinafter provided.

1.	The owner of a rental Dwelling Unit must obtain a temporary permit if they have not received an operating license. There is no fee and no inspection is necessary for a temporary permit. A temporary permit issued prior to publication of Ordinance No. 107,  Fourth  Series, which expired in 2015 or is set to expire in 2016 or thereafter, will continue to be valid until said permit expires as stated on the permit or December 31, 2020, whichever is later. A  temporary  permit issued after publication of Ordinance No. 107, Fourth Series  will expire on December 31, 2020.

2.	An  operating  license  issued  prior  to  publication  of  Ordinance  No.
107, Fourth Series, which expired in 2015 or is set to expire in 2016 or thereafter, will continue to be valid until said license expires as stated on the license or December 31, 2020, whichever is later.

3.	A license renewal application shall be filed at least 60 days prior to license  expiration  date,  unless  the  City  has already  renewed  that
 
license  based  upon a scheduled  inspection conducted  pursuant  to paragraph C below.

B.	Permit and License Exemption.

1.	The owner of a rental Dwelling Unit is exempted from the permitting and licensing requirements of this section if the renter of the Dwelling Unit is related to the owner as a parent, child, sibling, grandparent, grandchild,	step-parent, step-child, step-grandparent, or step­ grandchild and the owner files an affidavit with the City stating that the renter is one of these relations. The affidavit required in this paragraph must also state the address of the dwelling.

2.	The owner must notify the City in writing within 30 days of this exemption being lost because the renter is not related to the owner as one of the above-referenced  relations.

C.	Rental Dwelling Inspections. No operating license may be issued or renewed unless the City determines, following an inspection conducted pursuant to this section, that the Rental Dwelling Unit and its premises conform	to the Housing Maintenance Code ("HMC"). As  more specifically provided below, the enforcement officer and his or her agents may cause inspections, follow-up inspections, and reinspections on Rental Dwelling Units on all classes of property within the City on a scheduled basis, and on Rental Dwelling Units or owner-occupied residential units on all classes of property when reason exists to believe that a violation of an applicable subdivision of the HMC exists, has been, or is being committed.

1.	The City enforcement officer and his or her agents are authorized to contact	owners, tenants and managers of rental dwellings  to schedule inspections of rental dwellings at reasonable times. They are also authorized to conduct those inspections once scheduled. These scheduled inspections will be conducted to determine whether the Unit and its premises conform to the HMC so as to inform the City's decision of whether to issue an operating  license.  The authority to schedule and to conduct these inspections is available even if the owner or owner's agent holds a temporary permit, and without regard to whether the owner or owner's agent has filed an application for an operating license.

2.	In addition, upon receipt of a  properly executed application for an operating license, the enforcement officer shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises to determine whether the structure is in compliance  with  the  HMC.   Inspections  performed  pursuant  to the
 
authority in subsection (a) or subsection (b) are hereinafter described as "Licensing Inspections."

3.	In addition, the City enforcement officer and his or her agents are authorized to conduct inspections on Rental Dwelling Units or owner­ occupied residential units on all classes of property when  reason exists to believe that a violation of an applicable subdivision of the HMC exists, has been, or is being committed. A complaint or complaints from a tenant of a Rental Dwelling Unit shall be an adequate basis for a reinspection of a Rental Dwelling Unit.

4.	To increase the awareness by owners of the likely timing  of requested inspections and to conserve public resources, the City enforcement officer may schedule and conduct inspections pursuant to subsection (a) according to the area of the City in which the unit is located, dividing the City into zones and endeavoring to perform inspections pursuant to subsection (a) in one zone before beginning them in a different zone.

5.	If a structure or Rental Dwelling Unit is not in compliance, one or more follow-up inspections or reinspections may be conducted  to verify that conditions and any corrections conform to the provisions of the HMC.

6.	When the basis for the inspection pursuant to this  section  is information observed or obtained during a Licensing Inspection, such reinspection	or follow-up inspection  shall  be  conducted  on  a scheduled  basis.

7.	Owners of Rental Dwelling Units shall report to the City the  full names, telephone numbers and addresses of the principal tenant of all Rental Dwelling Units under their ownership or control, and update such information as needed to ensure that it is accurate and current.

8.	When scheduling Licensing Inspections pursuant to this section, the City enforcement officer or his or her agents will seek the consent of the owner of the property (if not already received) to inspect those areas outside of Rental Dwelling Units that are not accessible to the general public (including any internal rooms that are inaccessible to the public, such as storage or mechanical rooms) and to unrented Dwelling Units, and the consent of the primary tenant of the Rental Dwelling Unit (if not already received) to inspect that Unit. If the property	owner demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City enforcement officer or his or her agents that one or more tenants have consented  in writing to the inspection of their  units, individual
 
contacts	by	the	City	with	those	tenants	may	be	deemed unnecessary.

9.	If the City is unsuccessful in securing consent for an inspection pursuant to this section, the City shall seek permission, from  a judicial officer through an administrative warrant, for its enforcement officer or his or her agents to conduct an inspection. Nothing in this Code shall limit or constrain the authority of the judicial officer to condition or limit the scope of the administrative warrant.

10.	The scope of a Licensing Inspection shall be limited to what is necessary to determine in accordance with this subdivision whether the Unit and its premises conform to the HMC. This shall not preclude the enforcement officer from relying upon observations from a Licensing Inspection in seeking one or more of the remedies provided in Section 4.04 Subd. 2.

11.	A Licensing Inspection must be scheduled during ordinary  business hours (or as otherwise arranged with the owner or tenant). Owners and  their agents, and tenants, may at their option request that Licensing  Inspections above take place only when they are present, so long as the  request identifies at least one date or time within the two  weeks  following  the  date  of the  request  when  the  requesting party agrees to be present.

12.	During inspections conducted pursuant to an administrative warrant, photographs and video recordings may not be taken of areas inside the building, absent further court permission or consent of the tenant (for areas inside the unit) or the landlord (for areas inside the building but outside a tenant's unit, and areas inside an unoccupied unit).

13.	Inspectors are not authorized to open containers, drawers,  or medicine cabinets, unless the containers, drawers, or medicine cabinets are opened with the consent of the tenant (for areas inside the unit) or the landlord (for areas inside the building but outside a tenant's unit, and areas inside an unoccupied unit). For purposes of this paragraph, a medicine cabinet is a covered cabinet  located above a sink in a dwelling unit's bathroom.

14.	Inspectors are authorized to open cabinets (other than medicine cabinets) or closets only when because of their location, those closets or cabinets, when unopened, appear to contain one or more water or waste water pipes, or fuses, or exposed  electrical  wiring, and it is reasonably necessary in order to inspect for the existence of one or more conditions that violates the HMC, or when the cabinets or closets are opened with the consent of the tenant (for areas inside
 
the unit) or the landlord (for areas inside the building but outside a tenant's unit, and areas inside an unoccupied unit).

15.	The information regarding the condition of the  unit or its occupants that inspectors retain after recording it in any inspection logs or forms shall be limited to descriptions of conditions constituting a violation of the HMC. Inspectors may record a list of conditions that the landlord or tenant is encouraged to repair or change but which do not constitute a violation of the HMC, if that list is not retained  by the inspector or City but is instead simply given to the landlord or tenant.

16.	The City may not upload to a GIS system any data  regarding the results of inspections conducted pursuant to this Section.

17.	The City will not share information regarding the condition of the unit or its occupants obtained through inspections conducted pursuant to this Section with any current member of the Red Wing Police Department or former member of that Department not serving as a housing inspector for the City, any sheriffs office, or any law­ enforcement agency of another jurisdiction, or enable their discovery by such person or agency, unless

(a)	such disclosure is required by law, or

(b)	such disclosure to such person or agency is needed to abate an active or inactive methamphetamine lab, mistreatment of one or more minors in violation of Minn. Stat. Section 609. 377 or .378, mistreatment of one or more vulnerable adults in  violation  of Minn. Stat. Section 609.23 through .233, or mistreatment of one or more animals in violation of Minn. Stat. Section 343. 21; or

(c)	if an owner or occupant of a unit has made an express or implied threat of bodily harm, causing the inspector to be concerned for his or her welfare, and the disclosure is made for the purpose of enabling one or more law enforcement officers to accompany the inspector	in the completion of the inspection or the full performance of his or her duties.

The City will not share information regarding the condition of the unit or its occupants obtained through inspections conducted pursuant to this Section with any current or former member of a non-law­ enforcement agency (not including the Red Wing City Government, Red Wing City Attorney, or a court), or enable their  discovery  by such person or agency, unless such disclosure is required by law.
 
D.	Inspection Not Required. Inspection for the issuance or renewal of a license may be waived by the City if the owner of a dwelling unit proves that within the previous 12 months the dwelling  unit  passed  an inspection required by the City, State, or Federal regulations that is at least as stringent as the inspection required under this section. The City has sole discretion to determine when an inspection program is at least as stringent as the inspection required under this section. Inspections conducted as the result of a complaint made to the City may not be waived under this provision.


E.	Application Contents. Owners of  one  or  more  Rental  Dwelling  Units who have not yet received a temporary permit or operating license are responsible for applying with the City for either a temporary permit or an operating license. Before any portion of a property is used as a Rental Dwelling Unit, the owner must first secure either a temporary permit or an operating license.  With either application, the owner must supply:

1.	Name,  address,  and  telephone  number  of  dwelling  owner,  owning partners if a partnership, corporate officers if a corporation;


2.	Name, address, and telephone number of designated resident agent, if any;

3.	Name, address, and telephone  number of vendor,  if the swelling  is being sold through a contract for deed;

4.	Legal address of the dwelling;

5.	Number of dwelling units within the dwelling;

6.	At least one emergency telephone number;

7.	The names, telephone  numbers and addresses  of principal tenants, if any, are required in Section 3 above.

F.	Following Acquisition. A new owner must register  a  newly  acquired rental residential property within ten days after acquiring it, by applying for either a temporary license or an operating license. The enforcement officer must be notified of any address change within ten days.

G.	Administrative Charge. Failure to obtain either a temporary permit as required by this section, or an operating license, will subject the owner of a dwelling unit to an administrative service charge up to $250.00.

H.	License and Inspection Fees. The license and inspection fees are charged at the time of the issuance of the  respective  license and are
 
due within 30 days of the date of the invoice; in the cases of newly constructed residential unlicensed Rental Dwelling  Units,  license  fees are due upon issuance of the certificate of occupancy; in the cases of licensing periods of less than two years, license fees will be pro-rated monthly. A license fee paid later than ten working days after the prescribed date is subject to an additional administrative service charge double the amount of the license. Once issued, a license is nontransferable and the licensee is not entitled to a refund of  any license fee upon revocation or suspension, or transfer of ownership. License and inspection fees shall be as established by the City Council.

I.	Resident Agent Required. An operating license may not be issued or renewed for a nonresident owner of rental dwelling units (one who does not reside in any of the following Minnesota or Wisconsin counties: Goodhue, Dakota, Rice, Wabasha, Hennepin, Washington, Ramsey, Olmsted, Pierce and St. Croix) unless such owner designates in writing to the enforcement officer the name, address, and telephone number of his resident agent (one who does reside in any of the following Minnesota or Wisconsin counties: Goodhue, Dakota, Rice, Wabasha, Hennepin, Washington, Ramsey, Olmsted, Pierce and St. Croix) who is responsible for maintenance and upkeep and who is legally constituted and empowered to receive service of notice of violation of the provisions of the City Code and to receive orders or process pursuant to law. The enforcement officer must be notified in writing of any change of resident agent or agent address or telephone number  change within  10 days. This	requirement may be waived if, in the enforcement officer's determination, the owner not living in one of the above specified counties is nonetheless sufficiently accessible for the purposes of the HMC.

J.	Participation in Crime-Free Multi-Housing   Program.  All  owners  of Rental Dwelling Units must participate in the Crime-Free Multi-Housing Program.	Participation is a condition precedent to the renewal of an operating license. For the purposes of this  section,  "participation" means documented attendance at a City-approved educational program that addresses crime prevention and housing issues.

K.	Posting of Permit or License. The current temporary permit or operating license of a  multiple dwelling unit, or a  legible copy thereof, must be conspicuously posted in the main entry way or a conspicuous exterior location of the respective multiple dwelling unit. In the case  of one­ family and two-family dwelling units, a legible copy of the current temporary permit or operating license must be given  to  the  renter of each unit.
 
L.	License Not Transferable. A temporary permit or operating  license is not transferable to another person or to another rental dwelling. Every person holding a temporary permit or operating license must give notice in writing to the enforcement officer within 72 hours after having legally transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of any permitted or licensed rental dwelling. The notice must include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such rental dwelling or dwellings. The person succeeding to the ownership  or control of the rental dwelling or dwellings must obtain  a  temporary permit or operating license in order to continue operating the rental dwelling or dwellings.

M.	Violation. Any person that maintains a rental dwelling  unit  without having either a valid temporary permit or a valid operating license, or permits new occupancy in violation of this subdivision, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is subject to a fine and imprisonment as prescribed by state law. In addition to, or in lieu of, charging a misdemeanor, the City may impose an administrative fee in an amount set in the City Fee Schedule. An administrative fee may be appealed pursuant to subdivision 3 of this section. Upon the failure to appeal an administrative fee within the period established in subdivision 3 of this section, the City may post the dwelling unit as illegal for habitation. Thereafter, the dwelling unit may not be occupied by anyone other than the primary homestead owner and that person's immediate family  until
(a) the administrative fee has been paid and (b) a rental license is obtained or the City is satisfied that the dwelling unit will not be used as a rental dwelling unit. Each day of each violation constitutes a separate offense.

Subd. 2.	Administration and Enforcement.

A. Administration and Enforcement. The enforcement officer and his or her agents administer and enforce the provisions of the HMC. They may enforce the standards of the HMC through the licensing and inspection programs set forth in Subd. 1 and, where appropriate, through the powers set forth below.

B.	Authority.  In the  absence  of a timely  appeal  under the  HMC or any other applicable provision of law, the enforcement officer is the  final authority in the determination of a violation under the HMC.

C.	License Suspension and Revocation. A temporary permit or operating license is subject to suspension or revocation by the City Council if the holder fails to operate or maintain permitted or licensed rental dwellings and units therein consistent with the provisions of the City Code and the laws of the State of Minnesota.   In the event that a permit or license is
 
suspended or revoked by the City Council, or expires without renewal, it is unlawful for the owner or his duly authorized agent to thereafter permit any new occupancy of vacant or thereafter vacated  Rental  Dwelling Units until such time as a valid license may be obtained or restored by the City Council.

D.	Compliance Order. Whenever an enforcement  officer  determines  that any rental dwelling unit, or the premises surrounding any of these, fails to meet the provisions of the HMC, the officer may issue a compliance order setting forth the violations of the code and ordering the owner, occupant, operator, or agent to correct such violations. The compliance order must:

1.	Be in writing;

2.	Describe the location and nature of the violations of the HMC;

3.	Establish a reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days, for  the correction of such violations.

(a)	When a violation of the HMC constitutes an imminent peril to life, health,  or  property,  an  immediate  and  exact  time  for   the correction of the violation constitutes a "reasonable time" for correction for purposes of this subpart. When this is the case, no stay of  proceedings in furtherance of action will be granted on appeal.

(b)	A reasonable time may be longer than 90 days if correction is not possible because of prevailing weather conditions;

4.	Include information regarding the owner's right to appeal the order and the procedure to be followed in filing such an appeal pursuant to section 4.04, subdivision 3;

5.	State that in the event the violations are not corrected within the time set in the compliance order, the license may be suspended or that the necessary work may be performed by the City at the expense of the owner  and that if the owner  does not pay for the expense, the cost of the work will be assessed against the property.

6.	Be served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant, as the case may require. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly  served upon such owner or agent, or upon any such occupant, if a copy thereof is:

(a)	Served personally, or
 
(b)	Deposited in the U.S. Post Office addressed to the owner at his last known address with postage prepaid, or

(c)	Upon failure to affect notice by personal service or by mail, posted at a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling which is affected by the notice.

E.	Emergency Cases. For purposes of subpart 0(3) above, situations which constitute an imminent peril to life, health, or property include, but are not limited to the following:

1.	Heating systems that are Unsafe as defined in Section  4.03 Subd. 4 due to: burned out or rusted out heat exchanges (fire box); burned out, or plugged flues;  not being vented; being connected with unsafe gas supplies; or being incapable of adequately heating the living space.

2.	Water heaters that are Unsafe as defined in Section 4.03 Subd. 4 due to: burned out or  rusted  out  heat  exchanges  (fire  box); burned out, rusted out, or plugged flues; lack of proper venting; being connected with unsafe gas supplies; or lack of temperature and pressure relief valves.

3.	Electrical systems that are Unsafe as defined in Section 4.03 Subd. 4 due to: dangerous overloading; damaged or deteriorated equipment; improperly tapped or spliced wiring; improper or overloaded fuses; expose uninsulated wires; distribution systems of extension cords or other temporary methods; ungrounded appliances in a hazardous condition.

4.	Plumbing systems that are Unsanitary due to:

(a)	leaking waste systems fixtures and traps;

(b)	lack of a water closet;

(c)	lack of washing and bathing facilities;

(d)	cross connection of pure water supply with fixtures or sewage lines.

5.	Structural systems, walls, chimneys, ceilings, roofs, foundations, and floor systems that are Unsafe as defined in Section  4.03 Subd. 4.
 
6.	Refuse, garbage, human waste, decaying vermin or other dead animals, animal waste, and other materials that are Unsanitary.

7.	Infestation of rodents, insects, and other vermin.

F.	Follow-up Inspection. At the end of the period allowed for the correction of a violation specified in the compliance  order, the enforcement officer shall make, or attempt to make, a follow-up inspection of the premises to determine whether corrective actions have been sufficient to bring the violation(s) into compliance.

1.	If the premises are in compliance with  the requirements of this section at the time of the follow-up inspection, a license may be issued in accordance with the requirements of section 4.04.

2.	If the enforcement officer determines that the violation(s) has not been corrected and the rental unit(s) has not been vacated, the enforcement officer shall suspend any existing license.  The enforcement officer also may issue a citation or may file a formal complaint summoning the responsible party into court. The citation shall reiterate the charge and the ordinance section(s) violated.	The City may also take action to correct violations under the provisions of Section 4.04, subdivision 2, paragraph G.

3.	After a suspension, the property owner may pay a reinspection fee  and request a reinspection and reinstatement of the license. If the  enforcement officer determines that the violation(s) has been  corrected  and  the  rental  unit(s)  and  building  comply  with HMC,  the  license  shall  be  reinstated.    Fees  for  a  reinspection may apply as outlined in the City Fee Schedule.

G.	Execution of Compliance Orders by Public  Authority.  Upon  the failure to comply with a compliance order within the time set therein, the rental unit(s) not being vacated, and no appeal having  been taken, the criminal penalty  established  hereunder  notwithstanding, the City Council may by resolution direct the enforcement officer to remedy the deficiency (deficiencies) cited  in the compliance  order. The cost of such remedy shall be a lien against the subject  real estate and may be levied and collected as a special assessment in the manner provided by Minnesota Statutes, Chapter  429.  Such action will not be taken,  however, without a good faith effort on the part of the City to provide the property owner with advance notice of its intention to proceed with repairs and assessment of the costs of repairs to taxes.
 
H.	No Warranty by City. By enacting and undertaking to enforce the HMC neither the City nor its Council, agents or employees warrant or guarantee the safety, fitness or suitability of any dwelling in the City. Owners or occupants should take whatever steps they deem appropriate to protect their interests, health, safety and welfare. A warning in substantially the foregoing language  shall be printed on the face of the license.

Subd. 3.	Appeals.

A. Right of Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a compliance order may appeal the compliance order to the City Council. Such appeals must be in writing, must specify the grounds for the appeal, must be accompanied by a filing fee in cash or cashier's check, and must be filed with the City Clerk within ten business days after service of the compliance order. If an appeal is not filed  within  the  timelines  and in the manner specified herein, the enforcement officer's decision shall be final. The filing fee is set by City Code Section 6.04 and council resolution pursuant to that section. The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless such a stay would cause imminent peril to life, health, property or public safety.

B. City Council Decision. Upon at least five business days' notice to the appellant of the time and  place for  hearing the  appeal, and within 30 days after said appeal is filed, the City Council or the individual or committee designated by the Council as the appeal body, must hold a hearing thereon, at which the applicant may appear and present evidence as to why the compliance order, or any portion thereof, should not be issued. If an individual or committee other than the City Council hears the appeal, it shall make a recommendation to the City Council. The City Council may reverse,  modify  or  affirm,  in whole or in part, the compliance order and shall order return of all or part of the filing fee if the appeal is upheld. The City Council or appeal committee or officer may postpone a meeting and hold hearing at a later date, not to  exceed 60 days after the appeal is filed, when it is necessary to do so.

Subd. 4. Penalties.  Any person who fails to comply with a compliance order within the time limits specified therein shall,  upon  conviction  thereof,  be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine or imprisonment as prescribed  by state law.  Each day of such failure to comply constitutes a separate offense.
 
SECTION 4.05.	UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND  EXCAVATION.
 
AND	HAZARDOUS	BUILDINGS,
 

Subd. 1.      Hazardous Building And Excavations Prohibited.  It is unlawful for the owner of premises to allow a hazardous building or hazardous excavation thereon. Each day such condition is permitted shall constitute a separate offense. For the purpose of this Section, the terms "owner," "hazardous building," and "hazardous excavation" shall have the meanings and usages ascribed to them in Minnesota Statutes, Sections 463.15 through 463.261 and as set forth in this Section. Provided, that this Section shall not be the exclusive remedy, but the City may proceed as the City deems appropriate under said statutory sections for abatement  and  other  remedies  therein  set  forth,  or   under provisions of the City Code. The filing of criminal charges hereunder or the conviction thereof shall not prohibit, void, or nullify any abatement proceedings or other remedies available to the City.

Subd. 2.	Unsafe Buildings And Structures.

A. Definition and Abatement. All structures, whether the same be buildings or otherwise, including hazardous buildings as defined in Minn.
Stat.§ 463.15, which are structurally unsafe or, when applicable, not provided with adequate ingress and egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,  unsanitary conditions, physical damage, obsolescence, fire hazard, or abandonment; as specified in the State Building Code, another provision of the City Code, or any other law or regulation; are, for the purpose of this Section, unsafe structures.  All such unsafe structures are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure specified herein.

B.	Notice to Owner. The Building Official or designee shall cause to be examined every structure or portion thereof which is dangerous or damaged and, if such is found to be an unsafe structure, the City shall give to the owner of such structure written notice stating the defects therein, and shall, in detail, indicate the improvements or repairs to be made and may state that if repairs and improvements are  impractical and not economically  feasible so as to ultimately provide for the public safety and health, that such structure  shall  be  removed.  This  notice may require the owner or person in charge of the structure or premises, within	48 hours, to commence either the required repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the structure or portions thereof, and all such work shall be completed within a reasonable period of time  as  so  stipulated  in the  notice by the  City.   Such  notice  may
 
require the structure, or portion thereof, to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the City.

Proper service of such notice shall be by personal service  upon  the owner of record or by registered  or  certified  mail,  return  receipt requested. The designated period within which said owner is required to comply with the order of the City shall begin as of the date of delivery shown upon the return receipt, or the affidavit of service.  If, in the event of an emergency situation the City determines that to protect the public interests of health and safety, precautions and/or repairs or removal must be conducted immediately, the City shall order the immediate cordoning off of any or all areas surrounding such structure causing the emergency condition and shall notify the owner of record forthwith and order repairs to be commenced immediately. In the event notice cannot be made effective in sufficient time for the owner to abate the condition or properly cordon off the area, the Building Official or designee shall order any necessary precautions to protect the public and notice of such actions shall be made on the owner of record forthwith. It is unlawful for any person owning or controlling a structure within the City to deny access to the City for purposes of this Section nor shall the City be liable  for trespass but the right of entry for the City shall be presumed to exist; and if need be, the Building Official or designee is authorized to obtain a search warrant or other court order mandating entry for the purposes of this Section.

C.	Hearing Procedure. Within twenty (20) days from the date of service, any person upon whom the order is served may request a hearing by the	City Council in compliance with such provisions relating to administrative appeals contained in the City Code and by making such request in writing to the Building Official or designee.  If such a hearing is requested, the execution of the order prepared by the City shall be stayed and the time period as provided in the notice shall not commence until such hearing has taken place and the order of the Council given. (The requirements of this Subdivision, however, shall not infringe upon the rights of the City in the event of an emergency as described in Paragraph B of this Subdivision). If an emergency situation exists as referenced in Paragraph B of this Subdivision, the hearing shall be held forthwith  and  demand  for  such  hearing  must be made within  fourteen
(14) days by the person upon whom notice is served following receipt of
such notice.

D.	Posting of Signs. After the hearing or expiration of the time to request a hearing, if requested by the owner, or in the event of an emergency situation, the City shall cause to be posted at each entrance to said structure, if any, and at other points the City deems appropriate, a notice
 
to  read:  DO  NOT  ENTER,  UNSAFE  TO  OCCUPY,  CITY  OF  RED
WING. Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs, demolition, or removal are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the Building Official or designee and no person shall enter the structure except for the purpose of making the required repairs or demolishing the structure.

E.	Right to Demolish. In case the owner shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove said building or structure or portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the structure prosecuted for violation of the provisions of this Section, or order the Building Official or designee to proceed with the work specified in such notice or the demolition of such structure, or both.

F.	Costs. The Building Official or designee shall keep an accurate account of the expenses incurred in carrying out the order and of all other expenses theretofore incurred in connection therewith. Such costs shall be charged  and assessed  to the owner of the premises involved as a special assessment and shall be collected in the manner ordered by the Council provided for by special assessments.

G.	Unlawful Act. It is unlawful for the owner of any property to suffer or permit an unsafe building as defined herein to remain thereon.  Each day such condition  is suffered or permitted shall constitute a separate offense.	In cases of multiple or corporate ownership, any person or persons exercising ownership control, either individually or with others, who refuses to order the action required herein shall be deemed to be the owner causing the violation and  subject  to  prosecution  and conviction hereunder.

H.	Secure Vacated Buildings. The owner of any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit which is vacant for a period of six days or more, must make same safe and secure so that it is not hazardous to the health, safety, or welfare of the public and does not constitute a public  nuisance. Any vacant dwelling open at doors or windows, if unguarded, shall be deemed a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a public nuisance within the meaning of this ordinance, and may be secured by the City under the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Section 463.251.

I.	Standards for Boarded Openings. All boarding over windows, doors or other openings shall be covered with W' or thicker COX plywood that is primed and painted to a light or matching color. The board(s) shall be the minimum number of pieces needed to cover the opening, well cut to fit and placed so there are no protruding edges. The board(s) shall be mounted in such a manner or sealed at edges so that rainwater is shed
 
away from interior structural components. Fasteners  shall  be galvanized or anodized finish and shall be placed at board corners and then no further than 12 inches apart around the board perimeter.

Subd. 3.  Hazardous  Excavations.  If  an  excavation   for   building purposes is left open for more than two months without proceeding with  the erection of a building thereon, whether or not completed, or if any excavation or basement is not filled to grade or otherwise protected after a building is destroyed, demolished, or removed, the City Council may order such excavation to be filled or protected or in the alternative that erection of a building must begin forthwith if the excavation is for building purposes. The order shall be served upon the owner by personal service or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. If the owner of the land fails to comply with the order within 15 days after the order is served, the City Council shall order the excavation to be filled to grade or protected. The Building Official or designee shall keep an accurate account of the expenses incurred in carrying out the orders and of all other expenses theretofore incurred in connection therewith. Such costs shall be charged  and assessed to the owner of the premises involved as a special assessment and shall be collected in the manner ordered by the Council provided for by special assessments.

Subd. 4.   Unfit for  Human  Habitation.    Under the  Local  Public Health Act, the Goodhue County Community Health Board (or its agent) has the responsibility to order an owner or occupant of a property to remove or abate a threat to the public health which is found on the property, such as a public health nuisance (i.e., a garbage house), source of filth, or cause of sickness.   Minn Stat.
§§ 145A.01-. 17.

SECTION 4.06.	MANUFACTURED  HOME PARKS.

Subd. 1.  Definitions.  The following terms, as used in this Section, shall have the meanings stated:

A.	"Closure Statement" - a statement prepared by the park owner clearly stating that the park is closing, addressing the availability, location, and potential costs of adequate replacement housing within a 25 mile radius of the park that  is closing and the probable relocation costs of the manufactured homes located in the park.

B.	"Displaced Resident" - a resident of an owner-occupied manufactured home who rents a lot in a manufactured home park, including the members of the resident's household, as of the date the park	owner submits a closure statement to the Planning Commission.

C.	"Lot" - an area within a manufactured home park, designed or used for the accommodation of a manufactured home.
 
D.	"Manufactured Home" - a structure transportable in  one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in it, and which complies with the manufactured home building code.

E.	"Manufactured Home Park" - any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which two or more occupied manufactured homes are located, either free of charge or for compensation, and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of the manufactured home park, but do not include facilities which are open only during three or fewer seasons of the year.

F.	"Manufactured Home Lot" - a parcel of land within a manufactured home park for the placement of a manufactured home and the exclusive use of its occupants.

G.	"Manufactured Home Stand" - that part of a manufactured home lot which has been reserved and designed for the placement of a manufactured home and accessory structures.

H.	"Accessory Service Building" - any structure erected or used for residential purposes ancillary to the manufactured home.

I.	"Permit" - a written permit issued by the City allowing the construction, alteration and extension of a manufactured home park pursuant to provisions of this Section.

J.	"Non-Conforming Uses" - a use lawfully in existence when it was established and is not conforming in accordance with the current regulations. Such use is not non-conforming if it could be authorized under a Special Use Permit.

K.	"Park Owner" - the owner of a manufactured home park and any person	acting on behalf of the owner in the operation  or management of a manufactured home park.

L.	"Person" - any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, incorporated and unincorporated association, or any other legal or commercial entity.

Subd. 2.	Other Provisions.	In the construction,  alteration or extension
 
of  a  manufactured  home  park  all  prov1s1ons  of  this  Section  and  any  other applicable provisions of the City Code shall be met.

Subd. 3.	Unlawful Acts.  It is unlawful for any person to:

A. Park any manufactured home on any street, highway or other public place.

B.	Occupy any manufactured home located outside of a State licensed manufactured home park where a licensed manufactured home park is reasonably available in the general area, unless adequate sanitary and water facilities are provided for occupants' use 24 hours each day. This section shall not apply to manufactured home parks under Minnesota Statutes, Section 327.23, Subd. 2.

C.	A special permit may be issued for the temporary use of a manufactured home as an office for a period not to exceed 180 days in connection with legal construction of a continuing nature  in  accordance  with  a  valid building permit on that site. Not more than two such permits shall be issued for the same location or site, except upon special permission of the City Clerk upon a showing of good cause.

D.	Construct, alter or extend any manufactured home park without a permit for the proposed activity issued by the Council.

E.	Operate or allow to exist any area for the use  of  dependent manufactured homes, transient manufactured homes, travel trailers or campers in conjunction with a manufactured home park.

F.	Use any part of any manufactured home park for non-residential purposes, except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well	being of manufactured home park residents and for the management and maintenance of the manufactured home park.

G.	Sell, or offer for sale, manufactured homes in any manufactured home park without following the requirements of Minnesota Statutes, Sections 327.32, 327C.07, and all other applicable laws.

H.	This Subdivision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of a manufactured home as an accessory building as specified in the Zoning Chapter as an interim conditional use.

Subd. 4.	Manufactured Home Park Requirements.

A. Caretaker. A responsible attendant or caretaker shall be in charge of every  manufactured   home  park  at  all  times  and  the  duty  of  said
 
attendant or caretaker shall be to maintain the manufactured home park, its facilities, and equipment in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition. The caretaker or attendant shall be the owner or operator of the manufactured home park or the camping  area,  or  that  person's appointed representative. In any manufactured home park containing more than 50 lots, the attendant, caretaker, or other responsible park employee shall be readily available at all times in case of emergency.

B.	Conditions. Condition of soil, ground water level, drainage  and topography shall not create hazards to the property or  the  health  or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable or sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion  shall  be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards.

C.	Site Planning. Site planning should adapt to individual site conditions, reflect advances in site planning techniques, and be adopted  to  the trends in design of the manufactured home itself. An informal park type of site planning which conforms to existing terrain, existing trees, shrubs and rock formations is preferred and other natural site features shall be preserved to the extent practical. Favorable views or outlooks should be emphasized by the plan. Service facilities throughout the manufactured home park such as recreation buildings, laundry facilities, drying yards, storage facilities and recreation areas shall be arranged on a functional basis to provide convenient access from all manufactured home stands.

D.	Design.	The	site,	including	manufactured	home   stands,	patios, structures	and all site improvements shall be harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, the shape of the plot and the shape, size and position of structures and common facilities and with full regard to use, appearance and livability. Special attention should be given	to new manufactured home designs and the common appurtenances that are available.

E.	Ground Area. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured home park shall be protected with a vegetable growth, or covered with stone screenings, or paved, or covered with other solid material that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust.  The manufactured home site shall be sodded.

F.	Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of every manufactured home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner. No wastewater from manufactured homes shall be deposited on the surface of the ground.
 
G.	Number. There shall be a maximum of five manufactured homes per gross acre of manufactured home park area. An accessory structure such as an awning, cabana, storage cabinet, carport,  windbreak,  or porch which has a floor area exceeding 25 square feet, and has a top or roof, shall, for purposes of all separation requirements or covered land area be considered to be part of the manufactured home.

H.	Park Size. There shall be a minimum area requirement of 20 acres with a minimum width of 200 feet for any manufactured home  park and a maximum	of 55 acres for any manufactured home park. No manufactured home park shall be contiguous to or abutting another manufactured home park.

I.	Recreation. In all manufactured home  parks  accommodating  or designed to accommodate 25 or more manufactured homes there shall be constructed and maintained one or more recreation areas which shall be easily accessible to all park residents. The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum standard of 500 square feet for each manufactured home. Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and should when the topography permits, be centrally located, shall  provide suitable recreation equipment  and shall be kept in good repair. Laundry or service buildings are not considered part of recreation facilities unless specifically equipped for recreation purposes. Facilities in recreation areas shall be provided for both active and passive functions.

J.	Boundary Lines. All manufactured homes shall be located at least 30 feet from any manufactured home park boundary line, including ones abutting upon a public street or highway.

K.	Distance. There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet between an individual	manufactured home and adjoining pavement of a manufactured home park street, or common parking area or other common areas.

L.	Landscape. All manufactured home parks shall be provided with landscape screening such as fences or natural growth along any property boundary line sufficient to permit complete privacy for the residents of the manufactured home park and to protect interests of adjacent landowners.

M.	Separation. Manufactured homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least fifteen feet provided that manufactured homes  placed end-to-end may have a clearance of ten feet where opposing rear walls are staggered.  (This  requirement may  be  waived   or   relaxed   by  the   Council  to   permit  grouping  of
 
manufactured homes into courts or other appropriate arrangements.)

N.	Accessory  Structure.   Any  accessory  structure which  has a horizontal area exceeding 25 square feet, is attached to a manufactured home or located within ten feet of its window, and has a top or roof that is higher than the nearest window shall, for purposes  of  all  separation  and covered	area requirements, be considered to be  part  of  the manufactured home.

0. Sanitary Sewers. All sewage and other water carried wastes shall be discharged into a municipal sewage system whenever available. When a municipal sewage system is not available, a sewage disposal system acceptable to the state commissioner of health shall be provided. Each manufactured home stand shall be treated as a separate service in calculating sanitary sewer connection and service charges.

P.	Access. Access to manufactured home parks  shall  be  designed  to minimize congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. The entrance road connecting the  manufactured  home  park streets with  a public street  or  road  shall have  a minimum  road  pavement  width  of  40 feet.  Where  only  one access  road is provided  an  emergency  access  shall  be  provided  to permit ingress or egress of emergency fire and ambulance equipment in the event the main access is blocked. No parking shall be permitted on the  manufactured  home park entrance street for a distance of  100 feet from its point of intersection with the public street.

Q.	Streets. Internal streets shall be hard surface of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic and shall meet the following minimum requirements:

1.	All streets shall have a minimum width of 30 feet  back to back on curb.

2.	Dead end streets shall  have cul-de-sac having an outside diameter of at least 75 feet. Such streets shall not exceed 150 feet in length not including the turn-around.

3.	All manufactured home parks shall be furnished with lighting units so placed and equipped with  luminaries  placed  at  such   mounting heights as will provide the following average levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night: (a) All parts of the  manufactured home park street systems: 0.2 foot-candle; (b) Service  buildings and other general use areas: 0.4 foot-candle; (c) Potentially  hazardous  locations,  such  as  major  street  intersections
 
and steps or stepped  ramps:	0.6 foot-candle;  (d)  Interior walkway areas:  0.1 foot-candle.

4.	All streets shall be provided with a paved concrete or bituminous surface of sufficient quality to meet the standards of the Minnesota Highway Department Specifications for a seven ton axle load. All streets shall be equipped with concrete curb and gutter specification B-618 of the Minnesota Highway Department Standards. All streets, walks, water lines, sewer mains, recreation areas and other general use facilities within the manufactured home park shall remain the property of the manufactured home park owner for the purposes of cleaning, snow removal, repair, replacement and maintenance.

5.	All streets established in any manufactured  home  park  shall  be subject to the applicable traffic and safety statutes and ordinances of any governmental body having jurisdiction and shall be subject to the control  of the  police enforcement  power  of the  State,  County  and City.

R.	Parking. Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all manufactured home parks for the use of park occupants and guests and  required vehicle parking spaces shall be so located as to provide convenient access to the manufactured home. Such areas shall be furnished at the rate of at least two car spaces for each manufactured home lot. Additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided at the office, laundry building, recreation building, and other general use sites within the manufactured home park.

S.	Storage. All boats, boat trailers, hauling trailers, snowmobiles and other equipment not stored within the manufactured homes or the utility enclosure that may have been provided shall be stored in a separate place provided by the manufactured home park owner and not upon the lots occupied by manufactured homes or upon the streets within the manufactured home park.

T.	Walks. A walk system shall be  provided  and  maintained  between locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated and to community use areas.  In addition a walkway shall be provided from the vehicle parking place to each manufactured home stand.

U.	Manufactured Home Stands and Lots.

1.	All manufactured homes must comply with the requirements of the Manufactured Home Building Code.

2.	At least one shade tree (minimum of a 6' whip) shall be placed and
 
maintained near each manufactured home stand.

3.	Enclosed storage lockers for garden tools and other such equipment may be provided by either the manufactured home  owner  or  the State licensee adjacent to the manufactured home or at such other place in the manufactured home park as to be convenient to the unit for which it is provided. These lockers shall be no larger than 63 square feet, and shall be compatible with the surroundings and adjacent structures.

4.	Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces,  wood-burning  stoves, and incinerators shall be so located, constructed,  maintained  and used as to minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisances both on the property on which used and on neighboring property. Incinerators shall be of a type acceptable to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. No open fire shall be permitted except in facilities provided. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be  used  or material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors. Nothing in this Subdivision is to be construed to permit open burning.

5.	A patio shall  be  constructed  on  the  ground  beside  each manufactured home stand.  This  patio  shall  be  no  less than  200 square feet in area and constructed of concrete with 4" minimum thickness or an alternative material approved by the Building Official.

V.	Structural  Requirements.

1.	All manufactured homes shall meet the  construction,  plumbing, electrical  and  mechanical  standards  of the  State  of  Minnesota  and the City.

2.	No manufactured home may be inhabited by a greater number of occupants than that for which it was designed.

3.	Skirting shall be used on all manufactured homes and shall be compatible with the manufactured home design.

4.	Each manufactured home owner shall provide each manufactured home with a fire marshal approved extinguisher, kept in constant usable condition.

W.	Utilities.

1.	All utilities shall be provided through underground service, including water, electricity, telephone, television  cable,  and  fuel  for  heating. No outside tanks or overhead wiring shall be permitted.
 
2.	Water facilities and sewage collection facilities shall be installed and maintained by the manufactured home park owner and shall be constructed in accordance with the laws of the State of Minnesota, the	recommendation of the State Health Department and the requirements of the City Code. For purposes  of water and sewer service, each manufactured home stand shall be regarded as a separate unit.

3.	Fire hydrants meeting standards of the City shall be provided and shall be located within 500 feet of any manufactured home, service building, or other structure in the manufactured home park. Water mains within the manufactured home park shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate water for firefighting purposes.

X.	Responsibilities of the Manufactured Home Park Management.

1.	The State licensee of a manufactured home park shall operate the manufactured home park in compliance with this Section and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the manufactured  home park and its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.

2.	The manufactured home park  management  shall  notify manufactured home park occupants of all applicable  provisions  of this Section and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this Section.

3.	The manufactured home park management shall supervise the placement of each manufactured home on its manufactured home stand which includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections.

4.	The manufactured home park management shall maintain a register containing the names of all park occupants. Such register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting the  manufactured home park.

5.	The manufactured home park management shall notify Goodhue County Public Health immediately of any  suspected  communicable or contagious disease within the manufactured home park.

Y.	Responsibilities of Manufactured Home Park Occupants.

1.	The manufactured home park occupant shall comply with  all applicable  requirements  of  the  City  Code  and  shall  maintain  their
 
manufactured  home  lot, its facilities  and  equipment  in good  repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.

2.	The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of their manufactured home on its manufactured home stand and proper installation	of all utility connections  in  accordance  with  the instructions of the park management.

3.	No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other pet animal shall permit it to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the limits of any manufactured home lot.

Z.	Shelters. In the case of a manufactured home park with less than ten manufactured homes, each manufactured home park must have a plan for the sheltering or the safe evacuation to a safe place of shelter of the residents of the manufactured home park in times of severe weather conditions, such as tornadoes, high winds, and floods. The shelter or evacuation plan shall be developed with the assistance and approval of the	City Council and shall be posted at conspicuous locations throughout the manufactured  home park. The park owner shall provide each resident with a copy of the approved shelter or evacuation plan, as provided by Minnesota Statutes, Section 327C.01, Subd. 1c.

A manufactured home park with ten or more manufactured homes, licensed prior to March 1, 1988, shall provide a safe place of shelter for residents or a plan for the evacuation of residents to a safe place of shelter within a reasonable distance of the manufactured home park for use by residents in times of severe  weather  including tornadoes  and high winds. The park owner shall provide each resident with a copy of the approved shelter or evacuation plan, as provided by Minnesota Statutes, Section 327C.01, Subd. 1c.

A manufactured home park with ten or more manufactured homes, receiving an initial license after March 1, 1988, must provide the type of shelter required by Minnesota Statutes, Section 327.205, except that for manufactured	home parks established as temporary, emergency housing in a disaster area declared by the President of  the  United States or the Governor, an approved evacuation plan may be provided in lieu of a shelter for a period not exceeding 18 months.

Subd. 5.	Permits For Construction.

A. All applicants for permits to construct, alter, or extend manufactured home	parks shall hold a pre-application conference with the City Engineer and the City Planner to review the proposed project and applicable City Code provisions.
 
B.	All  applications  for  permits shall  be made to the  City  Clerk  and  shall contain the following:

1.	Name and address of the applicant.

2.	Legal relationship of the applicant to the manufactured home park.

3.	Location and legal description of the manufactured home park.

4.	Five copies of complete engineering plans and specifications of the manufactured home park approved by a registered professional engineer, architect, or by a recognized designing firm showing:

(a)	The area and dimensions of the tract of land.

(b)	The number, location and size of all manufactured home lots.

(c)	The location and width of roadways and walkways.

(d)	The	location   of   service	buildings	and   any   other	proposed structures and park and recreation areas.

(e)	Plans  and  specifications  of  the  water  supply  and  refuse  and sewage collection systems.

(f)	Plans  and  specifications  of  all  buildings  constructed  or  to  be constructed within the manufactured home park.

(g)	The location and details of lighting and electrical systems.

(h)	Complete landscaping and drainage plans.

(i)	A map  of the general area and property  adjacent  to  the manufactured home park at a scale of 1" to 50'. Such map shall show:

(1)	The park name, date, north point and scale.

(2)	Area of the proposed park to the nearest tenth of an acre.

(3)	Location of all area subject to inundation or storm water overflow and the location, width, and direction of all water causes and existing drainage channels and structures.

(4)	Contour lines of the entire property, indicating topography showing intervals not greater than five feet.
 
(5)	Location,   names  and   existing  width   of  all  adjoining   and continuous highways, streets and ways.

(6)	Proposed  plan  for  drainage,  showing  direction  of  flow  and improvements.

(7)	Wooded areas showing location and size of existing trees.

(8)	Number  and  dimension  of  all  park spaces  and  an enlarged detail of each typical space.

(9)	Location,	width,	direction	of	traffic	flow	and	type	of construction of all roadways within the proposed park.

(10)	Location of shelters,  laundry facilities,  drying yards,  garbage disposal areas, storage areas and service yards.

(11)	Location of all pedestrian walkways.

5.	Location, size, height and design of a site sign.

C.	All applications for permits shall be accompanied by a payment of a fee to be established by ordinance.

D.	All applications  for  permits shall be filed with the City Clerk who shall refer it to the Planning Commission. It shall study and investigate such application, hold such conferences and public hearings as may be necessary  to  ascertain the  suitability  of the  location and the  plan.  It shall, within 60 days after its first meeting following receipt of the application,	make recommendations to the Council approving or disapproving the application in whole or in part, together with detailed comments thereon.

E.	The Council shall review the recommendations of the Planning Commission and shall grant or deny the permit and may  attach whatever conditions it shall deem necessary to the granting of such permit.

Subd. 6.	Inspections.

A. The Building Official or other City officials are hereby authorized to make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this Section and regulations issued hereunder and may, with consent, pursuant to a warrant, or as otherwise provided by the  law, enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for that purpose.
 
Subd. 7.	Notices, Hearing And Orders.

A. Whenever upon inspection or complaint it is found that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has  been a violation of any provision of this Section or other applicable laws, written notice of such alleged violation shall be given to the person to whom the permit was issued.	Such notice shall include a statement of the reasons for its issuance, contain a description of necessary remedial action, allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires, be served upon the owner or the owner's agent by sending a copy thereof to their last known address, or by personal or substituted service. At the end of such period, such manufactured home park shall be inspected and, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, the  permit shall be suspended with written notice of such suspension as provided herein.	Upon receipt of notice of such suspension, such person shall cease operation of such manufactured home park except as provided herein.

B.	Any person affected by any notice issued in connection with the enforcement  of this  Section  or other  applicable  law  may  request  and shall be granted  a  hearing  on  the  matter  before the  Council.  Such person shall file with the City Clerk  a written petition requesting  such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten  days  after the  notice was  served.   The filing  of the  request for  a hearing shall operate as  a  stay  of the  notice  and  of the  suspension except in the case of an order issued under this Subdivision. When no petition for such hearing shall have been filed within ten days following the day on which notice of suspension was served, such permit shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked at the expiration of such ten-day period.

C.	Upon receipt of such petition, a time and place for such hearing shall be set and the petitioner shall be given  written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified  or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than fourteen days after the day on which the petition was filed unless continued for good cause upon request of petitioner.

D.	After such hearing, the Council shall make findings  as to  compliance with the provisions of this Section and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice which shall be served. Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a notice, the permit of the manufactured home park affected by the order shall be revoked.
 
E.	A summary of the proceedings at such a hearing, including the findings and decision  of the Council together with a copy of every notice and order related thereto shall be entered as a matter of public record but a transcript of the proceedings need not be taken. Any person aggrieved by the decision may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this State.

F.	Whenever it  is  found  that  an  emergency  exists  which  requires immediate action to protect the public health, the Building Official shall notify Goodhue County Public Health.

Subd. 8.   Non-Conforming  Uses.    Any  lawful  non-conforming  use  of land may be continued, except that any non-conforming use or buildings may not be: (1) changed to another non-conforming use; (2) re-established after discontinuance for one year if it involves a substantial building; or after discontinuance for any period in other cases; (3) extended; or, (4) rebuilt after damage exceeding 50 percent of its value.

Subd. 9.	Manufactured Home Park Closure.

A. Notice of Closing. If a manufactured home park is to be  closed, converted in whole or in part to another use or terminated as a use of the property, the park owner shall, at least nine (9) months prior to the closure, conversion to another use or termination of use, provide a copy of a  closure statement to the State Commissioner of Health and the Minnesota Housing Finance Agency, the Planning Commission and a resident of each manufactured home in the park where the use is being converted.  The closure statement  must include the following  language in a font no smaller than 14 point: "YOU MAY BE ENTITLED TO COMPENSATION FROM THE MINNESOTA MANUFACTURED HOME RELOCATION TRUST FUND ADMINISTERED BY THE MINNESOTA HOUSING FINANCE AGENCY."

B.	Notice of Public Hearing: Proposed Change in Land  Use.  If  the planned conversion or cessation of operation requires a variance or zoning change, the City must mail a notice at least ten days before the hearing to a resident of each manufactured home in the manufactured home park stating the time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. The park owner shall provide the City with a list of the names and addresses of at least one resident of each manufactured home in the manufactured home park at the time application is made for a variance or zoning change.

C.	Notice of Public Hearing; Closure. The Planning Commission  shall submit the closure statement to the City Council with any comments and/or recommendations the Commission deems appropriate.   The City
 
Council shall schedule a public hearing. The City shall mail a notice at least ten days prior to the public hearing to a resident of each manufactured home in the manufactured home park stating the time, place and purpose of the hearing. The park owner shall provide the City with a list of the names and addresses of at least one resident of each manufactured home in the manufactured home park at the time the closure statement is submitted to the Planning Commission.

D.	Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be held before the City Council for the purpose of reviewing the closure statement and evaluating any impact that the manufactured home park closing or conversion of the manufactured home park to another use may have on the displaced residents and the park owner. At the time of, and in the notice for, the public hearing, displaced residents must be informed that they may be eligible for payments from the Minnesota manufactured home relocation trust fund under Minnesota Statutes, Section 462A.35 as compensation for reasonable relocation costs under Minnesota  Statutes, Section 327C.095, Subd. 13, paragraphs (a) and (e).

At the public hearing, the City Council shall appoint a neutral third party, to be  agreed upon by both the manufactured home park owner and manufactured home owners, whose hourly costs  must  be  reasonable and paid from the Minnesota manufactured home relocation trust fund. The neutral third party shall act as a paymaster and arbitrator, with decision-making authority to resolve any questions or disputes regarding any	contributions or disbursements to and from the Minnesota manufactured home relocation trust fund by either the  manufactured home park owner or the manufactured homeowners. If the  parties cannot agree on a neutral third party, the City Council will make a determination.

E.	Vacation Requirements.  A resident may not be required to vacate until sixty (60) days after the conclusion of the public hearing required under
(D) of this  subdivision.    If a  lot  is available  in another  section  of the
manufactured home park that will continue to be operated as a manufactured home park, the park owner must allow the resident to relocate the home to that lot unless the home, because of its size or local ordinance, is not compatible with that lot.

F.	Manufactured Home Park Conversions. If the planned cessation of operation is for the purpose of converting the part of the manufactured home park occupied by the resident to a common interest community pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 5158, the requirements in Minnesota Statutes, Section 327C.095, Subd. 5, apply.

G.	Relocation Payments to Displaced Residents.
 
Payments to displaced residents by the manufactured home park owners or its purchaser are governed by Minnesota Statutes, Section 327C.095.

H.	Violation.

1.	Violation of this Subdivision is a misdemeanor.

2.	Any provisions of this subdivision  may be enforced  by injunction or other appropriate civil remedy.

3.	No Building Permit, Re-Zoning, platting, conditional use permit, or planned development application shall be approved for the proposed re-use of a park until all provisions of this subdivision have been met by the owner of the park.

Subd. 10. Administration. This  Section  shall  be  administered  and enforced by the Building Official and other City officials as may  be designated. The Building Official may institute in the name of the City any appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as provided by law.

Subd. 11.	Minnesota Department Of Health.  The requirements contained in this ordinance are intended to be comparable to the Minnesota Department of Health Standards and are intended to meet the minimum requirements set forth by the Minnesota Department of Health.  Whenever the Minnesota Department of Health amends regulations or adopts new regulations
setting higher standards than the ones established in this ordinance, the standards set by the Minnesota Department of Health shall govern and will be considered in the enforcement procedure as part of this ordinance.

Subd. 12.	Compliance With Other Laws, Ordinances, And Regulations. Any manufactured home park in the City limits must be in compliance with all other federal, state, and local laws, ordinances and regulations as they pertain to such facility.

SECTION 4.07. VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR. Upon conviction  of violating this  Chapter, a person shall be punished for  a misdemeanor except  as otherwise stated in specific provisions  hereof. A violation of one or more standards of Section 4.03 (the Housing Maintenance Code) does not constitute a "violation" within the meaning of this Section or Section 1.09.
 
Title	Page

CHAPTER 5	ALCOHOLIC  BEVERAGES

Section	5.01	Definitions	5-1
	5.02	Application and Licensure	5-4
	5.03	Premises Licensed	5-9
	5.04	Requirements of Licensee	5-10
	5.05	Unlawful Acts	5-10
	5.06	Social Host	5-14
	5.07	Beer License	5-17
	5.08	Liquor License	5-19
	5.09	Wine License	5-23
	5.10	Brewpub License	5-25
	5.11	Fixing Fees	5-26
	5.12	Violation a Misdemeanor	5-26
 
CHAPTER 5

ALCOHOLIC  BEVERAGES LICENSING AND REGULATION



SECTION 5.01.  DEFINITIONS.  As  used  in  this  Chapter,  unless otherwise stated in specific sections, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated:

1.	"Alcohol" - ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.

2.	"Alcoholic Beverage" - alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.

3.	"Applicant" - any person filing an application for business licensure under this Chapter .

4.	. "Application" - a form furnished by the City to be completed by  an applicant as a prerequisite for consideration for business licensure.

5.	"Bed & Breakfast" - a place of lodging that provides not more than eight rooms for rent to no more than 20 guests at a time; is located on the same property as the owner's personal residence; and was originally built and occupied as, or converted to, a single-family residence prior to use as a place of lodging.

6.	"Beer" -- malt liquor containing not less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume nor more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight, including "malt coolers" with the alcoholic content limits stated herein.

7.	"Club" - any incorporated organization organized under the laws of this state for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, for intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, or a congressionally chartered veterans' organization which has  more than 30 members, has owned or rented a building or space in a building for more than one year that is suitable for accommodation of its members, and is directed by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members for that purpose.

5-1
 
No member, officer, agent, or employee  may receive any profit from the sale of liquor other than a reasonable salary.

8.	"Exclusive Liquor Store" - an establishment used exclusively for the sale of alcoholic beverages; tobacco products; ice; liquid or powder beverages designed to mix with alcoholic beverages; soft drinks; liqueur-filled candies; cork extraction devices; books, videos , and other publications published for information on alcoholic beverages; and home-brewing equipment.

9.	"Hotel & Motel" - an establishment where food and lodging are regularly furnished to transients in exchange for payment and which has:	(1) a dining room serving the general public at tables which seats at least 30 guests at one time ; and (2) a minimum of 10 guest rooms.

10.	"Intoxicating  Malt Liquor" - a malt beverage containing in excess of
3.2 percent of alcohol by weight.

11.	"License" - a document, issued by the City, entitling the recipient to carry on and transact business as stated therein.

12.	"License Fee" - money paid to the City pursuant to an application for a license to carry on and transact business as stated therein.

13.	"Licensee" - the holder of a valid, current, unexpired license, approved	by the City, which has neither been revoked nor suspended, to conduct business as stated therein.

14.	"Liquor" - ethyl alcohol, and distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous, and malt beverages containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight,	including "wine coolers" and "malt coolers"  with  these alcoholic content limits.

15.	"Manufacturer" - a person who , by process of fermenting, brewing, distilling , refining, rectifying, blending, or by combination of different materials, prepares or produces liquor, wine , or beer for sale.

16.	"Off-Sale" - the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for consumption off the licensed premises only.

17.	"On-Sale" - the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed premises only .

18.	"Original Package" - a sealed or corked container containing an alcoholic  beverage.

5-2
 

19.	"Place of Worship"  - a building where  persons gather to engage  in
religious activities .

20.	"Responsible Seller/Server Training Course" - a course dealing with Minnesota laws regarding the sale and service of liquor or wine; said course must include an examination that identifies that the student has successfully learned the  basic facts and information relating to the safe and legal sale and service of liquor or wine .

21.	.  "Restaurant" - an establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor  or  manager,  where  meals  are   regularly prepared on the premises and served at tables to the general public in exchange for payment, which has a minimum  seating capacity of 30 guests at one time .

22.	"Retail" - sale for consumption .

23.	. "Sale, Sell, & Sold" - all manners and means of furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons including barters.

24.	"School Ground"- (1) any property owned, leased, or controlled by a public school district that is used for educational purposes or is regularly used for extracurricular or  co-curricular activities,  and  (2) the area within a school bus when that bus is being used to transport one or more public school students.

25.	"Theater" - a building containing an auditorium in which live dramatic, musical, dance, or literary performances are regularly presented to holders of tickets for those performances.

26.	"Training Verification Fee" - money  paid  to  the  City  prior  to  the issuance of and in connection with an Application for a liquor or wine license for the sale or service of liquor or wine.

27.	"Underage Person" - any individual under 21 years of age.

28.	"Wholesaler" - a person who sells alcoholic beverages to retail dealers .

29.	.   "Wine" - the beverage made from the normal alcoholic  fermentation of  grapes,  including still wine,  sparkling  and  carbonated wine,  wine made	from condensed grape  must,  wine    made   from    other agricultural	products   than   sound,   ripe   grapes, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider,  perry and sake, in each instance containing not less than one-half  of one percent nor more

5-3
 
than 24 percent alcohol by volume for nonindustrial use. This definition includes "wine coolers" with the alcoholic content limits stated herein .

SECTION 5.02.	APPLICATION  AND LICENSURE.

Subd. 1.   Application .  All applications shall be made at the office of the City Clerk upon forms prescribed by the City, or if by the State of Minnesota, then together with such additional information as required by the Council. Information required may vary with the type of business organization making application. The application form shall be completed in full by the applicant. Every application for the issuance or renewal of a liquor or wine license must include a Training Verification Statement signed by the licensee/applicant verifying that all persons selling or serving liquor or wine upon licenses premises have successfully completed a Responsible Seller/Server Training course .

Subd. 2. False  Statements .  It  is  unlawful  for  any  applicant  to intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any application form. Any false statement or willful omission on an application form shall result in the automatic rejection of the application. If a license has already been issued and a false statement or omission is discovered, the license shall be rendered void.

Subd. 3.	Application,  Investigation and Fees.

A.	At the time of the initial application, the applicant shall pay to the City a fee to be fixed by ordinance of the Council pursuant to Minnesota Statutes,	Section 340A.412, which fee shall be considered  an application and investigation fee, in addition to a Training  Verification Fee, non-refundable to applicant, to cover the City's processing and investigation	costs. Failure to submit a timely application and investigation fee shall result in assessment of late fees as authorized by ordinance.		A general Authorization/Release Form authorizing the release of information to the City shall accompany the application and investigation fee. A current (within the last 12 months) Fire Inspection Report	completed by the Red Wing Fire Department, indicating compliance with all relevant fire codes and regulations, shall also accompany the application. In the event the Council determines that it is in the public interest to undertake an investigation of an applicant for the renewal of a license, said applicant shall pay an investigation fee and provide an updated Authorization/Release Form with the application for license renewal. No such fee shall be required of an applicant for a temporary Beer License.

B.	Upon receipt of each application, investigation fee and Authorization/Release Form completed in accordance herewith, the City Clerk shall forward all application  information to the  Police Department
 
which shall conduct a criminal history check and investigate the truth of statements made therein and the moral character and  business reputation of each applicant for license to such extent as the Police Department deems necessary. The Police Department shall forward the results of its investigation to the City Clerk, who shall report the results to the City Council. The Council shall not consider an application before the investigation has been completed and it has received the results.

Subd. 4.	Action .

A.	Approval. The Council may approve any application for the period of the remainder of the then current  license  year  or  for  the  entire  ensuing license year.   Upon rejection of any application for a license, the license and investigation fee shall not be refunded to the  applicant.  If the application is withdrawn prior to Council action , only the investigation fee shall be retained.

B.	Issuance. If an application is approved, the City Clerk shall issue a license pursuant thereto in the form prescribed by the City or the proper Department of the State of Minnesota, as the case may be, upon payment of the license fee. All licenses shall be issued for the period of July 1 to June 30 or a portion thereof unless otherwise specified herein. For licenses issued for a portion less than the entire year , the fee to be paid with the application shall be a pro rata share of the annual license fee . Licenses shall be valid only for the premises described therein .

C.	Refund of License Fee. License refunds may be made under those circumstances outlined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 340A.408, Subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.

D.	Rejection and Termination . The Council may, in its sole discretion and for any reasonable cause including the moral character of the applicant, refuse to grant any application. Licenses shall terminate by expiration or revocation.

E.	Sanction.

1.	Certain acts committed by a licensee shall result in a presumptive minimum penalty as set forth in the subsequent paragraphs .  For purposes of this section, the number of offenses by a licensee shall be cumulative over a 36-month period on a rolling basis.  Thus, after the end of the 36 months following the day a violation occurred, that violation shall not be considered for purposes of determining presumptive penalties.  Nothing in this section shall restrict the discretion of the Council with regard to determination of the appropriate penalty for any violation.
 

2.	Willful violation of a state statute or regulation or City Code provision related to the sale or possession of beer, wine or liquor.

The first offense of this type shall result in a presumptive penalty of a civil fine of $1,000 and a suspension of 5 business days.  The
second offense shall result in a presumptive penalty of a fine of
$1,500 and a suspension of 15 business days, and/or revocation of the license . A third offense shall result in revocation of the license. However, no revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the Council, a committee of the Council, or a hearing under the Administrative  Procedures Act, as may be determined by the Council in action calling the hearing. Such hearing shall be called by the Council upon written notice to the licensee served in person or by certified mail not less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to the hearing date, stating the time, place and purpose thereof .

3.	Unintentional violation of a state statute or regulation or City Code provision related to the sale or possession of beer, wine or liquor.

The first offense of this type shall result in a penalty of a civil fine of
$750 . The second violation of this type shall result in a penalty of a civil fine of $1,500 and a suspension of 10 business days.  Any subsequent offenses shall result in a penalty of a civil fine of $2,000, a suspension of 20 business days, and/or revocation of the license. However, no such suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing which conforms to the requirements specified in paragraph (2) above.

4.	.  Additional misconduct.

A licensee shall also be subject to sanction if it is determined: (i) that the licensee suffered or permitted illegal acts upon licensed premises unrelated to the sale of beer, wine or liquor; (ii) that the licensee had knowledge of such illegal acts upon licensed premises, but failed to report the same to police; (iii) that the licensee failed or refused to cooperate fully with police in investigating such alleged illegal acts upon licensed premises; (iv) that the activities of the licensee created a serious danger of public health, safety, or welfare; or (v) that the licensee suffered or permitted a sale of liquor or wine upon the licensed premises by a person who did not have verification of successful completion of a Responsible Seller/Server training course on file with the City Clerk at the time of the sale.
 
The first offense of this type shall result in a presumptive penalty of a civil fine of $750.  The second offense of this type shall result in a presumptive penalty of a fine of $1,500 and a suspension of 10 business days.  Any subsequent offenses shall result in a presumptive penalty of a civil fine of $2,000, a suspension of 20 business days, and/or revocation of the license.  However, no such suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing which conforms to the requirements specified in paragraph (2) above .

5.	Conviction of licensee/agent/employee for violation of certain laws .

The Council shall revoke a license if any licensee or agent or employee of a licensee is convicted for violating any law relating to the sale or possession of beer, wine, or liquor upon the premises of the licensee.

6.	Mandatory revocation.

The Council shall revoke a license if such revocation is mandatory pursuant to state statute or regulation .

F.	Corporate Applicants and Licensees . A corporate applicant , at the time of application, shall furnish the City with a list of all persons who have an interest in such corporation and the extent of such interest. The list shall name all shareholders and show the number of shares held by each, either individually or beneficially for others . It is the duty of each corporate licensee to notify the City Clerk of any change in legal ownership, or beneficial interest in such corporation or in such shares. Any change in the ownership or beneficial interest in the shares entitled to be voted at a meeting of the shareholders of a corporate licensee , which results in the change of voting control of the corporation by the persons owning the shares therein , shall be deemed equivalent to a transfer of the license issued to the corporation , and any such license shall be revoked 30 days after any such change in ownership  or beneficial interest of shares unless the Council has been notified of the change in writing and has approved it by appropriate action.  The Council, or any officer of the City designated by it, may at any reasonable time examine the stock transfer records and minute books of any corporate licensee in order to verify and identify the shareholders, and the Council or its designated officer may examine the business records of any other licensee to the  extent necessary to disclose the interest which persons other than the licensee have in the licensed business.	The Council may revoke any license issued upon its determination that a change of ownership of shares in a corporate licensee or any change of ownership of any interest in the business of
 
any other licensee has actually resulted in the change of control of the licensed business so as materially to affect the integrity and character of its management and its operation, but no such action shall be taken until after a hearing by the Council on notice to the licensee.

Subd. 5.    Duplicate Licenses.   Duplicates of all original  licenses under this Chapter may be issued by the City Clerk without action by the Council, upon the licensee's affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of a fee of $25 for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked DUPLICATE.

Subd. 6.     Posting.  All licensees shall conspicuously  post their licenses on the premises of the licensed place of business.

Subd. 7.    Resident Manager or Agent.   Before a license is issued under this Chapter to a corporation, partnership, or association, the applicant  or applicants shall appoint in writing a natural person as its manager or agent. Such resident manager or agent shall consent in writing to: (1) take full responsibility for the conduct of the licensed premises; and (2) serve as agent for service of notices and other process relating to the license. Such manager or agent  must  be  a person who, by reason of age, character, reputation, and other attributes, could qualify individually as a licensee. If such manager or agent ceases to act in such capacity for the licensee without appointment of a successor or be readily available and responsible to reasonably manage the business in  its  daily operations, the license issued pursuant to such appointment may be subject to revocation or suspension.

Subd. 8.     Persons Disqualified.  In addition to any other provision of law, no person shall qualify for a license under this Chapter who has been convicted within the past five years of violating any law relating to the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages or whose license therefore has been revoked within such period of time. Nor shall any person qualify as a licensee who has not attained the age of 21 years . The Council shall also disqualify any applicant who it determines is not of good moral character or repute.

Subd. 9. Renewal Of Licenses. Applications for renewal of all licenses under this Chapter shall be made at least 60 days prior to the date of expiration of the license. A current (within the last twelve months) Fire Inspection Report completed by the Red Wing Fire Department, indicating compliance with all relevant fire codes and regulations, shall also accompany the renewal application. The City Clerk may waive the 60-day requirement for good and sufficient cause shown.

Subd. 10. Delinquent  Taxes  And  Charges.  No  license  under  this Chapter   may  be  granted  for  operation  on  any  premises  upon  which  taxes,
 
assessments,  or  installments  thereof,  or  other  financial  claims  of  the  City,  are owed and are delinquent and unpaid.

Subd. 11. Conditional Licenses. The Council may, upon a finding of the necessity therefor, place such special conditions and restrictions, in addition  to those stated in this Chapter, upon any license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified .

SECTION 5.03.	PREMISES LICENSED.

Subd. 1.  Validity.  Unless  expressly  stated  therein,  a  license  issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be valid only in the building or structure situated on the premises described in the license, and all transactions relating to a sale under such license must take place within such building or structure.

Subd. 2.    Conduct.    Except  as  herein  provided,  every  licensee  under this Chapter shall be responsible for the conduct of the licensed place of business and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and order therein.

Subd. 3.   Seller/Server  Training.    Every  licensee  under  this  chapter shall be responsible for providing that the sale or service of liquor or wine upon the licensed premises shall be conducted only be persons having a verification of successful completion of a Responsible Seller/Server Training course on file with the City Clerk.

Subd 4.     Sale By Employee.  Any sale of alcoholic beverages in or from any premises licensed under this Chapter by any employee authorized to make such sale in or from such place is the act of the employer as well as of the person actually making the sale; and every such employer is liable for all of the penalties provided by law for such sale, equally with the person actually making the sale.

Subd. 5.	Inspection.

A. All premises licensed under this Chapter shall at all reasonable hours be open to inspection by any police officer to determine whether or not this Chapter and all other laws are being observed. This inspection may include the premises and any books, papers, and records pertaining to the licensed business. All persons, as a condition to being issued such license, consent to such inspection by such officers without a warrant for searches or seizures.

B. It is unlawful for any licensee, or agent or employee of a licensee, to hinder or prevent a police officer from making such inspection. Failure to comply with inspection when requested by a police officer may result in revocation of the license.
 
SECTION 5.04.	REQUIREMENTS OF LICENSEE.

Subd. 1.   Financial  Responsibility .   No  Beer, Wine  or  Liquor  License shall be issued or renewed unless and until the applicant has provided proof of financial responsibility imposed by Statute, by filing with the City a certificate that there is in effect an insurance policy or pool providing minimum coverages of (1)
$50,000 because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence,  and ,
subject to the limit for one person, in the amount of $100,000 because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any one occurrence , and in the amount of $10,000 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one occurrence , and
(2)	$50,000 for loss of means of support of any one person in any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person, $100,000 for loss of means of support of two or more persons in any one occurrence; $50,000 for other pecuniary loss of any one person and any one occurrence, and $100,000 for other pecuniary loss of two or more persons in any one occurrence;  an annual  aggregate  of  $300,000 may be included in the insurance coverage.

A.	Exception. This section does not apply to on-sale Beer licensees with sales of Beer of less than $25,000 for the preceding year, nor to off-sale Beer licensees with sales of Beer of less than $50,000 for the preceding year, nor does it apply to holders of on-sale wine licenses with sales of wine of less than $25,000 for the preceding year. An affidavit of the licensee shall be required to establish the exemption under this Subdivision.

B. Documents Submitted to Commissioner. All proofs of financial responsibility and exemption affidavits filed with the City under this section shall be submitted by the City to the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety.

Subd. 2.	Insurance Certificate .  Whenever an insurance certificate is required by this Chapter the applicant shall file with the City Clerk a certificate of insurance showing (1) that the limits are at least as high as required, (2) that coverage is effective for at least the license term approved, and (3) that such insurance will not be cancelled or terminated without 30 days' written notice served upon the City Clerk.  Cancellation or termination of such coverage shall be
grounds for license revocation.

SECTION 5.05.	UNLAWFUL ACTS.

Subd. 1.	Licensed  Premises.

A. Consumption.  It is unlawful for any person to consume, or any licensee to permit consumption of, alcoholic beverages on licensed  premises more than 20 minutes after the legal time for making licensed sales.
 
B.	Removal of Containers . It is unlawful for any on-sale licensee to permit any glass, bottle or other container, containing alcoholic beverages  in any quantity, to remain upon any table, bar, stool or other place where customers are served, more than 20 minutes after the legal  time for making licensed sales.

C.	Closing . It is unlawful for any person, other than an on-sale licensee's bona fide employee actually engaged in the performance of his duties, to be on the premises licensed under this Chapter more than 30 minutes after the legal time for making licensed sales.

Subd. 2.	Underage  Persons.

A.	Consumption.  It is unlawful for any:

1.	Licensee to permit any underage  person to consume alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises.

2.	Underage person to consume alcoholic beverages except in the household of the minor's parent or guardian, and then only with the consent and in the presence of the parent or guardian.

B.	Purchasing .  It is unlawful for any:

1.	Person to sell, barter, furnish, or give alcoholic beverages to an underage person unless such person is the parent or guardian of the underage person, and then only for consumption in the  household and in the presence of the parent or guardian.

2.	Underage person to purchase or attempt to purchase  any alcoholic beverage .

3.	Person to induce  an underage person to purchase or procure any alcoholic  beverage.

C.	Possession. It is unlawful for an underage person to possess any alcoholic beverage with the intent to consume it at a place other than the household of the person's parent or guardian. Possession of an alcoholic beverage by an underage person at  a place other than the household of the parent or guardian is prima facie evidence of intent to consume it at a place other than the household of a parent or guardian .

D.	Entering Licensed Premises . It is unlawful for any underage person to enter licensed premises for the purpose of purchasing or consuming any alcoholic beverage. It is not unlawful for any person who has attained the  age  of   18  years  to  enter  licensed   premises  for  the  following
 
purposes: (1) to perform work for the establishment ,  including  the serving of alcoholic  beverages,  unless otherwise  prohibited  by statute;
(2) to consume meals; and (3) to attend social functions that are held in a portion of the establishment where liquor is not sold.  It is unlawful for a licensee to permit a person under the age of 18 years to  enter licensed premises unless attending a social event at which alcoholic beverages are not served , or in the company of a parent or guardian .

E.	Misrepresentation of Age . It is unlawful for a minor to make a misrepresentation of age for the purpose of purchasing an alcoholic beverage .

F.	Proof of Age. Proof of age for purchasing or consuming alcoholic beverages may be established only by a valid driver's license, a Minnesota identification  card, or, in the case of a foreign national, by a valid passport.

G.	License Inspection. License Inspectors or persons as designated by the City are authorized to conduct periodic inspections of the premises of liquor license holders to assure compliance with the City Code and state law. Licensees shall be responsible for the conduct of their employees , agents and representatives while on the licensed premises. Fines for noncompliance may be issued for violations . Any fine is  subject  to appeal to the City Council.

Subd. 3.	Alcoholic Beverages.  It is unlawful for any:

A. Person to knowingly induce another to make an illegal sale or purchase of an alcoholic beverage.

B.	Licensee to sell or serve an alcoholic beverage to any person who is obviously  intoxicated.

C.	Licensee to fail, where reasonable doubt of legal age could exist, to require adequate proof of age of a person upon licensed premises .

D.	Licensee to sell an alcoholic beverage on any day, or during any hour, when such sales are not permitted by law.

E.	Licensee to allow consumption of an alcoholic beverage on licensed premises on any day, or during any hour, when such consumption is not permitted by law.

F.	Person to purchase an alcoholic beverage on any day, or during any hour, when such sales are not permitted by law.
 
Subd. 4.	Alcoholic Beverages In Certain Buildings And Grounds.  It is unlawful for any person to introduce or possess upon, or in, any school ground, or building, any alcoholic beverage, except for experiments in laboratories authorized by school personnel and except for those organizations which have been issued temporary licenses to sell Beer, and for any person to possess Beer as a result of a purchase from those organizations holding temporary licenses.

Subd. 5.	Consumption  And  Possession  Of  Alcoholic   Beverages  On Streets, Public Property And City Parks.

A.	It is unlawful for any person  to consume, or possess in an unsealed container, alcoholic beverages, on any street or other public property except when and where permission has been specifically granted or licensed by the Council. Provided, that between sunrise and 10:30 p.m. of each day, if the parks are otherwise open to use, the possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall  be allowed unless otherwise posted . This Subparagraph A. shall not apply to the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the Athletic Field and Colvill Park Courtyard during events scheduled with approval of the  City Council, and which are not school events.

B. This section shall not apply to the possession of an unsealed container in a  motor vehicle on streets or public property when the container is kept in the trunk of such vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk, or kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if that motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. For the purpose of this section, a utility or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver or passengers.

Subd. 6.	Nudity Or Obscenity.

A.	Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated:

1.	"Nudity" - the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum anal region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female	breast, which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.

2.	"Obscene Performance" - a play, motion picture, dance, show or other presentation, whether pictured, animated or live, performed
 
before an audience and which in whole or in part depicts or reveals nudity, sexual conduct, sexual  excitement  or  sado-masochistic abuse, or which includes obscenities or explicit verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual conduct.

3.	"Obscenities" - those those slang words generally rejected for regular use in society, that are used to refer to genitals , female breasts, sexual conduct or excretory  functions  or  products,  either that have no other meaning or that in context are clearly used for their bodily, sexual or excretory meaning.

B.  Unlawful Act.  It is unlawful for any person issued a license provided for in this Chapter to permit upon licensed premises any nudity, obscene performance, or continued use of obscenities by any agent, employee, patron or other person.

Subd. 7.	Ultimate Fighting.

A.  Purpose . Ultimate Fighting is regulated in Chapter 6, Section 6.25.

B.	Unlawful act. No licensee shall permit, promote, or allow participation in ultimate fighting in any licensed establishment or any adjoining property owned or leased by the licensee .

C.	Violations; penalties . The penalties provided in this Chapter, including, but not limited to, those set forth in Section 5.02, Subd. 4(E) and Section 5.11, apply to violations of this Section.

SECTION 5.06.	SOCIAL HOST.

Subd. 1. Purpose and Findings . The City Council intends to discourage underage possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private residence, and intends to hold persons criminally responsible who host events or gatherings where underage persons possess or consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the event or gathering supplied the alcohol. The City Council finds that:

A. Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol is possessed or consumed by underage persons are harmful to those persons and constitute a potential threat  to public health requiring prevention or abatement.

B.	Prohibiting   underage   consumption	acts   to   protect   underage persons,  as well  as the  general  public, from  injuries  related  to
 
alcohol consumption, such as alcohol overdose or alcohol-related traffic collisions.

C.	Alcohol is an addictive  drug  which,  if used irresponsibly,  could have drastic effects on those who use it as well as those who are affected by the actions of an irresponsible user.

D.	Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and consumption occur outside the presence of parents . However, there are times when the parent(s) is/are present and, condone the activity, and in some circumstances provide the alcohol.

E.	Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person is a crime, it is difficult to prove, and an ordinance is necessary to help further combat underage consumption .

F.	A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person criminally responsible for hosting an event or gathering where underage possession or consumption occurs .

Subd. 2.	Authority.	This	section	is	enacted	pursuant	to Minnesota Statutes, Section 145A.05.

Subd. 3.	Definitions.	For  the	purpose   of   this	section,   the following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated:

1.	"Event or Gathering" - any group of three or more persons who	have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.

2.	"Host" - to aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or permit a gathering or event.

3.	"Parent" - any person having legal custody of a juvenile:

(a)	As natural, adoptive parent, or step-parent;

(b)	As a legal guardian; or

(c)	As  a  person  to whom  legal  custody  has  been  given  by order of the court.

4.	"Person" - any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or any association of one or more individuals.
 
5.	"Residence" or "Premises" - any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment,	condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a temporary	or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned , leased, rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.

Subd. 4.	Prohibited Acts.

A.	It is unlawful for any person(s) to;

1.	host or allow an event or gathering;

2.	at any residence, premises, or on any other private or public property;

3.	where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present;

4.	when the person knows or reasonably should know that an underage person will or does

(a)	consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or

(b)	possess any alcohol or alcoholic  beverage with the  intent to consume it; and

5.	the person fails to  take  reasonable  steps  to  prevent possession or consumption by the underage person(s).

B.	A person is criminally responsible for violating this subdivision if the	person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires with or otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.

C.	A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the event or gathering to be criminally responsible.

Subd. 5.	Exceptions.

A. This section does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and his or her parents while present in the parent's household.
 
B.	This section does not apply to legally protected religious observances.

C.	This section does not apply to  retail  intoxicating  liquor  or  3.2 percent  malt  liquor  licensees,  municipal  liquor  stores,  or  bottle club permit holders who are regulated  by  Minnesota  Statutes, Section 340A.503 Subd . 1(a)(1).

D.	This section does not apply to situations where underage persons are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of employment.

 
Subd. 6.
police officer.
 
Enforcement.	This  section  can  be  enforced  by  any
 

Subd. 7.  Severability.  If  any  subsection,  sentence,   clause, phrase, word , or other portion of this section is, for any reason , held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in whole , or in part, by any court of competent jurisdiction , such portion shall be deemed severable , and such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this law, which remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect.

SECTION 5.07.	BEER LICENSE.

Subd. 1.	License Required.  It is unlawful for any person to sell, or keep or offer for sale , any Beer without a license therefor from the City.  This section shall not apply to sales by manufacturers to wholesalers or to sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale or off-sale Beer Licenses from the City.  Any person licensed to sell liquor on-sale shall not be required to obtain an on-sale Beer License, and may sell Beer on-sale without an additional license .  Any person licensed to sell liquor off-sale shall not be required to obtain an off-sale Beer License, and may sell Beer off-sale without an additional license .

Subd. 2.	Restrictions And Regulations .

A.	No gambling or gambling device shall be permitted on any licensed premises, except such  as are licensed by or under the control of the Minnesota Gambling Control Board .

B.	No licensee shall, during the effective period of such license , be the owner or holder of a Federal retail liquor dealer's tax stamp for the sale of intoxicating liquor, unless such owner or holder also holds a liquor license from the City, and ownership or holding thereof shall be grounds for immediate revocation, without a hearing .
 
C.	No license shall be granted to a wholesaler or manufacturer of Beer or to	anyone holding a financial interest in such manufacture or wholesaling.

D.	No person who has not attained the age of 18 years shall be employed to sell or serve Beer in any on-sale establishment.

E.	No license shall be granted for any building within 300 feet of any school ground, or within 100 feet of any place of worship, unless specifically authorized by the City Council in its sole discretion.

F.	On-sale Beer Licenses may be granted to only exclusive liquor stores, motels,	hotels, restaurants, clubs, drug stores, bowling centers, theaters, and congressionally chartered veterans organizations.

G.	Every license shall be granted subject to the provisions of this Chapter and all other applicable provisions of the City Code and other laws relating to the operation of licensee's business.

Subd. 3.	Hours And Days Of Sales.

A.  No sale of beer may be made between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through Saturday , nor between 2:00 a .m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday.

B.	No off-sale beer sales may be made on Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, or after 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve.

C.	No licensee may sell beer on-sale between 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. unless the licensee has received approval by the City Council and obtained a permit from the Commissioner of Public Safety State of Minnesota.

Subd. 4.	Temporary License.

A. Applicant. A temporary on-sale or off-sale license for the sale of Beer within the City limits may be issued to a club or charitable , religious, or non-profit organization.

B.	Conditions.

1.	An application for a temporary license shall state the exact dates and place of proposed temporary sale .

2.	No applicant  shall qualify  for  a temporary  license for  more than  a total of seven days in any calendar year.
 

3.	The Council may, but is not obligated to, grant a temporary Beer License on premises owned or controlled by the City. Any such license may be conditioned, qualified or restricted  as  the  Council sees fit. If the premises to be licensed are owned  or  under  the control of the City, the applicant shall file with the City, prior to issuance of the license, a certificate of liability insurance coverage in at  least  the  sum  of  $50,000  for  injury  to  any  one  person  and
$100 ,000 for injury to more than one person, naming the City as an
insured during the license period.  Such license shall be issued only on the condition that the applicant will not sell in excess of $10,000 (retail value) worth of Beer in any calendar year, and thereupon shall be exempt from proof of financial responsibility as provided for herein.

SECTION 5.08.	LIQUOR LICENSE.

Subd. 1.	License Required.  It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, on any pretense or by any device , to sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise dispose of liquor, as part of a commercial transaction, without a license from the City.  This Section shall not apply to:  (1) such potable liquors intended for therapeutic purposes and not as a beverage; (2) industrial alcohol and its compounds not prepared or used for beverage purposes; (3) wine in the possession of a person duly licensed under this Chapter as an on-sale wine licensee; (4) sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as such by the Commissioner; or (5) sales by wholesalers to persons holding liquor licenses from the City.  Any person licensed to sell liquor on-sale shall not be required to obtain an on-sale beer license, and may sell beer on-sale without an additional license. Any person licensed to sell liquor off-sale shall not be required to obtain an off-sale beer license, and may sell beer off-sale without an additional license.

Subd. 2.	Restrictions And Regulations.

A. No license shall be granted to a wholesaler or manufacturer of liquor, or to	anyone holding a financial interest in such manufacture or wholesaling.

B.	No license shall be effective until a permit shall be issued to a licensee under the laws of the United States, if such  permit be required under such laws of the State of Minnesota.

C.	No gambling or gambling device shall be permitted on any licensed premises, except such as are licensed by or under the control of the Minnesota Gambling Control Board.
 
D.	No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed upon premises, or in any rooms constituting the same, except that persons under the age of 18 years may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a busser or dishwasher in places defined as a restaurant, hotel or motel.

E.	No licensee shall sell, offer for sale, or keep for sale , liquor in any original package which has been refilled or partly refilled.

F.	No licensee shall display liquor to the public during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited .

G.	No license shall be granted for any building within 300 feet of any school ground or within 100 feet of any place of worship unless specifically authorized by the City Council in its sole discretion .

H.	No more than one off-sale license shall be held by any person and no person may hold an off-sale license for more than one location. The Council may immediately revoke all licenses in which such person has an additional off-sale interest.  The  term  "interest"  includes  any pecuniary interest  in the ownership,  operation,  management , or profits of a retail liquor establishment, but does not include: bona fide loans; bona fide rental agreements ; bona fide open accounts  or  other obligations held with or without security arising out of the ordinary and regular course of business of selling or leasing merchandise, fixtures or supplies to such establishment ; an interest in a corporation owning or operating a hotel but having at least 150 or more rental units holding a liquor license in conjunction therewith; or 10 percent or less interest in any other corporation holding a license. A person who receives moneys from time to time directly or indirectly from a licensee, in the absence of a bona fide consideration therefore and excluding bona fide gifts or donations, shall be deemed to have a pecuniary interest in such retail license . In determining bona tides, the reasonable value of the goods or things received as consideration for any payment by the licensee and all other facts reasonably tending to prove or disprove the existence of any purposeful scheme or arrangement to evade the prohibitions of this subdivision shall be considered .

I.	On-sale licenses shall be granted only to  exclusive  liquor  stores , hotels,	motels, restaurants, clubs, bowling centers, theaters and congressionally chartered veterans organizations .

J .  The Council may issue the number of licenses authorized by statute or local referendum or restrict such number from time to time as it may, in its discretion , deem proper.
 
K.	Every license shall be granted subject to the prov1s1ons of this Chapter and all other applicable provisions of the City Code and other laws relating to the operation of the licensed business .

L.	It is lawful for an off-sale licensee  to  provide  samples  of  wine, liqueurs, and cordials which the licensee currently has in stock and is offering for sale to the general public without obtaining an additional license, provided the wine, liqueur, and cordial samples are dispensed at no charge and consumed on the licensed premises during the permitted hours of off-sale in a quantity  less than 50 milliliters of wine per variety per customer and 25 milliliters of liqueur or cordial per variety per customer.

M.	No person who has not successfully completed a Responsible Seller/Server Training course with proof of successful completion on file in the Office of the City Clerk  may sell or serve liquor or wine on the licensed premises.

Subd. 3.	Hours And Days Of Sales.

A. No on-sale liquor sales may be made after 2:00 a.m. on Sunday until 8:00 a.m. on Monday.   No on-sale liquor sales may be made after 2:00
a.m . until 8:00 a.m . on any other weekday .

B.	No off-sale  liquor sales  may be made before 8:00 a.m. or after  10:00
p.m. on any weekday or on Sundays, except between the hours of 11:00
a.m . and 6:00 p.m. No off-sale liquor sales may be made  on Thanksgiving Day, Christmas  Day, December 25, or after 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24.

C.	No licensee may sell liquor on-sale between 1:00 a .m. and 2:00 a.m. unless the licensee has received approval from the City Council and obtained a permit from the Commissioner of Public Safety State of Minnesota.

D.	No delivery of alcohol to an off-sale licensee may be made by a wholesaler or accepted by an off-sale licensee on a Sunday. No order solicitation or merchandising may be made by a wholesaler on a Sunday .

Subd. 4.  Sunday  Sales.   The   electorate  of   the   City   having authorized the same, a Sunday on-sale liquor  license may be issued to hotels, restaurants and clubs, theaters, and also bowling centers, which have facilities for serving at least 30 guests at one time. The hours of such sales shall be from 10:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight in conjunction with the serving of food. In the event New Year's  Eve falls  on  a  Sunday,  the  hours  of  sale for  the  above-described
 
establishments shall be from 10:00 a.m. on Sunday to 1:00 a .m. (or 2:00 a .m. with proper state licensure) on Monday.

This section shall not affect the ability of a licensed  bed  and  breakfast facility to provide wine to guests under Section 5.09, Subd . 2(f) of this Chapter.

Subd. 5. Sports Or Convention Facilities License.  The  Council  may authorize any holder of an on-sale liquor license issued by the City or by an adjacent municipality to sell liquor at any convention , banquet , conference , meeting or social affair conducted on the premises of  a  sports  or  convention facility owned by the City, or instrumentality thereof having independent policy­ making and appropriating authority and located within the City. The licensee must be engaged to sell liquor at such an event by the person or organization permitted to use the premises, and may sell liquor only to persons attending the event. The licensee shall not sell liquor to any person attending or participating in  any amateur athletic event.  Sales may be limited to designated areas of the facility.

Subd. 6	Intoxicating Malt Liquor License for Theaters
The council may issue an on-sale intoxicating malt liquor license to an operator of a theater within the City.  A theater operator holding an on-sale intoxicating malt liquor license is authorized to sell intoxicating malt liquor and beer on all days of the week to persons attending events at the theater.

Subd. 7.	Temporary License.

A. License Authorized. Notwithstanding any provision of the City Code to the contrary , the Council may issue a license for the temporary on-sale of liquor in connection with a social event sponsored by the licensee. Such license may provide that the licensee may contract with the holder of a full-year on-sale license, issued by the City, for liquor catering services .

B.	Applicant. The applicant for a license under this section must be a club or  charitable , religious, or other non-profit organization  in existence for at least three years .

C.	Terms and Conditions of License.

1.	No license is valid until approved by the State Commissioner  of Public Safety.

2.	No license shall be issued for more than four consecutive days.

3.	All licenses and licensees are subject to all provisions of statutes and the City Code relating to liquor sale  and  licensing.  Accordingly , liquor  liability  insurance  shall  be  required  for  temporary   on-sale
 
licenses to the same degree as is required for yearly on-sale licenses. The licensee shall provide proof of financial responsibility coverage and, in the case of catering by a full-year on-sale licensee, such caterer shall provide proof of the extension of such coverage to the licensed premises.

4.	Licenses may authorize sales on premises other than those owned or permanently occupied by the licensee.

5.	No temporary license shall issue until the City Clerk is furnished with a written statement of verification from the applicant or licensee that all persons selling or serving liquor or wine upon the premises where liquor or wine is to be served have successfully completed a Responsible Seller/Server Training course and proof of successful completion for all sellers or servers of liquor or wine upon the licensed premises is on file with in the office of the City Clerk.

6.	Charitable, religious, or other nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from the Training Verification Fee.

D.	Insurance Required. The Council may, but at no time shall it be under any obligation to, grant a temporary liquor license on premises owned or controlled by the City. Any such license may be conditioned, qualified or restricted as the Council sees fit. If the premises to be licensed are owned or controlled by the City, the applicant shall file with the  City, prior to issuance of the license, a certificate of liability insurance coverage  in at least the  sum of $50,000 for  injury to any one  person,
$100,000 for injury to more than one person, and $10,000 for property damage, naming the City as an insured during the license period.

SECTION 5.09.	WINE LICENSE.

Subd. 1.      License Required.  It is unlawful for any person to sell, or keep or offer for sale, any wine without a license therefor from the City. This section shall not apply to: (1) possession or handling for sale or otherwise of sacramental wine by any representative of any religious order or for use in connection with a legitimate religious ceremony; (2) sales by manufacturers to wholesalers duly licensed as such by the State of Minnesota; (3) sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale or off-sale liquor licenses from the City; or (4) sales by wholesalers to persons holding on-sale wine licenses from the City.

Subd. 2.	Restrictions And Regulations.

A. No license shall be granted to a wholesaler or manufacturer of wine, or to	anyone holding a financial interest in such manufacture or wholesaling.
 

B.	No gambling or gambling device shall be permitted on any licensed premises, except as licensed by or under the control of the Minnesota Gambling Control Board.

C.	No person under 18 years of age shall be employed upon the premises where on-sale wine is offered, or in any rooms constituting the same, except that persons under the age of 18 years may be employed to perform the duties of a musician, actor, usher, ticket seller, busser or dishwasher in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel, or theater. Persons under 18 years of age may also be employed as waiters or waitresses to serve food in rooms in which only wine is sold on-sale, provided they shall not be permitted to serve or sell wine.

D.	No license shall be granted for any building within 300 feet of any school ground or within 100 feet of any place of worship unless specifically authorized by the City Council in its sole discretion .

E.	No more than one license shall be held by any person . For the purpose of this subparagraph, any person owning a beneficial interest of five percent, or more, of any licensed establishment shall be considered  a licensee.

F.	On-sale wine licenses shall be granted only to the following: (1) a restaurant as defined in this Chapter that has appropriate facilities for seating at least 25 guests at one time; (2) a licensed bed and breakfast facility to furnish wine only to registered guests of the facility and, if the facility contains a licensed commercial kitchen, also to guests attending private events at the facility; (3) a theater to furnish wine only to persons attending events at the theater. An on-sale wine license shall not be required for a bed and breakfast facility to provide at  no  additional charge to a person renting a room at the facility not more than two glasses of wine  per day containing not more than four fluid ounces  if:
(1)	the wine  is consumed  on the  premises of the facility;  and  (2) the
facility is registered with the State Commissioner of Public Safety,

G.	Every license shall be granted subject to the provisions of this Chapter and all other applicable provisions of  the City Code and other laws relating to the operation of the licensed business .

Subd. 3.	Hours And Days Of Sales.

A. No on-sale of wine may be made between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a .m. on Sunday, nor between 12:00 a.m. until 8:00 a.m. on Monday, nor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any other weekday.
 
B. In the event New Year's Eve falls on a Sunday, the hours of sale shall be from 10:00 a.m. on Sunday to 2:00 a.m. on Monday. The 2:00 a.m. closing time listed assumes the on-sale wine licensee has received approval by the City Council and the Commissioner of  Public  Safety State of Minnesota for a 2:00 a.m. closing. If required approvals are not received, then the closing time shall be at 1:00 a.m.

 
Subd. 4.
License.
 
Sale  of	Intoxicating   Malt   Liquors   at   On-Sale   Without	a
 

A. A holder of an on-sale wine license issued pursuant to this section who is also licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors at on-sale pursuant to this Chapter, may sell intoxicating malt liquors at on-sale without an additional license.

SECTION 5.10	BREWPUB LICENSE



Subd. 1.	Brewpub Defined. A Brewpub is a restaurant operated on the same premises as a brewery that is licensed pursuant to this Section.

Subd. 2.	State Brewpub Licenses Required.  A Brewpub must be licensed by the State of Minnesota and is subject to the restrictions and regulations in this Section and Minnesota Statutes Sections 340A.24 and .301, or their successor.

Subd. 3.	General Restrictions and Regulations for Brewpubs .  Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the restrictions and regulations for Liquor Licenses contained in Section 5.08 of this Chapter are applicable to Brewpubs.

A.	A Brewpub must possess a liquor brewer/manufacturer  license issued by the State of Minnesota.

B.	Total sale of malt liquor produced and packaged on the licensed premises shall not exceed 3,500 barrels per year, with no more than 750 barrels per year of malt liquor produced and packaged on the licensed premises being sold off-sale pursuant to this Section.

C.	A Brewpub may only provide off-sale with a Brewpub off-sale intoxicating license issued by the City. Brewpub off-sale shall be limited to malt liquor produced and packaged on the licensed premises in 64 ounce containers commonly known as "growlers" or in 750 milliliter bottles that are designed, sealed, and labeled pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 340A.285, as it may be amended from time to time.

D.	Off-sale of malt liquor under this Section may be made between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and
 
between the hours of 10:00 a .m . and 10:00 p .m. on Sunday .  No off-sale malt liquor sales may be made on Thanksgiving Day;
Christmas Day, December 25; or after 8 :00 p.m. on Christmas Eve,
December 24.

E.	All malt liquor sold off-sale under this Section must be removed from the premises by 10:00 p.m.

SECTION 5.11.	FIXING FEES. Fees for all licenses provided for in this Chapter, including, but not by way of limitation, license fees for on-sale and off­ sale of Beer, temporary on-sale of Beer, on-sale and off-sale of liquor, on-sale of liquor by clubs, on-sale of wine, and application and investigation fees , shall be fixed and determined by the Council, adopted by ordinance , and uniformly enforced.

SECTION 5.12	VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR.   Upon conviction of violating this Chapter, a person shall be punished for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
 



CHAPTERS
 
Title

GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING AND REGULATION
 
Page
 

Section	6.01	Definitions	6-1
	6.02	Applications	6-1
	6.03	Action on Application, Termination,	
		and Duplicate License	6-3
	6.04	Fixing License Fees	6-4
	6.05	Carrying or Posting	6-4
	6.06	Penalty for Property Owner	6-4
	6.07	Responsibility of Licensee	6-4
	6.08	Conditional  Licenses	6-4
	6.09	Renewal of Licenses	6-4
	6.10	Insurance Requirements	6-4
	6.11	License Denial and Fixing Rates - Hearing	6-5
	6.12	Private Use of Public Property	6-5
	6.13	Shows	6-6
	6.14	Small Vehicle Passenger Service	6-6
	6.15	Tobacco	6-10
	6.16	Sidewalk Cates	6-15
	6.17	Food Wagons	6-19
	6.18	Lodging Tax	6-21
	6.19	Farmers Market	6-25
	6.20	Tattooing and Body Piercing	6-29
	6.21	Junk Dealers	6-30
	6.22	Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Merchants	6-31
	6.23	Charitable Gambling	6-38
	6.24	Pawnbrokers	6-43
	6.25	Ultimate Fighting Prohibited	6-59
	6.26	Violation Subject to Penalty	6-60
 
CHAPTERS

GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING AND REGULATION



SECTION 6.01.	DEFINITIONS.	As  used in this Chapter,  the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated:

1.	"Applicant" - any person making an application  for a license under this Chapter.

2.	"Application" - a form to be completed by the applicant to request a license,	furnished by the City and  uniformly  required  as  a prerequisite to the consideration of the issuance of a license for  a business.

3.	"Bond" - a corporate surety document in the form and  with  the provisions acceptable and specifically approved by the City Attorney.

4.	"Business" - any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services, or transaction that is either licensed or regulated, or both licensed and regulated, by the terms and conditions of this Chapter.

5.	"License" - a document issued by the City permitting an applicant to carry on and transact a business.

6.	"Licensee" - an applicant who, following completion and approval of an application, holds a valid, current, unexpired and unrevoked license from the City for carrying on a business.

7.	"License Fee" - the money paid to the City pursuant to an application and prior to issuance of a license to transact and carry on a business.

8.	"Sale, Sell and Sold" - all forms of barter and all manner or means of furnishing merchandise to persons.

 
SECTION 6.02.
follows:
 
APPLICATIONS.	All  applications  shall  be  made  as
 

Subd. 1. All applications shall be made at the office of the Permits and License Manager upon forms furnished by the City.

Subd. 2.  All  initial  applications  shall  be  accompanied  by   an investigation fee, to be set from time to time by Council ordinance, to cover the cost  of  investigation  as  herein  provided,  and  a  general  Authorization/Release
 
Form authorizing the release of information to the City. If the Council determines that it is in the public interest to undertake an investigation of an applicant for the renewal of a license, the applicant shall pay an investigation fee and provide an updated Authorization/Release Form which shall accompany the application for license renewal.

Subd. 3.	All such applications must be subscribed, sworn to, and include, but not be limited to, the following:

A  Applicant's full name (first, middle, last) and age.

B.	Applicant's present address and length of time applicant has lived at that address.

C.	Applicant's phone number(s) (home, business, cell) and e-mail address.

D.	Applicant's occupation and length of time so engaged.

E.  Applicant's addresses and occupations for the three years preceding the date of application.

F.	Names  and  addresses  of  applicant's  employers,  if any,  for  the  three years preceding the date of application.

G.	Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor,	or misdemeanor, including violation of  a  municipal ordinance but excluding traffic violations, and if so, the date and place of conviction and the nature of the offense.

H.	Type of license and location of premises for which application is made.

I.	At least four character references.

J.	Any other information that the Council deems necessary considering the nature of the business for which license application is made.

Subd. 4. It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any application form. Upon discovery of any such falsehood or willful omission, the City shall automatically reject the license application, or if already issued, shall render any license or permit issued pursuant thereto, void, and of no effect.

Subd. 5.   Upon receipt of each completed application,  investigation fee and Authorization/Release Form, the Permits and License Manager will forward all application information to the Police Department which shall  conduct a criminal history check and investigate the truth of statements  made therein and the moral
 
character and business reputation of each applicant for license to such extent as the Police Department  deems  necessary.  The  Police Department  shall forward the results of its investigation to the Permits and License Manager, who will report said the results to the City Council. The Council shall not consider an application before such the investigation has been completed and its results forwarded to the Council.

Subd. 6.  Applications for renewal licenses may be made in abbreviated form as the Council may adopt by ordinance.

SECTION 6.03. ACTION ON APPLICATION, TERMINATION, AND DUPLICATE LICENSE.

Subd. 1. Approval. The  Council  may  grant  any  application  for  the period of the remainder of the then current calendar year or for the entire ensuing license year. All applications, including proposed license periods, must be consistent with this Chapter.

Subd. 2. Issuance. If an  application  is  approved,  the  Permits  and License Manager shall forthwith issue a license in the form prescribed by the Council upon payment of the appropriate license fee, and approval of the bond or insurance as to form and surety or carrier, if required. All licenses shall be on a calendar year basis unless otherwise specified herein as to particular businesses. Unless otherwise herein specified, license fees shall be pro-rated on the basis of 1/12th for each calendar month or part thereof remaining in the  then  current license year. For licenses where the fee is less than $100 a minimum license fee equal to one-half of the annual license fee shall be charged. Except as to licenses which by their terms apply City-wide, licenses shall be valid only at the specified location

 
Subd. 3.
revocation.
 
Termination.	Licenses  shall  terminate  only  by expiration  or
 

Subd. 4.    Refusal, Suspension and Revocation.   The Council may, for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any application, or suspend or revoke any license. No license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral character or business reputation. Before suspension or revocation of any license, the Council shall give reasonable notice to the licensee and grant the licensee the opportunity to be heard. Grounds for suspension or revocation may be, but are not limited to, any of the following: (1) the licensee suffered or permitted illegal acts upon the licensed premises; (2) the licensee had knowledge of such illegal acts but failed to report the acts to police; (3) the licensee failed or refused to cooperate fully with police in investigating the alleged illegal acts; or (4) the activities of the licensee created a serious danger to public health, safety, or welfare.
 
Subd. 5. Duplicate License. Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued by the Permits and License Manager, without action by the Council, upon the licensee's affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of a fee of $25 for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked "DUPLICATE."

SECTION 6.04. FIXING LICENSE FEES. Except as otherwise herein provided, all fees for licenses under this Chapter shall be fixed and determined by the Council, adopted by ordinance, and uniformly enforced.

SECTION 6.05. CARRYING OR POSTING. All peddlers or transient merchants shall at all times, when so engaged, be in possession of their license. All other licensees shall post their licenses in their place of business near the licensed activity. In the case of machine or other device licensing, however, the City may provide a sticker for the current license year which shall be affixed to each machine or device requiring a sticker, and the sticker shall suffice for the posting requirement. All licensees  shall  display  their  licenses  upon demand  by any City officer or authorized other government official.

SECTION 6.06.	PENALTY FOR PROPERTY OWNER.  It is unlawful
for persons who own or control real property to knowingly permit the property to be used, without a license, for any business for which a license is required by this Chapter.

SECTION 6.07.	RESPONSIBILITY  OF  LICENSEE.	The  conduct  of
agents or employees  of a licensee, while engaged in performance of their duties for their principal or employer under the license, shall be deemed the conduct of the licensee.

SECTION 6.08. CONDITIONAL LICENSES. The Council may, upon a finding of necessity, place conditions and restrictions upon a license as it, in its discretion, may deem reasonable and justified.

SECTION 6.09.      RENEWAL OF LICENSES.  Applications for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 30 days prior to the date of expiration of the license, and shall contain information required by the City. This time requirement may be waived by the Council for good and sufficient cause. The City may, but shall not be responsible for, notifying each licensee of the deadline for renewal.

SECTION 6.10.       INSURANCE  REQUIREMENTS.   Whenever  insurance is required by a section of this Chapter, after approval by the Council, but before the license shall issue, the applicant shall file with the Permits and License Manager a policy or certificate of public liability insurance showing that: (1) the limits are at least as high as required; (2) coverage is effective for at least the license term approved;  and (3) the insurance will not be cancelled or terminated
 
without 30 days' written notice  served upon the Permits and License Manager. Cancellation, termination, or insufficiency of required insurance coverage shall be grounds for license revocation.

SECTION 6.11.	LICENSE DENIAL AND FIXING RATES - HEARING.

Subd. 1. Right to Deny. The Council reserves the right to deny any application for a license to operate any business licensed or regulated under this Chapter where the business involves: (1) service to the public; (2) rates charged for service; (3) use of public streets or other public property by the applicant or the public; or (4) the public health, safety and convenience. The Council may also consider the location of the business in making this determination. Before making such a determination, however, the Council shall hold a public hearing with notice to interested parties and the public as it may deem necessary or proper in action calling for such a hearing.

Subd. 2. Rates. Where, under specific provisions of this Chapter, the Council has reserved the right to fix or approve fees, rates or charges of a licensed or regulated business, the rates shall be uniform for each category or class of service, and no licensee or proprietor of a regulated business shall claim or demand payment in excess of the uniform guidelines.

Subd. 3. Hearing. Any applicant or licensee under this Chapter who challenges denial of a license or rates fixed or approved by the Council shall have a right to a hearing before the Council upon written request. Notice of time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be given to such persons and by such means as the Council may determine in calling the hearing.

SECTION 6.12.	PRIVATE USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.

Subd. 1.  Application.  Individuals  or  groups  desiring   to   use   City property for an event or construction project must complete an application and submit it to the City for approval. An Application for Private Use of Public Property may be obtained from the Public Works Office.

Subd. 2.   Application  Deadline.   Applications  must be submitted to the City at least 30 days prior to the planned event or commencement of the construction project.

Subd. 3. Council Action  Required.  Applications  requesting  a  street closure or waiver of fees must be approved by the City Council. All other applications may by acted upon by City administrative staff.

Subd. 4. Public Health Authorization Required for Food Service. If an applicant's plans for an event on public property include food service, the applicant must include a copy of a Public Health Authorization  obtained from the Goodhue
 
County  Public  Health  Department with the Application  for  Private  Use of  Public Property submitted to the City.

SECTION 6.13.	SHOWS.

Subd. 1. License Required. It is unlawful for any person to present any public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical or other performance or exhibition without first having obtained a license from the City.

 
Subd. 2.
instances:
 
Exceptions.	No  license  shall  be  required  in  the  following
 

A Performances presented in the local schools and colleges, under the sponsorship of such schools and colleges, and primarily for the students only.

B.	Performances of athletic, musical or theatrical events sponsored by local schools or colleges using student talent only.

C.	Any  performance or event  in, or sponsored  by, bona fide  local church and non-profit organizations, provided that such organization shall be incorporated.

SECTION 6.14.	SMALL VEHICLE PASSENGER SERVICE.

Subd. 1.	Definitions.  The following terms, as used in this Section, shall have the meanings stated:

1.	"Vehicles for Hire" - any motor vehicle for hire, including but  not limited	to taxicabs, engaged in the business of transporting passengers within the City, having a seating capacity of seven or fewer persons, including the driver, and not  operating on a fixed route. "Vehicles for hire" does not include a vehicle under contract with a Transportation Network Company and used exclusively  for­ hire in accordance with that contract.

2.	"Small Vehicle Passenger Service" - a service provided by a person engaged in the for-hire transportation of passengers in a vehicle designed to transport seven or fewer persons, including the driver. "Small vehicle passenger service" does not include Transportation Network Companies.

3.	"Operator" - a licensee owning or otherwise having control of one or more vehicles for hire.
 
4.	"Driver" - the person driving and having physical control over a vehicle for hire. The driver may be the licensee or in the employ of the licensed operator.

5.	"For Hire" -for remuneration or compensation of any kind, promised, paid, given to, or received by a person for the transportation of persons.

6.	"Taxicab Stand" - any place along the curb or street or elsewhere which is exclusively reserved by the City for the use of vehicle for hire.

7.	"Special Transportation  Service" - motor vehicle transportation, including but not limited to mobility vans, provided on a regular basis by a public or private entity or person that is designed exclusively or primarily to serve individuals who are elderly or disabled and who are unable to use regular means of transportation but do not require ambulance service.

8.	"Motor Carrier of Passengers" - a service provided by a person engaged in the for-hire transportation of passengers in vehicles designed to transport eight or more persons, including the driver.

9.	"Transportation Network Company" - a corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other entity that is operating in Minnesota that uses a digital network to connect transportation network company riders to transportation network company drivers who provide prearranged rides, including but not limited to Lyft and Uber.

Subd. 2. License Required.  It is unlawful for  any  person to  drive  a vehicle for hire or operate a, small vehicle  passenger service without first having obtained a small vehicle passenger service license from the City. It is unlawful for anyone to operate  as a motor carrier of passengers within City limits without a certificate of registration or permit issued by the Minnesota Department of Transportation. All small vehicle passenger service licenses issued by the City of Red Wing, unless revoked sooner, will expire on December 31 of each year. Eligibility for a license to drive or operate a vehicle for hire shall be as follows:

A   Is the holder of a valid Minnesota driver's license authorizing operation of the Licensed vehicle;

B.	Is at least 18 years el-G of age;

C.	Has no felony,  gross misdemeanor,  or misdemeanor  convictions  in the State of Minnesota or any other state, in the last five years for matters
 
involving  the  use  of  threat  or  use  of  force,  possession  or  sale  of controlled substances, prostitution, or indecent conduct;

D.	Has no felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor  convictions in the State of Minnesota or any other state, in the last five years for matters involving leaving the scene of an accident, driving under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or drug, theft, damage to property, reckless or careless driving, or refusing to take a chemical test;

E. Has provided a written consent to a criminal history background check to the City.

Subd. 3. License Issuance and  Display,  and  Vehicle  Marking.  All licenses shall be issued for specific vehicles, except as otherwise herein provided. License tags, including number and year for which issued, shall be plainly visible from the front of the vehicle. Both sides of every licensed vehicle for hire, when in use, shall be plainly and permanently marked as such with a painted sign or appurtenances showing the full or abbreviated name of the licensed operator. Licenses from vehicles retired from service may be transferred to proper replacement vehicles by the Permits and License Manager upon application being made for such transfer.

Subd. 4.  Insurance  Required.   Before   a   small   vehicle   passenger service license is issued by the Council, and at all times effective during the licensed period, the licensee shall  have  and maintain property damage liability and bodily injury insurance in the amount of $500,000 per person, $500,000 per accident, and $100,000 property damage insurance if split limits or $500,000 combined single limit (CSL). The license holder shall ensure each licensed and insured vehicle is properly titled in the company's name.

Subd. 5. Mechanical Condition. Before issuing a new small vehicle passenger service license or upon renewal thereof the applicant shall present to the Permits and License Manager a certificate signed by a competent and experienced mechanic showing that the vehicle is: (1) in good mechanical condition; (2) thoroughly safe for transportation of passengers; and (3) in neat and clean condition. A similar certificate may be required from time to time during the licensed period.

Subd. 6.  Taxicab  Stands.  The  Council  is  authorized  to  establish Taxicab Stands in places on City streets as the Council determines necessary. In establishing Taxicab Stands, the Council shall take into consideration the need for stands, and the convenience to the general public. Taxicab Stands shall be available on a first-come, first-served  basis. Drivers shall stay within five feet of their vehicle. When a Taxicab Stand is occupied, no other vehicle for hire shall loiter or wait for the Taxicab Stand to become vacant. Taxicab Stands shall be plainly marked.
 

Subd. 7.	Smoking.	In accordance with the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act, (Minnesota Statutes section 144.414), as it may be amended from time to time, smoking of tobacco and plant products is prohibited inside any vehicle for hire.  This prohibition applies to smoking of e-cigarettes. "Tobacco" shall have the same definition as used in Section 6.15 of this Chapter.

Subd. 8.	Driver Impairment.  No driver shall be permitted to operate a vehicle for hire while under the influence of alcohol or any mood-altering drug, including prescription and over-the-counter drugs.  No driver shall possess any controlled substance or alcoholic beverage while operating a vehicle for hire.

 
Subd. 9.
Exceptions.
 
Additional License Requirements,  Exemptions and
 

A		Special transportation services, including mobility vans, are exempt from this licensure requirement if certified by the State of Minnesota and using a driver who is qualified pursuant to Minnesota Rules Chapter 8840, or operating under a permit from the Minnesota Department of Transportation.

B.	A vehicle for hire having no valid Red Wing small vehicle passenger service license may bring passengers into Red Wing but may not pick up passengers or accept any business within the City of Red Wing.
C.	Motor carriers of passengers are required to register with the
Minnesota Department of Transportation in accordance with Minnesota Statutes section 221.0252.

D.	The carrying of passengers as a business for compensation by a vehicle other than a vehicle duly licensed under and operating in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, or by a vehicle contracted through a Transportation Network Company, or by a motor carrier operating under Minnesota Statutes, is hereby forbidden.

E.	This Ordinance applies in equal force to all small passenger vehicle services, motor carriers of passengers, and special transportation services operating within the City, regardless of whether the service's principal place of business is located outside of the City.
 
SECTION 6.15.	TOBACCO.

Subd. 1.	Definitions.  As used in this section, the terms used shall have the following meanings:

1.	"Tobacco" - cigarettes and any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by other means, or any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product including, but not limited  to,  cigars;  cheroots; stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco, snuff,  snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts; refuse scraps; clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco.

2.	"Tobacco-Related Device" - cigarette papers or pipes for smoking or other devices intentionally designed or intended to be used in a manner that enables the chewing, sniffing, smoking, or inhalation of vapors of tobacco or tobacco products, including components of tobacco-related devices marketed or sold separately.

3.	"Electronic-Delivery Device" - any product containing or delivering nicotine,	lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking in the delivery of nicotine or any other substance through inhalation of vapor from the product, including any component part of a product marketed or sold separately.

4.	"Nicotine or Lobelia Delivery Device" - any product containing or delivering nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any component part of such a product, that is not tobacco or an electronic-delivery  device.

5.	"Adult" - a person 18 years of age, or over.

6.	"Licensee" - any person lawfully possessing a license to sell, dispense, or give away tobacco, tobacco-related devices, electronic­ delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices and shall include any employee, agent, or representative of any person having such a license.

7.	"Person" - any individual, corporation, partnership, or other entity.

8.	Daycare Facility" - a daycare center as defined in Minnesota Rules 9503.0005, subpart 5, as amended.
 

9.	"Vending Machine" - any mechanical, electrical or electronic, or other type of device which dispenses tobacco, or tobacco-related devices, electronic-delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices upon the insertion of money, tokens, or other form of payment directly or into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, or tobacco-related device, electronic-delivery device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device.

Subd. 2.	License Required.

A		License. It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, to keep for retail sale, sell at retail, or otherwise furnish for profit or benefit any tobacco,obacco-related	devices,	electronic-delivery	devices,	or nicotine or  lobelia delivery  devices without  a valid  license obtained from the City.  Application for the license shall be on a form approved and provided by the City.

B.	Amended Definitions. Any amendments to the definitions of the terms   "tobacco,"  "tobacco  related  device,"   or  "electronic  delivery device"  found in Minnesota Statutes, section 609.685, or to "nicotine or lobelia  delivery device" as addressed in Minnesota Statutes, section 609.6855,  shall be considered amendments to the definition of the terms  found   herein. Any license issued pursuant to this Section shall  entitle  the   Licensee to sell  all  "tobacco,"  "tobacco related devices," "electronic  delivery devices," or "nicotine or lobelia delivery devices," as defined   herein,  while  that   license  remains active.

C.	License Fee. The license fee shall be set from time-to-time by City Council ordinance. All tobacco licenses shall be valid for one calendar year, from January 1 to December 31. Licenses may be issued anytime after January 1, but shall expire on December 31 of the year of issuance, and the license fee shall not be pro-rated.

Subd. 3.	Restrictions.

A Separate licenses shall be issued for the sale of tobacco at each fixed place of business, and no license shall be issued for a movable place of business.		No license shall be transferred  to the  new owner should a licensed	establishment be sold. The new owner of any such establishment must apply for a new license.

B.	It is unlawful for any person to sell, dispense, or give away any tobacco, tobacco-related device, electronic-delivery device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery  device to any person without first  having the person provide a
 
valid form of identification  providing proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.

C.	It is unlawful for any Licensee to manufacture, advertise, deliver, or sell any drug paraphernalia, as that term is defined in Section 10.27 of the City Code. A violation of this restriction may be punished as a misdemeanor, as provided in Red Wing City Code Section 10.27, and/or be grounds for the suspension, revocation, denial,  or non-renewal of a license issued pursuant to this Section.  Any suspension or revocation of a license shall be done in conformance with Red Wing City Code Section 6.03, subd. 5. Notice of the hearing and the final decision shall be in writing. Any such suspension, revocation, denial or non-renewal shall also conform with Subdivision 10 of this Section.

D.	No tobacco license shall be issued to any establishment within 1000 feet of any school property or daycare facility, as measured by the shortest line between the property to be occupied by the proposed Licensee and the property occupied by the school or daycare facility, unless the Licensee continuously holds a tobacco license predating the enactment of this provision or the date that the school or daycare facility occupied the property.

E. It is unlawful for the Licensee to sell any liquid, whether or not such liquid contains nicotine, intended for human consumption and use in an electronic-delivery device that is not contained in packaging that is child­ resistant packaging as set forth in 16 C.F.R. § 1700.15(b)(1).

Subd. 4. Compliance Checks. Law enforcement officials or persons as designated by the City shall conduct periodic compliance checks of the premises of all holders of licenses for the sale of tobacco products. Compliance checks will be held at least two times per year. These compliance checks may include, but shall not be limited to surveillance, including minors under the age of 18 who attempt to purchase tobacco products.

A law enforcement official or persons as designated by the City shall issue  a license violation citation to any license holder found violating any provision of this code or the laws of the State of Minnesota. License suspension or revocation may be instituted following the issuance of a citation or criminal  conviction  of  any officer, director, manager, or other agent, employee, or representative of any licensee.

Subd. 5.       Responsibility.  Licensees shall be responsible for the conduct of their employees, agents, and representatives while on the  licensed premises. Any violation of this section by an employee, agent, or representative shall also be considered a violation by the licensee for the purposes of imposing a civil penalty, license suspension, revocation, denial or non-renewal.
 

Subd. 6. Vending  Machines.  No  sale  of  tobacco,  tobacco-related devices, electronic-delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices  may occur through vending machines.

Subd. 7.  Self-service  Merchandising.  No  sale  of  tobacco,  tobacco- related devices, electronic-delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices shall occur from open displays which are accessible to the public without the intervention of the Licensee. This subdivision shall not apply to the sale of cartons of cigarettes by a  Licensee who derives at least 90 percent of its revenue from tobacco, tobacco-related devices, electronic-delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices and where the Licensee ensures that no person younger than 18 years of age is present, or permitted to enter, at any time.

Subd. 8. Use and Sampling. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the sampling of tobacco as provided for in the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act, Minnesota Statutes Section 144.4167, subdivision 4, provided that the Licensee ensures that  no person younger than 18 years of age is present or permitted to enter the premises at any time.  This  provision  shall  extend  to  allow  sampling using electronic-delivery devices or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices at licensed establishments deriving at least 90 percent of revenue from electronic-delivery devices or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices according to the same restrictions and limitations. It is prohibited for licensed establishments to provide access to seating in exchange for a fee or any other consideration, including, but not limited to, the purchase of tobacco, tobacco-related  devices, electronic-delivery  devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices.

Subd. 9.	Penalties.

A Licensees. Any violation of the restrictions attached  to  the  tobacco license, including, but not limited to sale of tobacco, tobacco-related devices,	electronic-delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices to any person under 18 years of age, shall be cause for Administrative penalty,  suspension,  revocation,  denial,  or  non-renewal of such license, as well as any civil or criminal remedy available at law. Any suspension or revocation of a license shall be done in conformance with Red Wing City Code Section 6.03, Subd. 5. Notice of the hearing and the final decision shall be in writing.

License violations shall carry the following minimum administrative penalties: $75 for the first violation; $200 for a second violation at the same location within 24 months of the initial violation, and $250 and a minimum 7-day suspension for the third violation within 24 months of the initial violation. Nothing in this section prohibits the City from imposing additional penalties based upon the circumstances of violation, and the history of license violations at the same location.
 

In the case of a license suspension or revocation, there shall be no license fee refund. Any person whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible for another tobacco license for one year from the date of the license revocation. The City Council reserves the right to attach reasonable conditions to the reinstatement of a suspended or revoked license.

B.	Individuals.

1.	First offense. Any person who sells or furnishes tobacco, tobacco­ related devices, electronic-delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices to a person under 18 years of age shall be charged with a misdemeanor for the first violation. The  notice and hearing requirements for a licensee shall also apply to any person accused of violating this provision.

2.	Subsequent offenses. (a) Any person who sells tobacco, tobacco­ related devices, electronic-delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices to a person under 18 years of  age a subsequent time within five years of a previous conviction for the same offense is guilty of a gross misdemeanor. (b) Any person who furnishes tobacco, tobacco-related devices, electronic-delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices to a person under 18 years of age after conviction for the same offense shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor for each subsequent violation.

3.	Administrative  fine.   Each offense committed  by an individual under this section shall carry a fine of $50 per offense.

4.	Affirmative  defense.    It is an affirmative defense to a charge  under this section if the defendant proves by a  preponderance  of  the evidence that the defendant reasonably and in good faith relied upon representative of  proof of age as described  in Minnesota Statutes, Section 340A.503, Subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time.

C.	Minors.

1.	Misdemeanor. A person under the age of  18 years who purchases or attempts to purchase tobacco, tobacco-related devices, electronic­ delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices and who uses a driver's license, permit, Minnesota identification card, or any type of false identification to misrepresent the person's age, is guilty of a misdemeanor.

2.	Petty  misdemeanor.    A  person  under  the  age  of  18  years  who
 
possesses, smokes, chews, otherwise ingests, or purchases or attempts to purchase tobacco, tobacco-related devices, electronic­ delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices is guilty of a petty misdemeanor.

3.	Any person under the age of 18 years who purchases, possesses or uses tobacco, tobacco-related devices, electronic-delivery devices, or   nicotine or  lobelia  delivery  devices  shall  be  referred  to  an alternative juvenile justice  system.  If  no  alternative  system  is available or suitable to the juvenile's situation, the juvenile shall be subject to a $25 administrative penalty. The notice and hearing requirements for a licensee shall also apply to any person accused of violating this provision.

Subd. 10.	Appeal of Suspension,  Revocation,  Denial, or Nonrenewal of License.

A In the event the City suspends, revokes, denies, or determines not to renew a tobacco license, the City shall send to the licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action, and the right to appeal. The aggrieved party may appeal  the  decision  of  the  City within 10 days of receiving notice of the City's action. Filing of an appeal shall stay the action of the City in suspending or revoking a license until the City Council makes a final decision. Failure to file an appeal within the 10-day period shall be deemed a waiver of appeal.

B. The City Council may appoint a committee or an independent hearing officer to hear an appeal hereunder, report findings of fact, and provide a recommendation for disposition to the Council.  Hearings  on  the appeal shall be open to the public and the licensee  or applicant shall have the right to appear and be represented by legal counsel and to offer evidence on its behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall make a final decision.

SECTION 6.16.	SIDEWALK CAFES.

Subd. 1.	Authorized;  license required.

A Any person authorized to operate a restaurant on designated premises within the City of Red Wing may apply to the City Council for a license to conduct a portion of the restaurant's authorized business in a sidewalk cafe on a part of the public way immediately adjoining the designated premises. Application shall be made on forms provided by the City and shall be accompanied by the fee required by City ordinance. A restaurant, if licensed under Chapter 5 of the Red Wing City Code for the on-sale of alcoholic beverages, may also request an amendment to
 
that  license  to  allow  the  sidewalk  cafe  to  be  a  part  of  the  licensed premises.

B.	A  scaled diagram  must be submitted with  information as requested on the application, including but not limited to the following:

•	width of the building or the  leased  premises  including  the dimension of the street frontage where the sidewalk cafe will be located;
•	layout for the sidewalk cafe furnishings (tables, chairs, umbrellas, fencing and anything else to be placed on the sidewalk) including the dimensions of the seating area;
•	width of the sidewalk remaining for pedestrian use;
•	the property lines; and,
•	location of trees (including tree grates), boulevard areas, other landscaping,	trash containers, bike racks, fire hydrants, mailboxes, street signs, utility poles and  boxes, and other obstacles.

In the case of a restaurant that holds a license under Chapter 5 of the Red Wing City Code and wishes to serve alcohol in the sidewalk cafe, this diagram shall be considered a description of the extended premises for purposes of the request to amend the on-sale alcohol license.

C.	To the extent authorized in any license granted under the provisions of this section, the licensee may conduct licensed business on the public way, notwithstanding the provisions of Section  7.07 of the  Red Wing City Code.

Subd. 2.	Restrictions.

A Each sidewalk cafe license shall specify the area in which the cafe may be operated. Cafe seating shall be allowed on the public sidewalk or hard-surfaced public walkway directly abutting the building housing the restaurant's premises. No sidewalk cafe seating, sale, or service shall be permitted on any unpaved or uneven surface or in any portion of the street designated for vehicular travel.

B.	No license shall authorize any permanent installation of any tables, chairs, furnishings, fencing, or other equipment on the public way. Only metal cafe style tables and chairs shall be allowed in the licensed sidewalk cafe area; no glass, plastic, or picnic style tables will be permitted. Umbrellas will be allowed if they do not create an obstacle for pedestrians or pose a safety hazard. It shall be the duty of the licensed restaurant to maintain sidewalk cafe furnishings,  such as chairs, tables,
 
and fencing in a neat, clean, safe, and sanitary condition and to inspect each item periodically.

C.	No license shall authorize placing any cafe fixtures on  the  sidewalk closer than 70 inches from any tree, boulevard,  landscaping,  public trash can, bike rack, fire hydrant, mailbox, street sign, utility pole or box, or other obstacle before 10:00 a.m., measured from the obstacle perpendicular from the curb toward the cafe fixtures. After 10:00 a.m., the sidewalk cafe must maintain a minimum of 44 inches of clearance from all obstacles for pedestrians, as measured from the obstacle perpendicular from the curb toward the cafe fixtures.

D.	No license shall authorize a sidewalk cafe at any location prohibited by state law or this section, except as herein provided.

E. Except as specifically provided herein, the ownership, operation and maintenance of a sidewalk cafe shall be subject to all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations.

F.	No sidewalk cafe that is part of the licensed premises under Chapter 5 of the Red Wing City Code may be located within 200 feet of a residentially zoned district. The measurement will be  taken from the nearest portion of the sidewalk cafe to the nearest boundary of the residentially zoned district. This subsection shall not apply to any such restaurant whose gross sales revenue during the preceding fiscal year from the sale of food and beverages not containing alcohol was in an amount of not less than 70 percent of the total gross revenue for the sale of food and beverages.

G.	A restaurant holding a license under  Chapter  5 of the  Red Wing  City Code that includes a sidewalk cafe in the licensed premises may allow consumption of alcohol in the sidewalk cafe area until 10:00 p.m. only. The license holder shall comply with all requirements of law, and must take all reasonable  steps  to  insure  that  alcoholic  beverages  are consumed only by patrons of the restaurant who are of age and not by passersby or persons who are not of age or who are obviously intoxicated, and ensure that alcoholic  beverages  served  to  patrons remain on the licensed premises.

H.	Each sidewalk cafe seating area that is part of the licensed premises under Chapter 5 of the Red Wing City Code shall be delineated with a continuous, stable barrier, with one egress onto the public way. The barrier will be a minimum of 36 inches and a maximum of 48 inches above the sidewalk surface.
 
I.	The location of a sidewalk cafe shall in  no way  obstruct  any  of  the existing, required means of egress from the restaurant.

J. The occupant load within the interior of the restaurant, as established by the fire marshal, shall be reduced by the allowable occupant load in the sidewalk cafe so that all patrons can be accommodated indoors should the need arise due to inclement weather or other circumstances.

Subd. 3.	Indemnification  and  Insurance.	Before  a  license  is  issued pursuant to this section, the applicant shall:

A Execute and deliver to the Permits and License Manager, on a form prescribed by the City, an agreement in which the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and hold the City harmless from any personal injury or property damage resulting from, or in any way related to, operation of the sidewalk cafe.

B. File with the Permits and License Manager evidence of Commercial General Liability insurance protecting the applicant against liability imposed by law arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or operation of such sidewalk cafe with limits in an amount of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence;	$2,000,000 general aggregate limit (coverage limit requirement may be satisfied by a General Liability policy in combination with an Excess Liability or Umbrella Liability policy). The insurance coverage must be primary, written on an "Occurrence" basis, and must list the City of Red Wing as an additional insured. All Certificates shall provide	for 30  days  written  notice  to  the  City  prior  to cancellation.	Restaurants licensed under Chapter 5 of the  Red Wing City	Code must extend Liquor Liability coverage, with  minimum coverage of $1,000,000 per occurrence and $1,000,000 aggregate to include the sidewalk cafe area if the sidewalk cafe is included in the licensed premises.

No license issued pursuant to this section shall be valid at any time the insurance required herein is not maintained and evidence of its continuance filed with the Permits and License Manager.

Subd. 4.	Suspension and Revocation.

A Any license authorized by this section may be revoked at any time by the City Council for violations of this section or the license terms. The license may also be suspended by the City Council for a period as the Council shall determine.

B. Upon conviction of the licensee, or the licensee's agent, or employee for the violation  of any City ordinance  or state law in connection with the
 
ownership, maintenance, or operation of a sidewalk cafe,  the  license shall automatically become suspended. The suspension shall continue until the Council acts to reinstate the license upon petition by the licensee.

Subd. 5.  Separability.  Every  prov1s1on  of  this  section  shall  be separable from every other provision, to the extent that if any provision shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not invalidate any other provision.

SECTION 6.17.	FOOD WAGONS.

Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is  to  regulate  the operations of "Food Wagon" within the City.

Subd. 2.  Definition.   Food Wagon  shall  be  defined  as  any  vehicle, stand or device used for the purpose of selling food and/or drink ready to be consumed while parked on public property or right of way.

Subd. 3.  License Required.  It is unlawful for any person to operate a Food Wagon without a license from the City.   Operations meeting the definition of a Food Wagon and operating under a valid Food Wagon license do not need a solicitor's license under Section 6.22 of the City Code.

Subd. 4.  License  Issuance  Fee  and   Display.   Licenses,   including number and dates for which issued, shall be plainly visible on the outside of the Food Wagon. Licenses may be issued on an annual or per event basis. An application on the form prescribed by the City shall be completed by the applicant and shall be accompanied by a fee as established by ordinance.

Subd. 5.    Indemnification.    Before a Food Wagon  license is issued by the City, the licensee shall execute and deliver to the Permits and License Manager, on a form prescribed by the City, an Indemnification Agreement holding the City harmless for any personal injury or property damage resulting from operation of the Food Wagon.

Subd. 6.	Restrictions.

A Food Wagons shall be  allowed only at  approved  locations  within  the City, and shall not travel from point to point around the City, unless specifically authorized to do so by Council action.

B.	No Food Wagon shall be allowed to dispense food on public property when there is a permit issued for another food or similar wagon in association with an organized and permitted event, festival, celebration or tournament at the same location.  No Food Wagon shall be allowed to
 
dispense food at Colvill Park during the pool season unless it is part of an organized and permitted event, festival or celebration.

C.	A person operating a Food Wagon may apply for and receive an annual license for different sites in the City  at  various  times  throughout  the license period,  provided that  the  Food Wagon  is only operated  in one site at a time and provided that the operator notifies the Permits and License Manager of the location of the Food Wagon in advance of each specific time that food is sold from the wagon.

Subd. 7.	Food Wagon  Regulations.

A   No food shall be sold except directly from the Food Wagon.

B.	Radios and other audio devices shall be permitted only inside the Food Wagon.	No music or noise shall be permitted that is audible 30 feet from the Food Wagon. No amplification device shall be permitted on the exterior of any Food Wagon.

C.	Food Wagon sales shall be permitted only between the hours of sunrise and 10:30 p.m., unless  the City Council gives express permission to deviate from these hours.

D.	Food Wagon owners shall clean up around their Food Wagons at the end of each business day.

E. All Food Wagons shall be kept in good repair and order and shall have a neat appearance.

F.	There shall be no drainage of liquids allowed from the Food Wagon onto public property.

G.	In the event that a Food Wagon is not used to dispense food for a period of 21 consecutive days (excluding days when food dispensation is not allowed under Subdivision 6 of this Section) the permit may be forfeited.

H.	No license shall be issued to any food wagon until proof of any appropriate and necessary licensure by the State of Minnesota and/or Goodhue County is provided.

Subd. 8. Forfeiture and Revocation. A Food Wagon  license  may  be revoked or forfeited for violation of any of the provisions of this Section or any other violation of the  City Code or other applicable laws and regulations. Food Wagon licenses are not transferable.
 
SECTION 6.18.	LODGING TAX.

Subd. 1.  Definitions.  For  the  purpose  of  this  Section,  the  following terms, phrases and words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein.

1.	"Lodger" - the person obtaining lodging from an operator.

2.	"Lodging" - the furnishing of accommodation for a fee by a retreat center/vacation home, hotel, bed & breakfast, motel, or rooming house, except where the accommodation shall be for a continuous period of 30 days or more to the same lodger(s). The furnishing of rooms by religious, educational or non-profit organizations shall not constitute "lodging" for purposes of this Section.

3.	"Operator" - a person who provides lodging to others or any officer, agent or employee of such person.

4.	"Person" - any individual, corporation,  partnership,  association, estate,	receiver, trustee, executor, administrator,  assignee, syndicate, or any other combination of  individuals.  Whenever  the term "person" is used in any provision of this Section prescribing and imposing		a penalty, the terms as applied to a corporation, association or partnership,  shall mean two officers, or partners thereof as the case may be.

5.	"Rent" - the total fee charged for lodging whether paid in money or otherwise, not including any fees for services rendered in connection with furnishing lodging other than the room fee itself.

Subd. 2.  Imposition of Tax.  The City shall impose and collect a tax of three percent on the rent charged by an operator for providing lodging to any person . The tax shall be stated and charged separately and collected by the operator from the lodger.  The tax collected shall be a debt owed by the operator to the City and shall be extinguished only by payment to the City. In no case shall the tax imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax which the operator is authorized and required by this Section to collect from a lodger.

Subd. 3.    Collections.    Each operator  shall collect the tax  imposed by this Section at the time the rent is paid. The tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust by the operator for the City. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the rent charged for the lodging and those persons paying the tax shall receive a receipt of payment from the operator.

Subd. 4.	Exceptions and Exemptions.
 
A Exceptions. No tax shall be imposed on rent for lodging paid by any officer or employee of a foreign government who  is exempt due to the express provisions of federal law or international treaty.

B. Exemptions. An exemption shall be granted to any person whose occupancy is beyond the power of the City to tax. No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim made at the time the rent is collected. The claim shall be made in writing and under penalty of perjury on forms provided by the City Finance Director. All exemption claims shall be forwarded to the Finance Director when the returns and collections are submitted as required by this Section.

Subd. 5. Advertising No Tax Prohibited. It shall  be unlawful for  any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or  any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. In computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax less than one cent shall be rounded up to one additional cent.

Subd. 6.  Payment  and  Returns.    The  taxes  imposed  by this  Section shall be paid by the operator to the Finance Director monthly not less than 15 days after the end of the month in which the  taxes were collected. At the time of payment, the operator shall submit a return upon forms supplied by the Finance Director.  The return shall contain the following minimum information:

A The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period covered by the return.

B.	The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period.

C.	The signature of the person filing the return or that of the person's agent duly authorized in writing.

D.	The period covered by the return.
E.  The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging tax. The operator may offset against the taxes payable from any reporting period, the
amount of taxes imposed by this Section previously paid as a result of any transaction the consideration for which became uncollectible  during the reporting period, but only in proportion to the portion of consideration which became uncollectible.

Subd. 7.    Examination of  Return, Adjustments,  Notices and Demands. The Finance Director shall, after the return is filed, review the return and make any investigation or examination of the records and accounts of the person making the
 
return as needed to determine its accuracy. The tax computed by the Finance Director on the basis of the examination shall be the tax due. If the tax due is found to be greater than the tax paid, the  excess shall be paid to the Finance Director on behalf of the City ten days after receipt of a notice given either personally to the operator or sent by registered mail to the address shown on the return. If the tax paid is greater than the tax due, the excess shall be refunded to the person who paid the tax ten days after determination of the refund.

Subd. 8. Refunds. Any person may apply to the Finance Director for a refund of taxes paid for a prescribed period in excess of the amount legally due for that period, provided that no application for refund shall be considered unless filed within one year after the tax was paid, or within one year from the filing  of the return, whichever period is longer. The Finance Director shall examine the claim and file written findings denying or allowing the claim in whole or in part, and shall mail a notice by registered mail to the address stated on the return. If the claim is allowed in whole or in part, the Finance Director shall credit the amount of the allowance against any  taxes due under this Section from the claimant and the balance of the allowance, if any, shall be paid to the claimant.

Subd. 9.	Failure to File a Return.

A If any operator required by this Section to file a return fails  to  do so within the time prescribed, or makes a willfully incorrect, false or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon written notice and demand by the City, file the return or corrected return within five days of receipt of the notice and shall at the same time pay any tax due. If the operator fails to file a return or corrected return within five days, the Finance Director shall make a return or corrected return, for the operator from the information that the Finance Director can obtain, and shall assess a tax on that basis. This tax (less any payments previously  made  on account of the tax for the taxable period covered by the return) shall be paid within five days of the receipt of written notice and demand for payment. Any return or assessment made by the Finance Director shall be on its face correct and valid. The operator shall have the burden of establishing incorrectness or invalidity of the return or assessment.

B.	If any portion of a tax imposed by this Section, including penalties, is not paid within 30 days after it is due, the City may institute any legal action needed to recover the amount due plus  interest,  penalties,  and costs and disbursements of the action.

C.	Upon good cause shown, the Finance Director may grant an operator one 30 day extension of time within which to file a return and make payment of taxes due, provided that interest during the extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of 10 percent per year.
 
Subd. 10.	Penalties.

A If any tax imposed by this Section is not paid within the prescribed period for payment, or any extension approved by the Finance Director, a penalty equal to 10 percent of the amount remaining unpaid shall be added.

B.	In case of any failure to file a return within the time prescribed by this Section, unless it is shown that the failure is not due to willful neglect, there shall be added to the 10 percent specific penalty provided in Subparagraph A of this Subdivision, 10 percent if the failure is for  not more than 30 days with an additional five percent for each additional 30 days or fraction thereof during which such failure continues, not exceeding 25 percent in the aggregate. If the penalty as computed does not exceed $10, a minimum penalty of $10 shall be assessed.  The penalty added to any tax shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and as a part of the tax unless the tax has been paid before the discovery of the negligence, in which case the amount added shall be collected in the same manner as the tax.

C.	If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any payment required by this Section, willfully files a false or fraudulent return, or willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat payment of the tax due, there shall also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal to 50 percent of any tax (less any amounts paid on the basis of the false or fraudulent return) found due for the period to which the return related. The penalty imposed by this Subdivision shall be collected as part of the tax, and shall be in addition to any other penalties provided by this Section.

D.	All payments received shall be credited first to penalties, next to interest, and then to tax due.

E.	The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty provided by this section, shall bear interest at the maximum rate per year as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes, Section 270.75, as it  may  be amended from time to time, from the time the tax should have been paid until it is paid.

Any interest and penalty shall be added to the tax and be collected as a part thereof.

Subd. 11.  Administration  of Tax.  The Finance Director shall administer and enforce the assessment and collection of taxes imposed by this Section. The Finance Director shall furnish blank forms for the returns and other documents required by this Section and distribute them throughout the City and provide them
 
on request. Failure to receive or secure the forms,  however, shall not relieve any person from any obligation required under this Section.

Subd. 12. Examine Records.  The  Finance  Director  and  persons authorized in writing to act on behalf of the Finance Director may examine the books, papers and records of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in this Section. Every operator is directed and required to give the person authorized to examine the books, papers and records, the means, facilities and opportunity for these examinations and investigations.

Subd. 13. Violations. It is a violation of this Chapter for any person to willfully fail to file a return required by this Section, fail to pay the tax due after written demand for payment, fail to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or interest imposed by this Section after written demand for payment, refuse to permit the Finance Director or any duly authorized agents or employees of the City to examine the books, records and papers pertaining to the tax due, or willfully file an incomplete, false or fraudulent return.

Subd. 14.  Use  of  Proceeds.  Ninety-five  percent  of  the  proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes pursuant to this Section shall be used by the City to fund a local tourism or convention bureau for marketing the City as a tourist destination or convention center. The remaining five percent  shall  be  used to defray the City's costs in administering this tax.

Subd. 15.	The tourism or convention bureau which is selected to receive the proceeds referenced in Subdivision 14 of this Section shall provide the City with an audited financial statement of its operations once every three years.  The year selected for audit will be determined by the auditor by means of a random sample, or as otherwise determined in the auditor's work plan.  Additionally, the tourism or convention bureau shall provide the City with an annual fiscal report.

SECTION 6.19.	FARMERS MARKET.

Subd. 1.      Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to set forth the policy of the City with regard to vendors operating at the Red Wing Farmers Market (hereinafter "vendors").

Subd. 2.	Definitions.  "Market Goods" shall include:

1.	"Vendor" - a person or agent who sells market goods to the public.

2.	"Market Goods" - vendor-grown fresh fruits and vegetables;

(a)	Vendor-grown herbs and spices;
 
(b)	Vendor-produced farmstead products such as cheese,  meats, fish,	poultry, eggs, baked goods, honey, maple syrup and preserves, if prepared and labeled in accordance with rules established by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture;

(c)	Vendor-grown bedding plants, hanging and potted plants, and cut flowers;

(d)	Vendor-grown dried flowers and plants; and

(e)	Arts, crafts, and other locally produced hand-made products.

3.	"Market Food Wagons" - any vehicle, stand, or device used for the purpose of selling food and/or drink ready to be consumed while parked at the Saturday Market. Market Food Wagons are only allowed	at the Saturday Farmers Market and are considered "vendors" as defined in this subdivision.

4.	"Satellite Market" - a farmers' market that is not located in front of City Hall and instead is located at a  different  private  or  public location.

Subd. 3. Permit Required. It is unlawful for any person to operate as a vendor without obtaining a permit for the Farmers Market. Permits may be issued by the Farmers' Market Association Manager or at City offices upon application by vendors on forms furnished by the City or the Association on a first-come, first­ served, basis. Daily permits (with the exception of Saturday permits) shall be purchased at City offices between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. each weekday. Daily permits may be issued for any number or configuration of days, excluding Saturdays. Permits needed for Sunday shall be purchased by Friday of that week. Seasonal and Saturday permits shall be purchased through  the Farmer's Market Association. Seasonal permits shall also be available  for purchase with a limit of seven permits being issued per season.

The City Council, at its discretion, may enter into a Management Agreement with any Farmers Market Association to manage the Farmers Market, (including satellite markets) collect fees, and ensure compliance with the City Code requirements.

Subd. 4. Indemnification. Before receiving a permit, the vendor shall execute and deliver to the Permits and License Manager an Indemnification Agreement upon a form to be furnished by the City, holding the City harmless for any personal injury or property damage resulting from the vendor's activities.

Subd. 5. Fee. All permit applications  shall  be  accompanied  by  a payment of a fee to be established by ordinance
 

Subd. 6.   On  Sunday  through  Friday,  permits  shall  allow  Vendors  to park only on the south side of Fourth Street, between Bush Street and Plum Street (except for satellite markets as described  below).  On Saturdays,  permits shall also allow Vendors to park in the west City Hall parking lot fronting Bush Street and to use the front lawn of City Hall facing Bush Street. A valid permit under this section exempts the Vendor from the two-hour parking limit generally enforced on this block. Each Vendor is entitled to only one permit per day and each permit is good for only one vehicle and one stall. A maximum limit of ten permits per day will be issued for each day of the week except Saturday for Fourth Street. This limitation of ten permits for each day except Saturday does not apply to satellite markets. For the Saturday Farmers Market, a maximum limit of fourteen permits shall be issued for Fourth Street and an additional six permits may be issued specifically for the west City Hall parking lot. A permit shall be nontransferable between Vendors and shall be nonrefundable. If  there  is  an  approved Management Agreement with a Farmers Market Association, the Farmers Market Association shall have the option of conducting the Saturday market  on Fourth Street, between Bush Street and Plum Street and use the west City Hall Parking lot fronting Bush Street and the front lawn of City Hall facing Bush Street (a maximum of 20 vendor stalls); or the Saturday market may be conducted on the north side of Levee Street, from Broad Street (east of the first seven parking stalls) to Bush Street, and the west side of Bush Street north of Levee Street, and the east side of Bush Street north of Levee Street (a maximum of 30 vendor stalls). In addition, if  approved by the Permits and License Manager, a Farmers Market Association may manage satellite farmers markets at other privately and publicly owned locations.

Subd. 7.	Vendor Regulations.

A Tables shall be allowed on the sidewalk adjacent to the motor vehicle from which the market goods are being sold, but shall not exceed the width of the parking stall space and must maintain a minimum of  40 inches clearance from all obstacles for pedestrians. No tables shall be allowed in the street. Food items must be kept at least six inches above the ground.

B.	No music or noise shall be permitted that is audible within 30 feet of the vendor's vehicle.

C.	No sales shall be permitted before sunrise or after sunset.

D.	No pets or other live animals shall be allowed in the vendor area.

E. All vendors shall clean up around their vehicles when they have completed their sales for each day.
 
F. All vendors agree to abide by the Operational Guidelines of the Farmers Market Association. Said Operational Guidelines  shall  require  review and approval by the Permits and License Manager.

Subd. 8.	Market Food Wagon Regulations.

A No food shall be sold except directly from the Market Food Wagon or Market Food Wagon setup.

B.	All Market Food Wagons and Market Food Wagon setups shall be kept in good repair and order and shall have a neat appearance.

C.	There shall be no drainage of liquids allowed from the Market  Food Wagon or Market Food Wagon setup onto public property.

D.	No permit shall be issued on any Market Food Wagon until proof of appropriate	and necessary licensure by the State of Minnesota (Department of Health or Department of Agriculture) is provided.

E. All Vendor regulations listed in Subd. 7 also apply to Market Food Wagons.

Subd. 9.    Signage.    The  Association  shall  be  allowed  to  place  A- frame style, Swinger Signs or Sandwich Signs on City right-of-way for the purpose of directing visitors to the Saturday Farmers Market  location.  This  is a  device which is ordinarily in the shape of an "A" or some variation thereof, located on the ground, easily moveable, not permanently attached thereto  and which  is usually two sided.  A-Frame/Swinger/Sandwich  Signs must meet the following regulations:

A   Such signs shall be no larger than 10 square feet in sign area per side.

B.	Such signs shall not be taller than 4 feet or wider than 2-1/2 feet.

C.	Such signs shall only be displayed during Saturday Farmers Market hours.

D.	Such signs may be placed on private property (with permission) or on the public sidewalk near the Saturday Farmers Market but must provide at	least 60 inches of clearance on the sidewalk for  pedestrian movement.

E. Such signs shall be placed no closer than 48 inches from the face of the public street curb.

F.  Only one such sign shall be allowed per Zoned Lot.
 
Subd. 10. Revocation. The Permits  and  License  Manager  may,  in writing, revoke any permit issued under this section, or refuse to grant or renew the permit of any vendor in violation of this section, of any other City Code provision, or of any regulations adopted by the City.

SECTION 6.20.	TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING.

Subd. 1.	Purpose and Applicability.   Due to the inherent risk to the health and safety of persons associated with tattooing, body piercing, and other body art procedures, the purpose and intent of this Section is to establish rules, regulations, and standards for tattooing, body piercing, and other body art procedures performed within the City of Red Wing.  This Section shall apply to all body art establishments,  including tattoo parlors and establishments at which body piercing is performed, body art technicians, and operators of body art establishments,  including tattoo parlors and establishments at which body piercing is performed.

Subd. 2.	Definitions.

A   For the purpose of this Section, the following words and phrases have the meanings given to them in Minnesota Statutes, Section 146B.01, as amended:

1.	"Body art" or "body art procedure;"

2.	"Body art establishment;"

3.	"Body piercing;"

4.	"Department"

5.	"Guest artist;"

6.	"Operator;"

7.	"Tattooing;"

8.	"Technician" or "body art technician;" and

9.	"Temporary body art establishment."

B.  For the purpose of this Section, the term "License" means a license issued by the Minnesota Department of Health in accordance with the procedures and standards identified in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 146B, as amended.
 
Subd. 3.	Body Art Procedures.

A No tattooing, body piercing, or other body art procedure shall be performed	within the City of Red Wing except at a body art establishment or temporary body art establishment that is the subject of a valid establishment license, or at a temporary  event  in accordance with a temporary event permit issued by the Department of Health pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 1468.

B.	No tattooing shall be performed within the City of Red Wing, except by a technician or guest artist holding a valid tattoo technician license.

C.	No body piercing, or other body art procedure, other than tattooing, shall be performed within the City of Red Wing, except by a technician or guest artist holding a valid body piercing technician license.

D.	No tattooing, body piercing, or other body art procedure shall be performed in the City of Red Wing in any manner which deviates from Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 1468, as amended.

Subd. 4.     Unlawful Conduct.  Any person who violates this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by the payment of a fine, not to exceed $1,000, and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days.

Subd. 5. Professional Standards. All technicians shall comply with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Section 1468.07, as amended.

Subd. 6. Reporting. The City of Red Wing  shall  report  all  known violations of any health, safety,  professional standards,  and/or other requirement of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 1468, as amended, to the Minnesota Department of Health, and may request that the Department take appropriate remedial action, including, but not limited to, the revocation of any license or permit issued pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 1468, as amended.

Subd. 7. Proof of Licensure. All  technician,  guest  artist,  and establishment licenses, as well as all temporary event permits issued by the Department of Health pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 1468, must be prominently displayed and available for inspection at all times while any tattooing, body piercing, or other body art procedure is being conducted.

SECTION 6.21.	JUNK DEALERS.

Subd. 1. Definition. The term "junk" as used in this section means and includes, but is not limited to, scrap of all kinds such as metal, paper, rags and wood.
 
Subd. 2. License Required. It is unlawful for any person to deal in junk without having a license from the City.

Subd. 3.     Bond Requirement.   Before receiving a junk  dealer's license, the applicant shall execute and deliver to the  Permits  and  License  Manager  a bond in the penal sum of $10,000 with sufficient sureties approved by the Council and conditioned that the applicant will in every particular conform with the requirements of any law relating to junk dealers.

Subd. 4. Restriction. No license shall be granted to  any  person for operation upon premises contrary to any zoning provision of the City Code or other law.

 
SECTION 6.22. MERCHANTS.
 
PEDDLERS,	SOLICITORS	AND	TRANSIENT
 

Subd. 1. Definitions. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply.

1.	"Door-To-Door Advocacy" - includes door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering as a method for the  dissemination  of  religious, political and other ideas.

2.	"Peddler" - a person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to­ place, for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property that the person is carrying or otherwise transporting. The term peddler shall have the same meaning as the term hawker.

3.	"Person" - any natural individual, group, organization, corporation, partnership or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations, partnerships and associations, the term shall include each member, officer, partner, associate, agent or employee.

4.	"Regular Business Day" - any day during which  the  City  Hall  is normally  open  for  the  purpose   of  conducting  public  business. Holidays defined by state law shall not be  counted  as  regular business days.

5.	"Solicitor" - a person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to­ place, for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods,  wares,  products,  merchandise,  other  personal  property  or
 
services of which the person may be carrying or  transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall  occur  at a  later time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of this section if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above.  The term shall have the same meaning as the term "canvasser."

6.	"Transient Merchant" - a person who temporarily sets up business to sell or purchase out of a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, hotel/motel, other portable shelter, or empty storefront for the  purpose   of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property, and who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location for more than 14 consecutive days.

Subd. 2.	Exceptions to Definitions.

A For the purpose of the requirements  of  this  Section,  the  terms PEDDLER, SOLICITOR,  and TRANSIENT  MERCHANT shall not apply to any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale  any  goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by the wholesale. The terms also shall not apply to any person who is personally known by the person being solicited  or who is first contacted by the person being solicited.

B.	Persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons participating in an organized multi-person bazaar, flea market, or festival, shall be exempt	from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, and TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, as shall any person conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer,  or any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this Section shall not excuse any person from complying with any other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance.

C.	Nothing  in  this  section  prohibits  or  restricts  door-to-door   advocacy.
Persons engaging in door-to-door  advocacy are not required to register as solicitors under Subdivision 6 of this Section.

Subd. 3.	Licensing; Exemptions.

A County License Required. No person shall conduct business  as  a peddler, solicitor or transient  merchant within the city limits without first obtaining  the  appropriate   license  from  the   County  as  required  by
 
Minnesota  Statutes,  Chapter  329 as  it may be amended from time to time, if the County issues a license for the activity.

B.	City License Required. Except as otherwise provided for by this section, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler or a transient merchant without first obtaining a license from the City. This license is nontransferable.	Solicitors need not be licensed, but are required to register under Subdivision 6 of this Section.

C.	Application. Application for a city license to conduct business as  a peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least 14 regular business days	before the applicant wishes to begin conducting business. Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the City Council and available from the office of the Permits and License Manager.	All applications shall be signed by the applicant and shall include the following information:

1.	Applicant's full legal name and date of birth;

2.	All other names under which the applicant conducts business or to which the applicant officially answers;

3.	A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color, height, weight, and distinguishing marks and features);

4.	Full address and telephone number of applicant's permanent residence;

5.	Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or agent;

6.	Full address and telephone number of applicant's regular place of business (if any);

7.	The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a license and a general description of the items to be sold or services to be provided;

8.	Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license;

9.	The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business, and if the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days the applicant will be conducting business in the City (maximum 14 consecutive days);
 
10.	Any and all addresses and telephone  numbers where the applicant can be reached while conducting business within the City, including the location where a transient merchant intends to set up business;

11.	Written  permission  of  the  property  owner  or  the  property  owner's agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant;

12.	A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor for violation of any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than traffic offenses;

13.	A list of the three most recent locations where the applicant has conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant;

14.	Proof of any required county license;

15.	A general description of the items  to  be  sold  or  services  to  be provided;

16.	The applicant's driver's license number or other acceptable form of identification;

17.	The license plate number, registration information and vehicle identification number for any vehicle  to be used in conjunction with the licensed business and a description of the vehicle;

18.	All additional information deemed necessary by the City Council.

D.	Fee. All applications for a license under this Section  shall  be accompanied by the fee established by ordinance.

E. Procedure. Upon receipt of the completed application and payment of the license fee, the Permits and License Manager, within two regular business days, shall determine if the application is complete. An application is determined to be complete only if all required information is provided. If the Permits and License Manager determines that the application is incomplete, the Permits and License Manager shall inform the applicant what  required information is missing. If the application is complete,	the Permits and License Manager shall order any investigation, including background checks, necessary to verify the information provided with the application. Within  10 regular  business days of receiving a complete application, the Permits and License Manager shall issue the license unless there are grounds  for  denying the license under Subdivision 4 of this Section, in which case the Permits and License Manager must deny the license.   If the Permits and
 
License Manager denies the license, the applicant must  be notified in writing of the decision, the reason for denial, and of the applicant's right to appeal the denial by requesting, within 20 days of receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing before the City  Council.  The  City  Council shall hear the appeal within 20 days of the date of the request. The decision of the City Council following the public hearing can be appealed by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a Writ of Certiorari.

F.	Duration. An annual license granted under this Section shall be valid for one calendar year from the date  of issue. All other licenses granted under this Section shall be valid only during the time period indicated on the license.

G.	License Exemptions.

1.	No license shall be required of any person going from house-to­ house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or other type of place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose of exercising that person's State or  Federal  Constitutional  rights such as the freedom of speech, press, and religion, except that this exemption may be lost if the person's exercise  of  Constitutional rights is merely incidental to a commercial activity.

2.	Professional fundraisers working on behalf of an otherwise exempt person or group shall not be exempt from the licensing requirements of this Section.

3.	No license shall be required of any person or group that is a tax exempt, transient merchant when it operates in an area of the City zoned as Central Business District (B-3) for one period, up to three days in length, per calendar year. Registration is still required pursuant to Subdivision 6 of this Section.

4.	Any person claiming to be exempt from the licensing or registration requirements of this section shall, when requested, present to the Permits and License Manager  proof  of  qualification  for  such exemption.

Subd. 4.	License   Ineligibility.	The  following   shall   be  grounds   for denying a license under this Section:

A The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of having obtained any required county license.

B.	The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the information requested by the City as a part of the application, or the failure to sign
 
the  application,  or  the  failure  to  pay  the  required  fee  at  the  time  of application.

C.	The conviction of the applicant within the past five years from the date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on the person's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought  in an honest and legal manner. Those violations shall include  but  not  be limited to burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of actual  or threatened physical harm against another person.

D.	The revocation within  the past five years of any license issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant.

Subd. 5.	Suspension and Revocation.

A Generally. Any license or Certificate of Registration issued under this section may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the following:

1.	Fraud, misrepresentation  or incorrect statements  on the application form.

2.	Fraud,   misrepresentation	or  false   statements	made   during   the course of the licensed activity.

3.	Failure  to  exhibit  the  license  or  Certificate  of  Registration  when requested to do so by any prospective customer or city employee.

4.	Conviction of any offense for which granting of a license could have been denied under Subdivision 4 of this Section.

5.	Violation of any provision of this section.

B.	Multiple Persons Under One License. The suspension or revocation of any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons  to conduct business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person's authority to conduct business as a peddler  or  transient merchant on behalf of the licensee whose license is suspended or revoked.

C.	Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this Section, the City shall provide the  license holder with written  notice of
 
the alleged violations and inform the licensee of the right to a hearing on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the permanent residential address listed on the license application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license application.

D.	Public Hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in section (C) of this Subdivision, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If no request for a hearing is received by the Permits and License Manager within 10 regular business days following the service of  the notice, the City may proceed with the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices,  service shall  be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail.  If a public hearing is requested within the stated timeframe, a hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within three regular business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its decision.

E. Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a peddler or transient merchant licensed under this Section, the City Council may immediately suspend the person's license and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in Subparagraph D. of this Subdivision.

F. Appeals. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.

Subd. 6. Registration. All solicitors, and any person exempt from the licensing requirements under Subdivision 3 of this Section, shall be required to register with the City. Persons engaging in DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCACY shall not be required to register. Registration shall be made on the same form required for a license application, but no fee shall be required. Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the Permits and License Manager shall issue to the registrant a Certificate of Registration as  proof  of  the  registration. Certificates of Registration are nontransferable.

Subd. 7.  Prohibited  Activities.  No  peddler,  solicitor   or   transient merchant shall conduct business or otherwise behave in any of the following manners:

A Calling attention to the business or items to be sold by means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.

B.	Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way.
 

C.	Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health, safety and welfare of any individual or the general public.

D.	Conducting business before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.

E. Failing to provide proof of identification and license or Certificate of Registration, when requested; or using the license or Certificate of Registration of another person.

F.	Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of  the  City solely based on the City having issued a license to that person.

G.	Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave, or to otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.

Subd. 8. Exclusion by Placard. No  peddler,  solicitor  or  transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant when the property is marked with a sign or placard with print of at least 48 point in size stating "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," "No Transient Merchants," "Peddlers and Solicitors Prohibited,"  or other comparable statement. No person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section.

Subd. 9.	Penalties.

A A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.

SECTION 6.23.	CHARITABLE GAMBLING.

Subd. 1. Purpose.  The  purpose  of  this  section  is  to  regulate  and control the conduct of lawful gambling (gambling) and to ensure that profits derived therefrom in the City of Red Wing provide direct benefits to the City's citizens.

Subd. 2. Statutes Incorporated. The provisions of Minnesota Statutes relating to gambling and providing penalties for violations thereof are hereby adopted and made a part of this section. The provisions of this Code  are additional restrictions placed on gambling by the City.
 
Subd. 3.    Definitions.  The terms defined in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 349 have the meanings assigned therein unless the text of this section expressly provides otherwise. In addition the following terms shall have the following meanings:

1.	"Resident Manager or Agent" - at the time of application to the City, the applicant shall appoint in writing a natural person as its gambling manager or agent. The manager or agent shall consent in writing to:
(1)	take full responsibility for the conduct of the  licensed premises; and (2) serve as agent for service of notices and other  process relating to the permit or license. The manager or agent must be a person who, by reason of age, character, reputation, and other attributes, could qualify as a gambling manager. The manager or agent, however, need not be or trained to be the organization's gambling manager as that term is defined in state statute. If the manager or agent ceases to act in that capacity for the licensee without appointment of a successor, the permit or license issued pursuant to the appointment shall be subject to revocation or suspension.

2.	"Trade Area" - the City's trade area includes all of Goodhue County in Minnesota and Trenton and Isabelle Townships of Pierce County, Wisconsin.

Subd. 4.	Gambling Prohibited; Exemption.

A No person, except an organization which is licensed by or has a valid exemption permit from the State or has a permit from the City, shall conduct lawful gambling within the City. A City permit shall be obtained each time an exemption permit is sought from the Gambling Control Board	(Board). All permits required by this section or State  Statutes shall be prominently displayed during the permit  year at the premises licensed to conduct gambling.

B. All gambling activities exempt from licensure by statute shall require a City permit for the conduct of exempt gambling.

 
Subd. 5.
Inspections.
 
Filing  of   Records   and   Reports;  Access   to   Records  and
 

A Every organization permitted to conduct lawful gambling in the City shall file with the Permits and License Manager copies of all records  and reports required to be filed with the Board. The  records  and  reports shall be due to the City at the same time they are due to the Board.
 
B. Every organization shall file an additional report with  the City proving compliance with the Trade Area spending restrictions imposed by this section.	The report shall be on a form prescribed by the Permits and License Manager and shall be submitted annually and in advance of application for renewal.

C. All licensed or permitted gambling operations are deemed to have consented to inspection of the licensed or permitted premises  by the City.

D. Authorized employees or agents of the City may inspect, at any reasonable time without notice or search warrant, all records, including gambling accounts and other bank records required by the Board to be maintained and preserved.

Subd. 6.	Application.

A An organization shall make application for a premises permit on a form prescribed by the Board. The applicant shall provide a complete copy of the State application to the City.

B. An organization holding a premises permit must notify the Permits and License Manager in writing within ten days of any material change in the information contained in the application.

C.  The Council shall act on the application within 60 days from the date complete materials are submitted,  but shall not approve  an application to the Board for a new premises permit until at least 30 days after the date of the application.

Subd. 7.	General Conditions.

A The City Council may require a copy of the financial audit or financial review required by the State of any organization that conducts lawful gambling in the City at the organization's expense. The audit  shall include information on all gross receipts, profits, and expenses incurred by the organization in the conduct of gambling as well as information on uses of profits and  trade area limitations. The audit report shall be submitted to the City Council upon timely completion, or at  the application for  renewal but no later than 180 days after the end of the gambling license year.

B. Gambling Manager Required. Each  licensed  organization  must designate a gambling manager. The gambling manager designated by an organization shall be responsible for the lawful conduct  of  all gambling	in compliance with all laws and state rules.  An organization
 
may not conduct gambling without a gambling manager.  Any organization changing gambling managers, or adding or removing gambling managers, must notify the City in writing within ten days of the change.

C. Hours of Operation.  Unless specifically  permitted by the City Council, no gambling shall be conducted between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. Monday, 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. daily Tuesday through Saturday and 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. Sunday.

Subd. 8.	Conditions for Allowing Premises to Be Used for Gambling.

A No organization or person shall, directly or indirectly, conduct, allow or permit gambling without a license issued by the Board, or an exemption from the Board and license from the City.

B. No person, organization or business entity shall suffer or permit  any gaming table or gambling equipment to be used for the purpose of gambling in any house, lot, yard, or garden owned, occupied  or controlled by that person, organization or business entity,  except  for those organizations licensed by the Board and issued permits pursuant to this  Section, unless the person, organization or business entity is a lessor of premises leased to an organization issued the license or permit for gambling.

Subd. 9.	Leased Premises; General Restrictions on Use.

A Lease/Ownership Required. An organization may conduct licensed gambling only on premises it owns or leases. Leases must be for  a period of at  least one year and must be on a form prescribed by the Board. Copies of all leases must accompany an application to the City. A lease may be a conditional lease based on granting of the permit. No lease agreement payments may exceed limitations established by the Board as set forth in Minnesota Statutes, Section 349.18, Subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time.

No person, distributor, manufacturer, lessor, or organization other than the licensed organization leasing or owning the space may conduct any gambling activity on the leased/owned premises while gambling is being conducted on the premises.

B.	No lessor shall permit more than one organization to conduct gambling at the leased premises at the same time.

C.	No person, organization or business licensed to conduct gambling at a leased location shall sell or solicit beyond the limits of leased space as
 
indicated on  the lease agreement.

Subd. 10. Establishments Applying for or Holding Liquor Licenses. No licensed liquor establishment shall keep, possess, operate or permit the keeping, possession or operation of any video games of chance, or gambling device including slot machines, roulette wheels, punch Boards and  pinball  machines which return coins or slugs, chips or tokens of any kind which are redeemable for merchandise, cash or other item of value on the licensed premises. In addition no dice or playing card gambling is allowed in any licensed establishment.

Only gambling licensed by the Board and conducted pursuant to state statute and this Section is permitted on licensed establishments. Personal gambling  for nominal consideration is allowed in a licensed establishment  when  allowed  by state statute.

Subd. 11.	Investigations; Permit Fees and Local Contributions.

A All organizations exempt from state licensing requirements, which are applying for a permit to conduct gambling in the City, shall pay a permit fee to the City established by ordinance.

B.	Any  organization  applying  for  or  renewing  a premises  permit  or  bingo hall license must pay an investigation fee at the time of application established by ordinance.
C.	All permit applications must be referred to the Police Department and to other departments as necessary for verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the application. The investigation shall include, but not be limited to, a criminal history background check. A written report of the findings, along with a recommendation of the Police Department regarding the license application, shall be forwarded to the Council with the application.

D.	Designated Trade Area. Any organization licensed to conduct gambling within the City shall expend at least 50 percent of its expenditures on lawful purposes conducted or located within the Trade Area. A licensed organization may request relief from this  provision.  The  City  Council may in its sole discretion grant such relief when the circumstances warrant.

Subd. 12.	Granting of Premises Permits and Bingo Hall Licenses.

A The City may deny an application to the Board for a premises permit or bingo hall license if:

1.	The  liquor  licensee,   owner,   or  manager  of  the  site  has  been convicted of a violation of any gambling or liquor license laws;
 

2.	The   City's   investigation   indicates   that   the   organization   or gambling  manager failed to comply with the terms  or conditions  of any other license or indicates a history of noncompliance with state or local law regulating the conduct of gambling;

3.	Noncompliance with any applicable zoning, building, fire and health codes of the City or other regulations in this section; or

4.	Noncompliance with requirements of this section or other stated factors including, but not limited to, the health, safety and welfare of the City.

B.	An application made to the Board for a premises permit or bingo hall license to conduct lawful gambling in the City may be  denied  by resolution of the City Council if notification of such resolution is made to the  Board within 60 days of the receipt of the complete application by the Permits and License Manager.

Subd. 13. Violations. Violations of this Section may result in penalties imposed by Section 6.26 or civil sanctions imposed by the City Council.

SECTION 6.24.	PAWNBROKERS.

Subd. 1.     Purpose.  The City Council finds that use of services provided by pawnbrokers offers an opportunity for the commission of crimes and their concealment because pawn businesses have the ability to receive and transfer property stolen by others easily and quickly. The City Council also  finds that consumer protection regulation is  warranted  in  transactions  involving pawnbrokers. The purpose of this section is to prevent  pawn businesses  from being used as facilities for the commission of crimes and to assure that these businesses comply with basic consumer protection standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City.

To help the Red Wing Police better regulate pawn businesses, decrease and stabilize costs associated with the regulation of the pawn industry, and increase identification	of criminal activities in the pawn industry through  the  timely collection	and sharing of pawn transaction information, this section also implements and establishes the required use of an automated pawn system of the City of Red Wing's choosing.

 
Subd. 2.
shall mean:
 
Definitions.	When  used in this  section,  the following  words
 

1.	"Pawnbroker" - any natural person, partnership or corporation, either as  principal,  agent  or  employee,  who  loans  money  on  deposit  or
 
pledge of personal property or other valuable thing; or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable thing on condition of selling it back again at a stipulated price within a fixed period of time; or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged. To the extent that a pawnbroker's business also includes buying personal property previously used, rented or leased, or selling it on consignment, the provisions of this Section shall apply.

The following are expressly exempt from the definition  of "pawnbroker": any bank regulated by the State of Minnesota, the comptroller of the currency of the United States, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the board of governors of the Federal Reserve System, or any other federal or state authority and their affiliates; any bank or savings association  whose  deposits  or accounts are eligible for insurance by the FDIC or any successor to it and all affiliates of those banks and savings associations; any state or federally chartered credit union; any industrial loan and thrift company or regulated lender subject  to licensing and regulation by the Department of Commerce; and antique and second hand goods dealers, so long as they do not engage in the activities of a "pawnbroker" as defined herein.

2.	"Reportable Transaction" - every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker	in which merchandise is received through a pawn, purchase, consignment or trade, or in which a pawn is renewed, extended or redeemed, is reportable except:

(a)	The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from	a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler having an established permanent place of business, and the retail sale of that merchandise, provided the pawnbroker must maintain a record of the purchase or consignment which describes  each item, and must mark each item in a manner which relates it to that transaction record.

(b)	Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by pawn or purchase,  and for which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods have expired.

3.	"Billable Transaction" - every reportable transaction conducted by a pawnbroker is a billable transaction except renewals, redemptions or extensions of existing pawns on items previously reported and continuously in the licensee's possession.
 
Subd. 3. License Required. No person shall engage in the business of pawnbrokering at any location without a pawnbroker license for that location. Any pawn transaction made without the benefit of a license is void. A separate license is required for each place of business.  No pawnbroker license may be transferred to a different location or a different person. Issuance  of  a  license  under  this Section shall not relieve the licensee from obtaining any other licenses required to conduct business at the same or any other locations.

Subd. 4. New Ownership. Any  change, directly or beneficially, in the ownership of any licensed pawnshop shall require an application for a new license. The new owner must satisfy all current eligibility requirements.

Subd. 5.	License Fees.

A The annual license fees for  licenses issued under this Section shall be established by ordinance within the following parameters. The billable transaction license fee shall reflect the cost of processing transactions electronically and manually and other related regulatory expenses as determined by the City Council, and shall be reviewed and adjusted, if necessary, annually. Licensees shall be notified in writing  30  days before any adjustment is implemented.

B. Billable transaction fees shall be billed monthly and are due and payable within 30 days. Failure to pay fees by the due date is a violation of this Section.

Subd. 6. Investigation Fee. An applicant for a new license, or for the renewal of an existing license that is more than six months past due, shall deposit an investigation fee with the Permits and License Manager at the time an application is submitted, The fee shall cover the costs involved in verifying  and investigating the license application needed to assure compliance with  this Section. The deposit and the actual investigation fee guidelines shall  be established by ordinance.

Subd. 7.	Term of License.

A Expiration.  All  licenses  shall  expire  on  December  31.  Each  license shall remain in full force and effect until surrendered, suspended, revoked, or expired. A license may be suspended or revoked for failure to comply with this section.

B.	No Effect on Existing Contract.  The expiration, revocation, suspension, or surrender of any license under this section, however, shall not impair or affect any preexisting lawful obligation between the licensee and any pledgor.
 
C.	Notification. The  Permits and License Manager  shall notify the Police Chief of any licensee whose license has expired or been surrendered, suspended, or revoked as provided by this section.

Subd. 8.	Application  Required.

A Contents. An application form provided by the Permits and License Manager must be completed by every applicant for a new pawnbroker license or for renewal of an existing license. Every new applicant must provide all the following information:

1.	If the applicant is a natural person:

(a)	Name, place and date of birth, street resident address, and phone number.

(b)	Whether the applicant has ever  used or  has been known by a name other than the applicant's name, and if so,  the  name or names used and information concerning dates and places used.

(c)	The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a designation,  name, or style other than the name of the applicant and a certified copy of the certificate as required by Minnesota Statutes.

(d)	Any street address at which the applicant has lived during the preceding five years.

(e)	The type, name and location of every business or occupation in which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five years and the name(s) and address(es) of the applicant's employer(s) and business partner(s), if any, for the preceding five years.

(f)	Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor, or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance.	If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the time, place, and offense of all such convictions.

(g)	A physical description of the applicant.

(h)	Applicant's current personal financial  statement  and true copies of  the applicant's federal  and state tax returns for the two years prior to application.
 
(i)	If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all information concerning each of them required in (a) through (h) of Subdivision 8A.1. of this Section.

2.	If the applicant is a partnership:

(a)	The name(s) and address(es)  of all general and limited partners and all information concerning each general partner required in Subdivision 8A.1. of this Section.

(b)	The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the interest of each partner in the licensed pawnbroker business.

(c)	A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the  application.   If the partnership  is required to file a certificate as to  a trade name pursuant  to Minnesota Statutes, a certified copy of such certificate must be attached to the application.

(d)	A true copy of the federal and state tax returns for partnership for the two years prior to application.

(e)	If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all information concerning each of them required in (a) through (h) of Subdivision 8A.1. of this section.

3.	If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:

(a)	The name of the corporation  or  business  form,  and  if incorporated, the state of incorporation.

(b)	A true copy of the Certificate of  Incorporation,  Articles  of Incorporation or Association Agreement, and By-laws shall  be attached to the application.  If  the  applicant  is  a  foreign corporation, a Certificate of Authority as required by Minnesota Statutes, must be attached.

(c)	The name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business	and  all  information  concerning  each   manager, proprietor, or  agent  required  in (a.) through  (h.)  of  Subdivision 8A.1. of this Section.

(d)	A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess of five percent in the organization or business form or who are officers  of the  corporation  or  business form  and all  information
 
concerning these persons required in Subdivision 8A.1. of this Section. This Subdivision, however, shall not apply to  a corporation whose stock is publicly traded on a stock exchange and is applying for a license to be owned and operated by it.

4.	For all applicants:

(a)	Whether the  applicant   holds  a  current  pawnbroker,  precious metal dealer or secondhand goods dealer license from any other governmental unit.

(b)	Whether  the  applicant  has  previously  been  denied,  or  had revoked or suspended, a pawnbroker, precious metal dealer, or secondhand dealer license from any other governmental unit.

(c)	The location of the business premises.

(d)	If the applicant does not own the business premises, a true and complete copy of the executed lease.

(e)	The legal description of the premises to be licensed.

(f)	Whether  all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid.

(g)	Whenever the application is for premises either planned, under construction  or undergoing substantial  alteration,  the application must be accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the design of the proposed premises to be licensed.

(h)	The applicant's social security number and Minnesota business identification number.

(i)	Such other information as the City Council may require of which the applicant is notified.

5.	New Manager. When a licensee places a manager in charge of a business, or if the named manager(s) in charge of a licensed business changes, the licensee must complete and submit the appropriate application, on forms provided by the Permits  and License Manager, within 14 days of the new manager's start date. The application must include all appropriate information required in this Subdivision. Upon completion of an investigation of a new manager, the licensee must pay an amount equal to the cost of the
 
investigation as established ordinance to assure compliance with this Section.

B.	Application  Execution.   All applications for a license under this section must be signed and sworn under oath or affirmation by the applicant. If the  application is that of a natural person, it must be signed and sworn by such person; if that of a corporation, by an officer thereof; if that of a partnership,	by one of the general partners; and if that  of  an unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof.

C.	Investigation. The employee designated by the Police Chief must investigate the truthfulness of the statements set forth in the application. The applicant must furnish to the employee designated by the Police Chief evidence that the investigator reasonably  requires to  investigate the truth of the statements set forth in the application.

D.	Persons Ineligible for a License. No licenses under this Section will be issued to a natural person who, or to a partnership with  a  general partner	or managing partner who, or to a corporation or other organization with a manager, proprietor or agent in charge who:

1.	Is under the age of 21 at the time that the application is filed;

2.	Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the pawnbroker business as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes, Section 364.03, as it may be amended from time to time, and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a licensee under this Section as prescribed by Minnesota Statutes; or

3.	Is not of good moral character or repute as determined by the Council.

Subd. 9. Bond Required. Before  a  license  will  be  issued,  every applicant must submit a $5,000 bond with completed forms provided by  the Permits and License Manager. All bonds must be issued on the condition that the principal will observe and conduct business in conformance with all laws relating to pawnbrokers, and that the principal will account for and deliver to any  person legally entitled any goods which have come into the principal's hand through the principal's business as a pawnbroker, or in lieu thereof, will pay the reasonable value in money to the person. The bond shall contain a provision that no bond may be canceled except upon 30 days written notice to the City, which shall be served upon the Permits and License Manager.

The  bond  may  be  used  to  reimburse  losses  as  a  result  of  violations  of  this ordinance.	In the  event  losses  exceed  the  amount  of  the  bond,  those  who
 
suffered losses will be reimbursed based on a pro-rated share of losses reported within 14 days of the discovery of the alleged violations and on a first come first served basis after that time. In the event losses are less than the amount of the bond, the City may use the bond to defer costs directly incurred in enforcing this ordinance against the licensee as a result of the violations.

Subd. 10. Records Required.  At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals, extensions or redemptions, every licensee must immediately record the following information in a computerized record approved by the Red Wing Police:

A A complete and accurate description of each item including,  but  not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item.

B.	The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon, or pledged therefor.

C.	The maturity date of the transaction  and  the  amount  due,  including monthly and annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges.

D.	Date, time and place the item of property was received by the licensee, and	the unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguishes it from all other transactions in the licensee's records.

E. Full name, residence address, residence telephone  number,  date  of birth and accurate description of the person from whom the item was received, including: sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair.

F.	The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of identification of the seller:

1.	Current valid Minnesota driver's license.

2.	Current valid Minnesota identification card.

3.	Current  valid  photo  identification  card  issued  by  another  state  or province of Canada.

G.	The signature of the person identified in the transaction.

H.	The licensee must also take a color photograph or color video recording of:

1.	Each customer involved in a billable transaction.
 
2.	Every  item  pawned or  sold that  does  not have  a  unique  serial  or identification number permanently engraved or affixed.

If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two inches in length by two inches in width and must be maintained in such a manner that the photograph can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the transaction  to which they relate. Such photographs must be available to the Police Chief  or designee,  upon request. The major portion of the photograph must include an identifiable front facial close-up of the  person who pawned or sold the item. Items photographed must be accurately depicted. The  licensee  must inform the person that he or she is being photographed by displaying a sign of readily legible size in a conspicuous place on the premises. If a video photograph is taken, the video camera must zoom in on the person pawning or selling the item so as to include an identifiable close-up of that person's face.  Items photographed  by video  must be accurately depicted. Video photographs must be electronically referenced by time and date so they can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the transaction to  which  they relate. The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being videotaped by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee must keep the exposed videotape for three months.

I.	Digitized photographs. Licensees may fulfill the color photograph requirements in Subdivision 1OH. of this Section by submitting them as digital	images, in a format specified by the issuing authority, electronically cross-referenced to the reportable transaction with which they are associated. Notwithstanding the  digital  images  may  be captured from required video recordings, this provision does not alter or amend the requirements in Subdivision 1OH. of this Section.

J.	Renewals, extensions and redemptions. For renewals, extensions and redemptions, the licensee shall provide the original transaction identifier, the date of the current transaction, and the type of transaction.

K.	Inspection of records. The records must at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the Red Wing Police.   Data entries shall be retained for at least three years from the  date of transaction. Entries of required digital images shall be retained a minimum of 90 days.

Subd. 11.	Permitted Charges.

A Maximum Fee.  A pawnbroker's fee may not exceed the maximum fee as established by Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 325J.
 
B. Date Due. The pawnshop fee shall be deemed earned and due as of the date of the pawn transaction, and a like sum shall  be  deemed earned and due on the same day of the succeeding month. If full payment is made more than two weeks  before  the  next  succeeding date, however, the pawnbroker shall remit one-half of the pawnshop fee for that month to the pledgor.

C.  Interest.  Interest shall not be deducted in advance.  Any loan shall not be divided or split so as to yield greater interest or fees than would be permitted on a single, consolidated loan. Any interest, charge, or fee received in excess of the amount permitted under this section shall be uncollectible and the pawn transaction shall be void.

D. Posted Schedule of Charges. A schedule of charges in accordance with this section shall be posted on the pawnshop premises in a place clearly visible to the public.

E. Insurance Charge Prohibited. A pawnbroker shall not sell or charge for insurance in connection with a pawn transaction.

Subd. 12.	Daily Reports to Police.

A Method. Licensees must provide to the Red Wing Police the information required in Subdivisions 1OA. through 1OG. of this Section, by the business day following the date of the transaction. The licensee must display a sign of readily legible size, and in a conspicuous place on the premises, so as to inform all patrons that all transactions are reported to the Red Wing Police daily. Licensees must submit every reportable transaction to the Red Wing Police daily in the following manner.

Licensees must provide to the Red Wing Police the information required in Subdivisions 1OA. through 1OG. of this Section, by transferring it from their computers to the Red Wing Police via modem or other approved electronic means. All required records must be transmitted completely and accurately after the close of business each day in accordance with standards and procedures established by the City using a dial-callback protocol or other procedures that address security concerns of the licensees and the issuing authority.

B.	Billable transaction fees. Licensees will be charged for  billable transactions in accordance with the established fee structure except:

1.	If a licensee is temporarily unable to successfully transfer the required reports by modem, the licensee must provide the Red Wing Police printed copies of all reportable  transactions for that date by 12:00 noon the next business day.
 

2.	If the problem is determined to be in the licensee's system and is not corrected by the close of the first business day following the failure, the licensee must provide the required reports as detailed in Subdivision 12A. of this section, and must be charged at the regular rate for transactions through the close of the first business day following the failure, and at the regular rate plus a 10 percent surcharge for all subsequent billable transactions until the error is corrected; or

3.	If the problem is determined to be outside the licensee's system, the licensee must provide the required reports in detail in Subdivision 12A. of this section, and will be billed at the regular rate for billable transactions until the error is corrected.

4.	If a licensee who has consistently reported via modem is unable to capture, digitize or transmit the photographs required in Subdivisions 1OH. and 101. of this Section, the licensee must immediately take all required photographs, immediately develop the photographs, cross­ reference the photographs to the correct transaction,  and  deliver them to the Red Wing Police by 12:00 noon the next business day. Billable	transactions will be charged at the regular rate for transactions through the close of the first business day following the failure,	and at the surcharged rate for all  subsequent billable transactions until the error is corrected.

5.	Subdivisions 128.1. through 4 of this Section  notwithstanding,  the Red	Wing Police may, upon presentation of extenuating circumstances, extend the period that a qualifying licensee  is billed at the regular rate for billable transactions.

Subd. 13.  Receipt Required.   Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified in every reportable transaction signed by that party and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for three years. The receipt must include at least the following information:

A   The name, address and telephone number of the licensed business.

B.	The date and time the item was received by the licensee.

C.	Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of the transaction.

D.	An accurate description of each item received including, but not limited to,  any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item.
 
E. The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee who conducted the transaction.

F.	The amount advanced or paid.

G.	The monthly and annual interest rates, including all  pawn  fees  and charges.

H.	The last regular day of business by which the item must be redeemed by  the pledgor without risk that the  item will be sold, and the amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date.

I.	The  full  name,  residence  address,  residence  telephone  number,  and date of birth of the pledgor or seller.

J.	The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of identification of the seller:

1.	Current valid Minnesota driver's license;

2.	Current valid Minnesota identification card; or

3.	Current valid photo driver's license or identification card issued by another state or a province of Canada.

K.	Description of the pledgor or seller including approximate sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair.

L.	The following printed statements as required  by  Minnesota  Statutes, Section 325J.04, as it may be amended from time to time:

1.	"Any personal property pledged to a pawnbroker within this state is subject to sale or disposal when there has been no payment made on the account for a period of not less than 60 days past the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension; no further notice is necessary. There is no obligation for the pledgor to redeem pledged goods."

2.	"The pledgor of this item attests that it is not stolen, it has no liens or encumbrances against it, and the pledgor has the right to sell  or pawn the item."

3.	"This item is redeemable only by the pledgor to whom  the  receipt was issued, or any person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or a person identified  in writing  by the  pledgor  at the time  of the  initial
 
transaction and signed by the pledgor. Written authorization for release of property to persons other than the original pledgor must be maintained along with the original transaction record."

M.	The signature of the pledgor or seller.

Subd. 14.	Motor Vehicle  Pawn Transactions.	A  pawnbroker who  holds title to a motor vehicle as part of a pawn transaction shall:

A   Be licensed as a used motor vehicle dealer under Minnesota Statutes:

B.	Verify that there are no liens or encumbrances against the motor vehicle with the Minnesota Department of Public Safety; and

C.	Verify that the pledgor has automobile insurance  on  the  vehicle  as required by law.

Pawnbrokers shall not sell a motor vehicle covered by a pawn transaction until 90 days after recovery of the motor vehicle.

Subd. 15.	Redemption Period.
A Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an item for security must have a minimum of 60 days from the date of that transaction to redeem the item before it may be forfeited and sold.

B.	During the 60 day holding period, items may not be removed from the licensed location except for storage as provided in Subdivision 24 of this Section or under the following circumstances:

1.	Licensees are permitted to return pledged goods to the pledgor at any time during the redemption period:

2.	Licensees are permitted to sell the pledged goods or remove the pledged goods from the licensed  premises  or  other  storage  at any time after the expiration of the redemption period set forth in this Subdivision; and

3.	Licensees who purchase goods not involving a pawn transaction are permitted to sell or remove the purchased goods from the licensed premises or other storage 31 days or later from the purchase transaction date.

C.	Licensees must return pledged goods to a pledgor or seller, or provide compensation for lost or damaged goods, upon payment of the full amount due the licensee unless either:
 
1.	The date of redemption is more than 60 days past the date of the pawn transaction,  renewal, or extension and the pawnbroker has sold the pledged goods pursuant  to   Subdivision  17  of  this Section; or

2.	The pledged goods have been taken into custody by a court or a law enforcement officer or agency.

D.	Licensees are prohibited from redeeming any item to anyone other than the person to whom the receipt was issued, or to any person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt, or to a person identified in writing by the pledgor, or with approval of the Police Department. Written authorization for release of property to persons other than original pledgor must  be  maintained along with original transaction record in accordance with Subdivision of 1OJ. of this Section.

Subd. 16. Risk of  Loss.  In the event  the goods are  lost or damaged while in possession of the pawnbroker, the pawnbroker shall compensate the pledgor for the fair market value of the lost or damaged goods.

Subd. 17.  Effect  of  Nonredemption.  The  pledgor  shall  have  no obligation to redeem pledged goods or make any payment on a pawn transaction. Pledged goods not redeemed within at least 60 days of the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension shall automatically be forfeited to the pawnbroker. Qualified right, title, and interest in forfeited goods shall automatically vest in the pawnbroker.

Subd. 18.   Holding Period.   Any  item purchased by a licensee must not be sold or otherwise transferred for 31 days from the date of the transaction.

Subd. 19.	Police Order to Hold Property.

A Investigative hold. Whenever a  law  enforcement  official  from  any agency notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the premises.  The  investigative  hold  shall  be confirmed in writing by the originating agency within 72 hours and will remain in effect for 15 days from the date of initial notification, or until the investigative order is cancelled, or until an order to hold/confiscate is issued, pursuant to Subdivision 198. of this Section, whichever comes first.

B.	Order to hold. Whenever the Police Chief or designee notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the licensed premises until authorized in writing by the Police Chief or designee.   The hold order shall be confirmed in writing within 72 hours.
 
The order to hold shall expire 90 days from the date it is placed unless the Police Chief or designee determines the hold is still necessary and notifies the licensee in writing.

C.	Order to confiscate. If an item is identified as stolen or evidence in a criminal case, the Police Chief or designee may:

1.	Physically  confiscate  and  remove  it from  the  shop,  pursuant  to  a written order from the Police Chief or designee, or

2.	Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided in Subdivision
198. of this Section, and leave it in the shop.

When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall provide the licensee the name and phone number of the confiscating agency and investigator, and the case number related to the confiscation. When an order to hold/confiscate is no longer necessary, the Police Chief or designee shall so notify the licensee.

Subd. 20. Inspection of Items. At  all  times  during  the  terms  of  the license, the licensee must allow the Police to enter the premises where  the licensed business is located, including all off-site storage facilities as authorized in Subdivision 24 of this Section, during normal business hours, except that they may enter at any time in an emergency, for the purpose of inspecting the premises and items, warehouse  and merchandise and records therein to verify compliance with this Section or other applicable laws. A pawnbroker shall upon request provide to the Police Department a complete and accurate record of pawn transactions.

Subd. 21.    Label Required.   Licensees must attach a label to every item at the time  it is pawned, purchased or received in inventory from any reportable transaction. Permanently recorded on this label must be the number or name that identifies the transaction in the shop's records, the transaction  date, the name of the item and the description or the model and serial number of the  item  as reported to the Red Wing Police, whichever is applicable, and the date the item is out of pawn or can be sold, if applicable.  Labels shall not be re-used.

Subd. 22.	Prohibited Acts.

A No person under the age of 18 years may pawn or sell or attempt to pawn or sell goods with any licensee, nor may any licensee receive any goods from a person under the age of 18 years.

B.	No licensee may receive any goods from a person of unsound mind or an intoxicated person.
 
C.	No licensee may receive any goods unless the seller presents identification in the form of a valid driver's license, a valid State of Minnesota identification card, or current valid photo driver's license or identification card issued by the state of residency of the person from whom the item was received.

D.	No licensee may receive any item of property that possesses an altered or obliterated serial number or operation identification  number  or  any item of property that has had its serial number removed.

E. No person may pawn or sell, or attempt to pawn or sell, goods in which the person does not have a legal undivided ownership interest.

F. No person may make false statements or representations regarding the ownership of items to be sold or pawned, nor may any person provide falsified or altered forms of identification to a pawnbroker.

Subd. 23. Denial, Suspension or Revocation. Any  license  under  this Section may be denied, suspended or revoked for  one or more of the following reasons:

A The proposed use does not comply with the Red Wing Zoning Code or State Statutes relating to the location of Pawnbrokers.

B.	The proposed use does not comply with any health, building, building maintenance or other provisions of the city code or state law.

C.	The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with one  or  more provisions of this Section.

D.	The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct a background or financial investigation due to the unavailability of information.

E.  Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing or renewing a license.

F.	Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the  application and investigation for, or in the course of, the applicant's business.

G.	Violation within the preceding five years of  any  law  relating  to  theft, damage or trespass to property, sale of a controlled  substance,  or operation of a business.

H.	The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not qualify for a license under the terms of this Section.
 
Subd. 24. Business at Only One Place. A license under this Section authorizes the licensee to carry on its business only at the permanent place of business designated in the license. However, upon written request,  Red Wing Police may approve an off-site locked and secured storage facility. The licensee shall permit inspection of the facility in accordance with Subdivision 20 of this Section. All provisions of this Section  regarding  record  keeping  and  reporting apply to the facility and its contents. Property shall be stored in compliance with all provisions of the City Code. The licensee must either own the building in which the business is conducted, and any approved off-site storage facility, or have a lease on the business premises which extends for more than six months.

Subd. 25.    Severability.  Should any subsection, clause or other provision of this section be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part other than the part so declared invalid.

SECTION 6.25.	ULTIMATE FIGHTING PROHIBITED.

Subd. 1. Purpose. The City Council finds that the practice of ultimate fighting is dangerous and puts the public health, safety, and welfare at great risk.

Subd. 2.  Definition.  Ultimate  fighting  shall  mean   any   activity, regardless of how named or described, or any other form of entertainment, where the primary practice involves individuals engaged in physical contact by striking or touching an opponent with hands, head, feet, or body. This shall include, but not be limited to, any contest or event where kicking, punching, martial arts, or submission holds are permitted. Officially sanctioned and regulated boxing and wrestling and team sports in which physical contact is incidental to the primary purpose of the game, including, but not limited to, football, basketball, volleyball, soccer, baseball, and softball are not included among activities prohibited by this section. Martial arts training or contests governed and sponsored by schools of martial arts are also not included among activities prohibited by this section.

Subd. 3. Prohibited conduct. It shall  be  unlawful  to  promote,  host, organize, stage, conduct, and/or participate in the practice of ultimate fighting as defined above in any public or private building or place.

Subd. 4.   Right of Injunction.   The City or its designated representative may institute a lawsuit in district court seeking injunctive relief against any individual violating this ordinance.

Subd. 5. Violations; penalty. Promoting, hosting, organizing, staging, conducting, and/or participating in an ultimate fighting event shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 6.26 of this Chapter. Separate fines may be issued to the promoter of the event, in such an event, and the owners of the premises where such event is held. Every day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
 

SECTION 6.26.	VIOLATION SUBJECT TO PENALTY.  Upon
determining that a person has violated this Chapter, the person shall be subject to:

license suspension or revocation;
imposition of a civil fine up to $2,000; and/or punishment as for a misdemeanor.

In the event a person is convicted of a misdemeanor and fined pursuant thereto, no civil fine shall be levied against that person.
 
Title	Page

CHAPTER 7	STREETS AND SIDEWALKS GENERALLY

Section	7.01	Definitions	7-1
	7.02	Application	7-1
	7.03	Scope and Orders of Officers	7-1
	7.04	Traffic and Parking Control	7-1
	7.05	Ice and Snow on Public Sidewalks	7-2
	7.06	Construction and Reconstruction of Roadway
Surfacing, Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter	
7-2
	7.07	Obstructions in Streets	7-5
	7.08	Street Openings or Excavations	7-7
	7.09	Parades	7-8
	7.10	Urban Landscape Regulations	7-9
	7.11	Limiting Time of Railway-Street Crossing Obstruction	7-13
	7.12	Requirement of Sewer and Water Main Service
Lateral Installation	
7-13
	7.13	Private Use of Public Streets and Parking Lots	7-13
	7.14	Curb and Gutter, Street and Sidewalk Painting
or Coloring	
7-14
	7.15	Vehicles  Prohibited	7-14
	7.16	Sidewalk Maintenance and Repair	7-15
	7.17	Violation a Misdemeanor or Petty Misdemeanor	7-16
 
CHAPTER 7

STREETS AND SIDEWALKS GENERALLY



SECTION 7.01. DEFINITIONS.  Except as otherwise defined in the City Code, or where the context clearly indicates a contrary intent, the words and terms defined in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 169, shall be applicable to this Chapter.

SECTION 7.02. APPLICATION. The provisions of this Chapter, are applicable to the drivers of all vehicles and animals upon streets, including, but not limited to, those owned or operated by the United States, the State of Minnesota, or any county, town, city, district, or other political subdivision.

SECTION 7.03.	SCOPE AND ORDERS OF OFFICERS.

Subd. 1.    Scope.   The  provisions  of this  Chapter  relate exclusively  to the streets, alleys and private roads in the City, and the operation and parking of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation and parking of vehicles upon such streets, alleys and private roads.

Subd. 2. Orders of an Officer. It is a misdemeanor for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police or peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.

SECTION 7.04.	TRAFFIC AND PARKING CONTROL.

Subd. 1. Council Action. No device, sign or signal shall be erected or maintained for traffic or parking control unless the Council shall first have approved and directed the same, except as otherwise provided in this Section; provided, that when traffic and parking control is marked or sign-posted, such marking or sign-posting shall attest to Council action thereon.

Subd. 2.  Temporary  Restrictions.   The  City  may  temporarily  restrict traffic or parking for any private, public or experimental purpose. It is the duty of the Chief of Police, Public Works Director or their designee to restrict traffic or parking when a hazardous condition arises or is observed.

Subd. 3.  Traffic  Restrictions  and  Prohibitions.  It  is   a   petty misdemeanor or misdemeanor for any person to drive a vehicle  contrary to lane restrictions or prohibitions painted on any street, or contrary to sign-posted, fenced, or barricaded restrictions or prohibitions.

Subd. 4. Parking  Restrictions  and  Prohibitions.  It is unlawful for any person  to   park  a  vehicle,   except   an  emergency   vehicle,   contrary   to   lane
 
restrictions or prohibitions painted on any curb, or contrary to sign-posted, fenced, or barricaded restrictions or prohibitions.

Subd. 5. Damaging or Moving Markings. It is a misdemeanor for any person to deface, mar, damage, move, remove, or in any way  tamper with any structure, work, material, equipment, tools, sign, signal, barricade, fence, painting or appurtenance on any street unless such person has written permission from the City or is an agent, employee or contractor for the City, or other authority having jurisdiction over a particular street, and acting within the authority or scope of a contract with the City or such other authority.

SECTION 7.05.	ICE AND SNOW ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS.

Subd. 1.  Ice and Snow a Nuisance.  All snow and ice remaining upon public sidewalks is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance. Property owners/tenants shall be responsible to abate the snow/ice from the public sidewalk located on the city boulevard that abuts and/or fronts their property within 24 hours after such snow or ice has ceased to be deposited.

Subd. 2. City to Remove Snow and Ice. The City may  cause to  be removed from all public sidewalks, beginning 24 hours after snow or  ice  has ceased to be deposited, all snow or ice which may be discovered thereon, and it shall keep a record of the cost of such removal and the private property adjacent to which such accumulations were found and removed.

Subd. 3. Cost of Removal to be Assessed.  The Finance Director shall, upon direction of the Council, and on receipt of the information provided for in the preceding Subdivision, extend the cost of such removal of snow or ice as a special assessment against the lots or parcel of ground abutting on walks which were cleared, and such special assessments shall at the time of certifying taxes to the County Auditor be certified for collection as other special assessments are certified and collected.

Subd. 4. Civil Suit for Cost of Removal. The City may, in the alternative, upon direction of the Council, bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover from the persons owning land adjacent to which sidewalks were cleared, as provided in Subdivision 2 hereof, the cost of such clearing and the cost and disbursement of a civil action therefor.

SECTION 7.06. CONSTRUCTION AND RECONSTRUCTION  OF ROADWAY SURFACING, SIDEWALK, RETAINING WALLS, CURB AND GUTTER.

Subd. 1.	Methods of Procedure.
 
A. Abutting or affected property owners may contract for, construct or reconstruct roadway surfacing, sidewalk, retaining walls, or curb and gutter in accordance with this Section if advance payment is made therefor or arrangements for payment considered adequate by the City are completed in advance. For purposes of this Chapter, "retaining wall" refers to any retaining wall located on the public right of way abutting any private property.

B.	With or without petition by the methods  set  forth  in  the  Local Improvement Code of Minnesota Statutes,  presently  beginning  with Section 429.011, as the same may from time to time be amended.

C.	For Public sidewalks that are to be installed based on the provision listed in Subd. 5. A.   below, the City shall notify the property owner that the owner has either three, five, or ten years from the date of notice to install the  required  public sidewalk  according  to  City sidewalk  specifications. The three, five, or ten year period is determined based on whether the undeveloped lot fronts on a Residential Collector Street, Residential Sub-Collector Street, or  Residential  Access  Street  as  shown  on  the City's officially adopted Sidewalk Street Classification Map as referred to in Subd. 5. A. below. If the property owner does not install the public sidewalk within the required time period, the City shall proceed to install the public sidewalk at the City's earliest convenience,  and  at  the property	owner's expense and invoice the cost of  the  sidewalk improvement to the property owner based on the City's fees set by Ordinance.

Subd. 2. Permit Required.  It  is  a  misdemeanor  to  construct  or reconstruct a sidewalk, retaining wall, curb and gutter, driveway, or roadway surfacing in any street or other public property in the City without a right-of-way permit in writing from the City of Red Wing. Permits required by this subdivision shall be issued in accordance with Chapter 14.

Subd. 3. Specifications  and  Standards.  All  construction  and reconstruction of roadway surfacing, sidewalk, retaining wall, and curb and gutter improvements, including curb cuts, shall use engineering best practices and be strictly in accordance with specifications and standards on file in the Engineering Department and open to  inspection and copying there. Such specifications and standards may be amended from time to time by the City, but shall be uniformly enforced.

Subd. 4.  Inspection.  The  City  Engineer  shall  inspect   such improvements as deemed necessary or advisable.  Any work not done according to the applicable specifications and standards shall be removed and corrected at the expense of the permit holder. Any work done hereunder may be stopped by the  City  Engineer  if  found  to  be  unsatisfactory  or  not  in accordance  with  the
 
specifications and standards, but this shall not place a continuing burden upon the City to inspect or supervise such work.

Subd. 5. Notwithstanding any prov1s1on herein to the contrary, the following provisions shall apply to the installation of public sidewalks, at  the earliest of the following:

A.	At such time as public sidewalks have been installed on two-thirds of all the  residential lots on any block face, public sidewalks shall be installed on the  remaining undeveloped lots on that block face,  based  on the schedule   listed below and  pursuant  to  Subdivision  1  herein,  at  the property  owner's expense.  A  block  face  is defined  as  all  of  the  lots facing a public street from one intersection to the next intersection (this includes three and four way intersections and both sides of the street in the case of  three  way  intersections).  The  schedule  for  installation  of sidewalks on the undeveloped lots shall be as follows:
1.	Undeveloped lots that front on a Residential Collector Street as shown on the City officially adopted "Sidewalk Street Classification Map" shall be required to be installed within three years of two-thirds of the sidewalks on the block face having public sidewalks.
2.	Undeveloped lots that front on a Residential Sub-Collector Street as shown on the City officially adopted "Sidewalk Street Classification Map" shall be required to be installed within five years of two-thirds of the sidewalks on the block face having public sidewalks.
3.	Undeveloped lots that front on a Residential Access Street as shown on the City officially adopted "Sidewalk Street  Classification  Map" shall be required to be installed within ten years of two-thirds  of the sidewalks on the block face having public sidewalks.

B. Whenever a building permit is issued for a new dwelling in zones R-1, R-2, RM-1, RM-2 or PUD (when public sidewalks are approved with the PUD approval), the property owner shall be  responsible  for  the installation and expense of the public sidewalk; except that a new dwelling that has frontage on rural designed street section (ditches with no curb and gutter) shall not require sidewalk installation until such time as the street is reconstructed to an urban design (curb and gutter). The Building Official shall not issue a Certificate of Occupancy for the dwelling	until the public sidewalk is installed; except that home construction that is completed after November 1st may obtain  a temporary Certificate of Occupancy subject to completion of the public sidewalk not later than June 15th of the following year. In such cases, If the property owner who is responsible for the installation of the public sidewalk fails to install the public sidewalk by June 15th of the following year, the City shall proceed to install the sidewalk at the owner's expense and invoice the cost of the sidewalk improvement to the property owner based on the City's fees set by Ordinance. No variance
 
of this requirement shall be approved except by the action of the City Council and upon the property owner showing that installation of the public sidewalk will not contribute to completing a public sidewalk network.

SECTION 7.07.	OBSTRUCTIONS  IN STREETS.

Subd. 1. Obstructions. It is a misdemeanor for any  person to  place, deposit, display or offer for sale, any fence, goods  or other  obstructions  upon, over, across or under any street or public sidewalk without first having obtained a written permit from the Council, and then only in compliance in all respects with the terms and conditions of such permit, and taking precautionary  measures for the protection of the public, except for newspapers and periodicals which are regulated by the provisions of Subdivision 7 of this Section. An electrical cord or device of any kind is hereby included, but not by way of limitation,  within the definition of an obstruction.

A.  Permits for Private Use of Public Property shall be required for exclusive use of Public Areas. These applications shall be completed and returned to the City of Red Wing Public Works Department for processing. Applications must be submitted to the Public Works Department at least 30 days prior to the event or activity. For events requesting street
closure such as neighborhood block parties, events that will vary from park/facility rules, special services or hours and/or involve serving alcohol, a Private Use of Public Property Form must be approved by the City Council.

Subd. 2.  Fires.  It is unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire upon a street or public sidewalk.

Subd. 3. Dumping in Streets.  It is a misdemeanor  for any  person to throw or deposit in any street or public sidewalk any nails, dirt, glass or glassware, cans, discarded cloth or clothing, metal scraps, garbage, leaves,  grass  or tree limbs, paper or paper products, shreds or rubbish, oil, grease or other petroleum products, or to empty any water containing salt or other injurious chemical thereon. It is a violation of this Section to haul any such material, inadequately enclosed or covered, thereby permitting the same to fall upon streets or public sidewalks. It is also a violation of this Section to place or store any building materials or waste resulting from building construction or demolition on any street, boulevard or public sidewalk without first obtaining an approved Public Use of Private Property application from the Public Works Department.

Subd. 4.	Placing Snow or Ice in a Roadway or on a Sidewalk.

A.  It is unlawful for any person, not acting under a specific contract with the City  or without  special  permission  from  the  Public Works  Director  or
 
designee,  to  remove  snow  or  ice from  private  property and  place the same in any roadway or on a sidewalk.

B. Where permission is granted by the Public Works Director or designee the person to whom such permission is granted shall be initially responsible for payment of all direct or indirect costs of removing the snow or ice from the street or sidewalk. If not paid, collection shall be by civil action or assessment against the benefited property as any other special assessment.

Subd. 5. Continuing Violation. Each day that any person continues in violation of this Section shall be a separate offense and punishable as such.

Subd. 6. Condition. Before granting any permit under  any  of  the provisions of this Section, the Council may impose such insurance or bonding conditions thereon as it, considering the projected danger to public or private property or to persons, deems proper for safeguarding such persons and property. Such insurance or bond shall also protect the City from any suit, action or cause of action arising by reason of such obstruction.

Subd. 7.	Newspapers and Periodicals.

A.	Placement. It is unlawful for any person to  vend  or  distribute newspapers or periodicals from a dispensing device on a public street if the device is placed in violation of any of the regulations set forth below:

1.	Within 10 feet of any fire hydrant, or fire alarm box;

2.	Attached in any  manner  to  any  fire  alarm  box  shaft,  ornamental street light pole, traffic signal,  parking  meter  or  any  traffic  control device post;

3.	Where it projects beyond any curb line onto the roadway;

4.	Within  5 feet of any marked crosswalk;

5.	Within  5 feet of  any driveway;

6.	Within 15 feet of the approach to any sign marking a designated bus stop, or 5 feet forward of such sign;

7.	Where it restricts access to a bus shelter or a bus bench;

8.	Where  it interferes with  loading or  unloading  at the front  and  rear doors of buses;
 
9.	In any handicap access ramp;

10.	In such a manner as to reduce the clear space for the passage way of pedestrians using the sidewalk to less than 6 feet;

11.	On any boulevard or other place planted with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees;

12.	So that it is bolted or permanently attached to the sidewalk surface;

13.	In a location other than near a curb or adjacent to the wall of a building. A dispensing device placed near the curb shall be placed no less than 18 inches or more than 24 inches from the edge of the curb. A dispensing device placed adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than 6 inches from the wall.

14.	At intersections, dispensing devices over 36 inches in height shall be prohibited within 75 feet of curb intersections. All other dispensing devices placed at   intersections  shall  not  create  sight   distance problems.

B.	Maximum Size. An unattended automatic dispensing device for newspapers  or  periodicals  shall   not  exceed   54   inches   in   height, 30 inches in width, or 24 inches in depth.

C.	Use and Appearance. An unattended dispensing device for newspapers and periodicals shall be used solely for the distributing of newspapers, magazines and other printed materials and shall be maintained by the applicant in a state of good repair and neat appearance. In addition, the name, address and phone number of  the owner of said device or  a person responsible for maintenance shall be legibly displayed thereon.

Subd. 8.  Exception.  Notwithstanding  any   other   provision   of   this Section, storage and collection of leaves, grass and shrubbery clippings shall be permitted as set forth in City Code, Chapter 10, Section 10.01, Subdivision 7.

SECTION 7.08.	STREET OPENINGS OR EXCAVATIONS.

Subd. 1. In making  openings  or  excavations  in  streets,  for  laying service pipe or making repairs, paving and earth removed must be deposited in a manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to the public, and provide for the passage of water along gutters.

Subd. 2.       No person shall leave any such excavation made in any street or  highway  open  at  any  time  without  barricades;  and  during  the  night warning
 
lights must be maintained at such excavations. All street excavations shall require traffic control in accordance with the most current copy of Minnesota Department of Transportation's field manual of "temporary traffic control zone layouts."

Subd. 3. In  backfilling  the  opening,  after  service  pipes  are  laid,  the earth must be laid in layers of not more than nine inches in depth, and each layer thoroughly compacted by mechanical or hand methods approved by the Engineering Director until there is no further evidence of increased consolidation. This work together with the replacing of sidewalks, ballast and paving must be done so as to make the street as good at least, as before it was disturbed, and satisfactory to the City.

Subd. 4. No opening of the streets for tapping the  mains  will  be permitted when the ground is frozen.

 
Subd. 5.
ordinance.
 
Charges  shall  be  fixed  and  determined  by  the  Council,  by
 

SECTION 7.09.	PARADES.

Subd. 1.  Definition.  The  term  "parade"  means  any  movement  of vehicles, persons or animals, or any combination thereof, which either moves together and as a body so as to in some way impede or affect the free and unobstructed flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or which moves so that some part thereof is in violation of one or more traffic laws or regulations, if such movement is without a permit hereunder.

Subd. 2.  Permit  Required.  It  is  a  misdemeanor  to   sponsor   or participate in a parade for which no permit has been obtained from the City, and it is also a misdemeanor to  obtain a parade permit and not conduct the same in accordance with the permit granted by the City. Application for such permit shall be made to the City at least 30 days in advance of the date on which it is to occur and shall state the sponsoring organization or individual, the route, the length, the estimated time of commencement and termination, the general composition, and such application shall be executed by the individuals applying therefor or the duly authorized agent or representative of the sponsoring organization. Applications to the City shall be in accordance with Section 7.07, Subdivision 1 A.

Subd. 3.	Unlawful Acts.

A. It is unlawful for any person to hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any	parade, parade assembly or any person, animal or vehicle participating in the parade.
 
B.	It is unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such parade is in motion, unless directed by a traffic control officer.

C.	It is unlawful for any person to enter into a parade without prior authorization from the parade chairman.

Subd. 4.	Exceptions.	This  Section  shall   not  apply  to  (1)  funeral processions, or (2) a governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.

SECTION 7.10.	URBAN LANDSCAPE  REGULATIONS.

Subd. 1.	For the purposes of this Section, the following  listed specific words and terms are defined as follows:

(1)	Compost: A mixture of decomposing vegetable or plant refuse that is free from obnoxious odors.

(2)	Garden: A plot of land used for cultivation of flowers, vegetables, fruit, herbs, ornamental shrubs or trees used for recreation and display.
(3)	Lawn Sprinkler: A device with perforations through which water issues into the air from a hose or underground pipe to irrigate a lawn.

(4)	Natural Landscape: Incorporates native plants and natural processes that require less time, money and energy for upkeep than other primarily ornamental species. These landscapes become functioning ecosystems capable of providing food and shelter for animals and insects while perpetuating native species whose habitats are being reduced through developments. A partial list of these plants can be found at the University of Minnesota Extension Office.

(5)	Prairie: An open treeless plant community consisting of a diverse mix of sun-loving flowers, grass and sedge species.

(6)	Rain Garden: A created swale planted with native vegetation that captures and filters storm water before it reaches wetlands, rivers and lakes.

(7)	Savanna:  A  transitional  plant  community  comprised  of  scattered mature trees with an understory of prairie vegetation.

(8)	Traditional Lawn: A fine-textured expanse of grass that is kept tended or mowed.

(9)	Noxious Weeds: The plant species of weeds as determined by Minnesota Statute, section 18.78 under the following headings:  "State
 
Prohibited   Noxious  Weed   List,"  "Restricted   Noxious  Weeds,"  and "Secondary  Noxious Weeds."

(10)	Woodland: A tree community covered  by a tree  canopy  of at least 50% with an understory of shade-tolerant plants.

(11)	Low Maintenance: Perennial rye, creeping red, chewings and hard fescues, clover and small wildflowers (wild ginger, blue violets and others similar). Also cover crops like oats or buckwheat. All require sun.

(12)	Native grasses: Big and little bluestem, Indian grass, side oats grama and others similar.  These also require mostly sun.

Subd. 2. City to Control Tree Planting (Standards). The City shall have control and supervision of planting shrubs and trees upon, or overhanging, all the streets or other public property. The City may establish and enforce uniform standards relating to the kinds and types of trees to be planted and the placement thereof. Such standards shall be kept on file in the office of the Public Works Director and may be revised from time to time by action of the Council upon the recommendation of the Public Works Director.

Subd. 3. Permit Required. It is a misdemeanor for any person to plant, spray, trim or remove trees or other plants which are upon City property, including rights-of-way, without first procuring from the City a right-of-way permit in writing to do so. Permits required by this subdivision shall be issued in accordance with Chapter 14.

 
Subd. 4.
maintain shrubs.
 
Duty of property owners to cut grass and noxious weeds and
 

A. Duty of City to Enforce: It is the duty of Director  of  Public Works, through his/her designee to inspect, document, control and enforce the maintenance and appearance of all property within the City as it relates to grass,  noxious weeds, trees and shrubs. This inspection shall take place from the public right-of-way. This person should be trained in the basics of sustainable urban landscaping and should utilize all resources associated with sustainable  landscape practices as available at both the state and local levels.

B.	Duty of Owners to Cut Grass and Noxious Weeds, Maintain Trees and Shrubs: Traditional lawn grass and noxious weed height shall be set at no higher than 6 inches for residential and commercial nonexempt parcels to discourage grasses and noxious weeds from going to seed and proliferating in unwanted areas. If any owner or occupant fails to assume the responsibility of this Section and, after notice given by the
 
Public Works Director, has not within 14 days of such notice complied, the City may cause such work to be done and the expenses thus incurred shall be a lien upon the property.  Noncompliance  after  the initial citing shall be cause for immediate action without notice to bring property into compliance. The City Clerk shall certify to the Goodhue County Auditor a statement of the amount of the cost incurred by the City. Such amount together with interest and the initial Citation penalty shall be entered as a special assessment against such lot or parcel of land and be collected in the same manner as real estate taxes.

C.	Undeveloped Residential Lots and Outlots: Open lots and outlots in residential areas. Where any undeveloped residential lot or outlot abuts an improved public street or highway, this lot or outlot shall be maintained so that the entire public right-of-way is maintained to a maximum of 6 inches along the entire frontage of the lot or outlot. The buffer-zone grass shall be subject to the maximum length of 6 inches as designated in Section B of this section. Where any undeveloped lot or outlot abuts a property with a home or business, this lot shall also be maintained to provide a 10-foot buffer zone from both the  adjoining private property as well as the  street  right-of-way.  The  buffer-zone grass shall be subject to the maximum length of 6 inches as designated in Section B of this subdivision. These lots shall be kept reasonably free of noxious weeds that have gone or are about to go to seed. The remainder of the lot shall be mowed twice annually, once between June 1 and June 15; and once between September 1 and September 15. These lots shall be seeded with low-maintenance, low-water grasses or native grasses to minimize maintenance and discourage growth of invasive species. At such time two-thirds of all lots are developed on any block, the remaining lots must be maintained to the same standard as in Section B of this subdivision.

D.	Undeveloped Commercial Lots and Outlots: Open lots and outlots in commercial areas. Where any undeveloped commercial lot or  outlot abuts an improved public street or highway, this lot or outlot shall be maintained so that the entire public right-of-way is maintained to a maximum of 6 inches along the entire frontage of the lot or outlot. The buffer-zone grass shall be subject to the maximum length of 6 inches as designated in Section B of this section. Where any undeveloped lot or outlot abuts a property with a business or an occupied residence, this lot shall also be maintained to provide a 10-foot buffer zone from both the adjoining private property as well as the street right-of-way. The buffer­ zone grass shall be subject to the maximum length of 6 inches as designated in Section B of this subdivision. These lots shall be kept reasonably free of noxious weeds that have gone or are about to go to seed.
 
E.	Watering: Watering of traditional  residential  lawns  by  lawn  sprinkler (see definition) between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. and also between 9:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. is discouraged in order to conserve water and prevent turf disease. Exceptions may be made for newly­ sodded/seeded lawns. In addition, the City retains the right to restrict public water usage as deemed necessary.

F.	Exempted Parcels/Areas: Within the corporate limits of the City, certain areas may  be exempted from maintenance regulations as set forth in Sections B, C, and  D above provided their existence does not present potential safety hazards or violate other sections of this code. This exemption does not apply to areas within the  public  right-of-way  that abut said property. The areas that abut a public right-of-way shall meet the requirements set forth in section D above. These areas include:
•	Designated floodplains or wetlands
•	Permitted or naturally occurring Prairie, Savanna, Woodland or Natural Landscapes
•	Natural Landscape and Garden areas within traditional lawns
•	Rain Gardens
•	Golf Courses
•	Public Schools
•	Parks and Playing Fields
•	Cemeteries
•	Outlots that do not abut an improved public street or other ROW
•	Agricultural Zoned Property
G.	Permitting of Natural Landscapes/Prairie Restorations: Any owner of a lot or parcel of less than five acres desiring to develop natural landscape (on more than 50% of the parcel) may do so provided  such plantings meet the requirements of the definitions  in this ordinance and of Subd.
48.   Such parcels shall  be subject to  investigation  and compliance  by
the Director of Public Works or their designee whose findings shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year at which time a new investigation can occur at the request of the landowner or of adjacent property owners.

H.	Steep Slopes, Hillsides and Ditches: Require any grass replanting or soddings on steep slopes, hillsides, ditches and culverts to  be  low­ water, low-grow grasses, native grasses or native wildflower species for the	purpose of erosion control, water conservation and  low maintenance.

Subd. 5. City May Order Work Done. Director of Public Works may, in cases of failure to comply with this section, perform such work, keeping an accurate account of the cost thereof for each lot, piece or parcel of land.
 
Subd. 6.  Dumping:   Placement  of  plant  material,  clippings,  animal waste and other debris on these parcels shall be governed by Chapter 10 of the City Code.

Subd. 7. Establishment of Fee. The City shall set a fee for each out-of- compliance parcel by Ordinance, and said fee shall cover administrative costs in addition to any costs incurred in the cleanup and maintenance work that the City completes or causes to be completed.

Source:  Ordinance No. 2, Fourth Series Effective Date:  04-16-2011

SECTION 7.11.	LIMITING  TIME  OF  RAILWAY-STREET  CROSSING
OBSTRUCTION. Unless prior permission of the Council has been granted, it is a misdemeanor for any person operating or in charge of a railroad train, car, engine, locomotive, or other railroad equipment, or  combination  thereof,  to  so  operate, park or leave the same standing upon the railroad at its intersection with a street, so as to prevent unobstructed vehicular traffic on such street for a period longer than   10 minutes.

SECTION 7.12. REQUIREMENT OF SEWER  AND  WATER  MAIN SERVICE  LATERAL INSTALLATION.

Subd. 1. Requirement of Sewer and Water Laterals. No petition for the improvement of a street shall be considered by the Council if such petition contemplates constructing therein any part of a pavement or stabilized  base, or curb and gutter, unless all sewer and water main installations  shall  have  been made therein, including the installation of service laterals to the curb, if the area along such street will be served by such utilities installed in the street.

Subd. 2. Sewer System Service and Water Main Service Laterals.  No sewer system shall be hereafter constructed or extended unless service laterals to platted lots and frontage facing thereon shall be extended simultaneously with construction of mains.

Subd. 3. Waiver. The Council  may  waive  the  requirements  of  this Section only if it finds the effects thereof are burdensome and upon such notice and hearing as the Council may deem necessary or proper.

 


LOTS.
 
SECTION 7.13.
 
PRIVATE USE OF PUBLIC STREETS AND PARKING
 

Subd. 1.   Authority,  Permission  and  Procedure.    Upon  an  application duly made to the City and reviewed and recommended by the Engineering Director, Public Works Director, Fire Chief, and Chief of Police, the Council may in its discretion, grant special permission whereby on-street parking or the use of City
 
owned parking lots or ramps or public sidewalks may be  temporarily  or permanently prohibited or restricted for private reasons and purposes (including, but not limited to, establishment of private or "leased" parking, "loading zones", or benches) at such places, on such terms and for such consideration as the Council may deem just and equitable. In establishing the amount of such consideration to be paid to the City, the Council shall consider the amount of  space,  location thereof, if any, public inconvenience, and hazards to persons or property. Permits must be obtained in accordance with Subdivision 5 of this section.

Subd. 2.  Public Vehicles. Free and reserved on-street parking shall be limited to City-owned and operated vehicles.

Subd. 3. Forbidden Practices. It is unlawful for any person to park or otherwise infringe upon a grant of right under this Section, when clearly and distinctly marked or sign-posted. It is unlawful for any person not granted such right to assert the same, or for any grantee of such right to exceed the same under claim thereto.

Subd. 4. Condition. Before granting any permit under  any  of  the provisions of this Section, the Council may impose such insurance or bonding conditions thereon as it, considering the projected danger to public or private property or to persons, deems proper for safeguarding such persons and property. Such insurance or bond shall also protect the City from any suit, action or cause of action arising by reason thereof.

Subd. 5. Permits. Any requests for permission to park on public right of ways, public park areas, or other public areas must be in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.07 Subdivision 1 A.

SECTION 7.14.	CURB  AND  GUTTER,  STREET,  SIDEWALK,   AND
RETAINING WALL PAINTING OR COLORING. It is unlawful for any person to paint, letter or color any street, sidewalk, retaining wall, or curb and gutter for advertising purposes, or to paint or color any street, sidewalk or curb and gutter for any purpose, except as the same may be done by City employees acting within the course or scope of their employment. Provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to uniformly coloring concrete or other surfacing, or  uniformly painted house numbers, as such coloring may be approved by the Public Works Director.

SECTION 7.15.	VEHICLES  PROHIBITED.

Subd. 1.  Motorized Vehicles.   Except as expressly permitted in Section 8.07, Subdivision 3, of the City Code, it is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motorized vehicle on any public sidewalk or public property designated for use as a pedestrian walkway, or bicycle trail, except when crossing the same for  ingress  and  egress  to  private  property  lying on the  other  side  thereof,  and
 
except when driving or operating an Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Device consistent with the requirements of state law contained in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 169.212 as it may be amended. For the purposes of this Section, a motorized wheel chair or other motorized mobility aid designed and built primarily for medical purposes used by persons with a bona-fide  medical need are not considered motorized vehicles, provided however that such  motorized  mobility aids must be  operated in a manner that doesn't inhibit the safe usage of the walkway or trail by others.

Subd. 2. Bicycles, skateboards, and rollerskates. It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate a skateboard or rollerskates on any street, alley, public sidewalk, or park, in the downtown district  between  the  hours  of  8:00  a.m.  - 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, 8:00  a.m.  -  9:00  p.m.  Thursday,  and 10:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m.  Sunday. Provided further, that no person shall  ride or operate a skateboard or roller skates at any time in LaGrange Park, the Sheldon Courtyard, or any public parking lot or ramp located in the downtown district. It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle on any public sidewalk, park, or public parking lot or ramp located within the downtown district. For purposes of this Subdivision, "downtown district" shall mean that portion of the City lying between East Avenue/Broad Street and Plum Street and between  Levee Street and Fourth Street. Also, for the purpose of this Subdivision, "skateboard"  shall mean a device intended to be ridden while standing, consisting of an oblong piece of wood, plastic or other solid material, mounted on skate wheels. "Rollerskates" shall mean any boot, shoe, or device that can be attached to the sole of a shoe, with wheels attached, either horizontally, or in a vertical line, that are intended for skating.

 
SECTION 7.16. AND REPAIR.
 
SIDEWALK AND RETAINING WALL MAINTENANCE
 

Subd. 1. Primary Responsibility.  It is the primary  responsibility  of the owner of property upon which there is abutting any sidewalk and/or retaining wall to keep and maintain such sidewalk and/or retaining wall in safe and serviceable condition.

Subd. 2. Maintenance and  Repair  Specifications.  All  maintenance  or repair of sidewalks and/or  retaining walls shall be done in strict accordance with specifications on file in the Engineering Department.

Subd. 3.       Notice - No Emergency.  Where, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, no emergency exists, notice of the required repair  or reconstruction shall be given to the owner of the abutting property. Such notice shall require completion of the work within 90 days, and shall be mailed to the owner or owners shown to be such on the records of the County Office who mails tax statements.
 
Subd. 4. Notice - Emergency.  Where, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, an emergency exists, notice of the required repair or reconstruction shall be given to the owner of the abutting property. Such notice shall require completion of the work within 10 days, and shall be mailed to  the  owner  or owners shown to be such on the records of the County Officer who mails tax statements.

Subd. 5.  Failure  of  Owner  to  Reconstruct  or  Make  Repairs.  If the owner of the abutting property fails to make repairs or accomplish reconstruction as herein required, the Director of Public Works shall report such failure to the Council and the Council may order such work to be done under its direction and the cost thereof assessed to the abutting property owner as any other special assessment.

Subd. 6. Duty to Inspect. In order to accomplish the purpose of this Section, it shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to inspect sidewalks within the City, or cause the same to be inspected under his direction.

Subd. 7. Permit Required. Any person engaged in the construction, reconstruction or repair of sidewalks or retaining walls shall obtain a right-of-way permit in accordance with Chapter 14.



 
SECTION 7.17. MISDEMEANOR.
 
VIOLATION	A	MISDEMEANOR	OR	PETTY
 

Subd. 1.	Upon  conviction  of violating  this  Chapter  a  person  shall  be punished for a misdemeanor if:

A.  The provision makes violation a misdemeanor; or

B.	A violation is committed in a manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property; or

C.	The violator is convicted of violation of any provision of this Chapter exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended vehicle, for a third or subsequent time within a 12-month period.

Subd. 2.	As  to  any  violation  not  constituting  a  misdemeanor  under Subdivision 1, the violator shall be punished as for a petty misdemeanor.

Subd. 3.	As  to  any violation  of a provision adopted  by  reference  the violator shall be punished as specified in such provision, so adopted.
 
Title	Page

CHAPTER 8	TRAFFIC REGULATIONS

 
Section 8.01
8.02
8.03
8.04
8.05
8.06
8.07
8.08
8.09
8.10
8.11
8.12
 
Definitions Application
Scope and Orders of Officers Illegal Turns
Exhibition Driving One-Way Streets
Snowmobile  Regulations
All-Terrain Vehicle (ATV) Regulations Golf Carts
Mini-Trucks
City of Red Wing Motorized Carts
Violation a Misdemeanor or Petty Misdemeanor
 
8-1
8-1
8-1
8-1
8-2
8-2
8-3
8-6
8-12
8-16
8-16
8-17
 
CHAPTER 8 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS

SECTION 8.01.	DEFINITIONS.

Subd. 1. Except as otherwise defined in the City Code, or where  the context clearly indicates a contrary intent, the words and terms defined in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 169, shall be applicable to this Chapter.

Subd. 2. As used  in  this  Chapter,  the  term  "Business  Hours"  shall mean 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.

SECTION 8.02. APPLICATION. The provisions of this Chapter, are applicable to the drivers of all vehicles and animals upon streets, including, but not limited to, those owned or operated by the United States, the State of Minnesota, or any county, town, city, district, or other political subdivision.

SECTION 8.03.	SCOPE AND ORDERS OF OFFICERS.

Subd. 1.    Scope.   The  provisions  of this  Chapter  relate exclusively  to the streets, alleys and private roads in the City, and the operation and parking of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation and parking of vehicles upon such streets, alleys and private roads.

Subd. 2. Orders of an Officer. It is a misdemeanor for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police or peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.

SECTION 8.04.	ILLEGAL TURNS.

Subd. 1.      U-Turns.   It is unlawful for any person to turn a motor vehicle to proceed in the opposite direction upon any public street except at a street intersection, and then only if the street intersection is not sign-posted prohibiting a U-turn. Any person making a permitted U-turn shall yield the right-of-way to all other vehicles.

Subd. 2. L-Turns. It is  unlawful  for  any  person  to  operate  a  motor vehicle on a public street by turning such motor vehicle perpendicular to the direction in which it was proceeding for the purpose of or which results in parking such motor vehicle on the opposite side of such street at an angle other than 90 degrees in relation to the curb.
 
Subd. 3. M-Turns. It is  unlawful  for  any  person to  operate  a  motor vehicle on a public street, when backing out of a parking space,  backing  such motor vehicle into the lane of traffic on the opposite side of the street from where such motor vehicle was parked, for the purpose of or which results in such motor vehicle traveling in the opposite forward direction from which it was proceeding immediately prior to occupying said parking space.

Subd. 4.       Left Turns Prohibited.  The Police Chief may, with the consent of the Council, prohibit left turns at certain intersections entirely, or during specified hours, by posting a sign at the intersection specifying the prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to make a left turn in violation of any posted prohibition ..

SECTION 8.05.	EXHIBITION DRIVING.

Subd. 1.	Definitions.

1.	"Exhibition Driving" as used in this Section - to stop, start, accelerate or decelerate a motor vehicle, or to turn such motor vehicle at an unnecessary rate of speed so as to cause the tires to squeal, gears to grind, soil to be thrown, engine to backfire, vehicle to fishtail or skid, or, as to two-wheeled or three-wheeled motor vehicles, the front wheel to lose contact with the ground or roadway surface.

2.	"Racetrack" - any track or premises where motorized vehicles, horses, dogs, or other animals or fowl legally compete in a race or timed contest for an audience, the members of which have directly or indirectly paid a consideration for admission.

Subd. 2. Unlawful Act. It is unlawful  for  any  person  to  engage  in exhibition driving on any street, parking lot or ramp, or other public or private property, except when an emergency creates necessity for such operation to prevent injury to persons or damage to property. This Section, however, shall not apply to driving on a racetrack or other event as expressly authorized by the City Council.

SECTION 8.06.	ONE-WAY STREETS.

Subd. 1. The Council may, by resolution, designate streets as one-way streets.  Signs posted on one-way streets shall indicate their designation.

Subd. 2.      It is unlawful for any person to travel upon any one-way street in a direction opposite that designated when the one-way direction has been sign­ posted.
 
SECTION 8.07.	SNOWMOBILE  REGULATIONS.

 
Subd. 1.
definitions apply:
 
Definitions.	For the  purposes  of this  Section,  the  following
 

1.	"Snowmobile' - a self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice or natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners.

2.	"Owner" - a person, other than a lien holder, having the property in or title to a snowmobile entitled to the use or possession thereof.

3.	"Operate" - to ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.

4.	"Operator" - every person who  operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile.

Subd. 2.	Except as herein specifically  permitted and authorized, it is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a snowmobile:

A.	On the portion of any right-of-way of any public highway, street, road, trail or alley used for motor vehicle travel. Snowmobile operators may, however,	use the City streets if they comply with the  following conditions:

1.	Use the most right-hand lane which is used for vehicle traffic in the same direction;

2.	Use the City Streets only as a means of traveling in as direct a route as practicable to a destination outside the City or in as direct a route as practicable to an area within the City which the Council may have designated for the use of snowmobiles; and

3.	The use of any trunk, county state-aid or county  highway  shall  be limited as set forth in Minnesota Statutes, Section 84.87, as it may be amended from time to time.

B.	On boulevards within any public right-of-way.

C.	On private property of another without specific permission of the owner or person in control of the property.

D.	On any other  public place, except as may be specifically permitted by other provisions of the City Code.
 
Subd. 3. Notwithstanding Subdivision 2, a person may operate a snowmobile on the portion of the public trail known as the Burnside Trail between Motel Avenue on the east to Oak Ridge Drive on the west.

Subd. 4. No person operating  a  snowmobile  may  make  a  direct crossing of a street or highway, except an interstate highway or freeway, provided:

A. The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;

B.	The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main traveled road;

C.	The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which could reasonably be perceived as an immediate hazard;

D.	In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made only at an intersection of such street or highway with another public street or highway; and

E.	If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility, both front and rear lights must be illuminated.

Subd. 5.      Traffic provisions of the City Code shall apply to the operation of snowmobiles upon streets and highways, except for those relating to required equipment, and except those which by their nature have no application.

Subd. 6.  No  person  operating  a  snowmobile   shall   enter   any intersection without yielding the right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so close to the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.

Subd. 7.	Age Restrictions.

A. No person under 14 years of age shall operate a snowmobile on streets or the roadway surface of highways or make a direct crossing of a trunk, county state-aid, county highway, or city street as the operator of a snowmobile.

B.	A person 14 years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age, may operate a snowmobile on streets and highways as permitted under this section and make a direct crossing of such streets and  highways only after having been issued a valid snowmobile safety certificate from the State Commissioner of Natural Resources as provided by  Minnesota Statutes, Section 84.872.
 

C.	It is a misdemeanor for the owner of a snowmobile to permit the snowmobile to be operated contrary to the provisions of this Subdivision.

Subd. 8.	It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a snowmobile:

A.	At any place, while under the influence of alcohol or drugs as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 169A.20, as it may be amended from time to time;

B.	At a rate of speed greater than  reasonable  or  proper  under  all surrounding circumstances, but in no event at a speed greater than  15 miles per hour;

C.	At any place in a careless, reckless, or negligent manner or heedlessly in disregard of the  rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger or  cause injury  or  damage  to  any person or property;

D.	So as to tow any person or thing in a public street or highway except through use of a rigid tow bar attached to the rear of the snowmobile;

E.	Within 100 feet of any skating rink or sliding area.

Subd. 9.	It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a snowmobile unless it is equipped with the following:

A.	Standard mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass, straight pipe or similar device on a snowmobile motor.

B.	Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the snowmobile under any condition of operation.

C.	A safety or so-called "deadman" throttle in operating condition. A safety or  "deadman" throttle is defined as a device which, when  pressure  is removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged from the driving track.

D.	When operated between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one­ half hour before sunrise or at times  of  reduced visibility,  at  least one clear lamp attached to the front, with  sufficient  intensity  to  reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead. Such headlamp shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an oncoming  snowmobile  operator.    It shall also  be equipped
 
with at least one red taillight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.

E.	Reflective material at least  16 inches square on each side, forward  of the handlebars, so as to reflect light at a 90 degree angle.

Subd. 10.	Every  person  leaving  a snowmobile  on a  public  place  shall lock the ignition and remove the key.

Subd. 11.	It is a misdemeanor to intentionally chase, run over or kill any animal with a snowmobile.

SECTION 8.08.	ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE  (ATV) REGULATIONS.

 
Subd. 1.
definitions apply:
 
Definitions.	For   the   purposes   of   this   Section,   the   following
 

1.	"All-Terrain Vehicles (ATVs)" - All-Terrain Vehicles (ATVs) as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 84.92, as it may be amended  from  time  to time.	As of June 2016, Section 84.92 defines an ATV as a  motorized vehicle with: (1) not less than three, but not more than six low pressure or non-pneumatic tires; (2) a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less; and (3) a total width from outside of tire rim to outside of tire rim that is 65 inches or less.  ATV includes a Class 1 ATV and Class 2 ATV.  ATV does not include a golf cart, mini-truck, dune buggy, or go-cart or  a vehicle designed  and used specifically for lawn maintenance, agriculture, logging, or mining purposes.	In the event the statutory definition of ATV is amended, the statutory definition will trump the definition of ATV provided  in  this paragraph.

2.	"Class 1 ATV" - a Class 1 all-terrain vehicle as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 84.92, as it may be amended from time to time. As of June 2016, Section 84.92 defines a Class 1 ATV as an ATV that has a total width from outside of tire rim to outside of tire rim that is 50 inches or less. In the event the statutory definition of Class 1 ATV is amended, the statutory definition will trump the definition of Class 1 ATV provided in this paragraph.

3.	"Class 2 ATV" - a Class 2 all-terrain vehicle as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 84.92, as it may be amended from time to time. As of June 2016, Section 84.92 defines a Class 2 ATV as an ATV that has a total width from outside of tire rim to outside of tire rim that is greater than 50 inches but not more than 65 inches. In the event the statutory definition of Class 2 ATV is amended, the statutory definition will trump the definition of Class 2 ATV provided in this paragraph.

4.	"Owner" - a person, other than a person with a security interest, having a property interest in or title to an ATV entitled to the use and possession of the vehicle.
 

5.	"Operate" - to ride in or on and control the operation of an ATV.

6.	"Operator" - every person who operates or is in actual physical control of an ATV.

7.	"Right-of-way" - the entire right-of-way of a public roadway, including the traveled portions, banks, ditches, shoulders, and medians of a roadway that is not privately owned.

Subd. 2.	Operation of ATVs.

A.	Consistent with the limitations found in the remainder of this section, side by side Class 1 ATVs designed by the manufacturer for off-road use to be driven by a steering wheel and equipped with operator and passenger seat belts and a roll-over protective structure may be operated on the extreme right hand side of the right-of-way of streets, roadways, or alleys that are used for other public motor vehicle travel and that are under the jurisdiction of the City. Class  1 ATVs that do not meet these specifications may not be operated on any right­ of-way of any streets, roadways, or alleys that are used for other public motor vehicle travel and that are under the jurisdiction of the City.

B.	Consistent with the limitations found in the remainder of this section, Class 2 ATVs may be operated on the extreme right hand side of the right-of-way of streets, roadways, or alleys that are used for other public motor vehicular travel and that are under the jurisdiction of the City.

Subd. 3.	ATV Crossing of Public Road Right-of:Way.

A.	A person operating an ATV may make a direct crossing of a street or highway, except an interstate highway or freeway, provided:

1.	The crossing is made at an angle  of  approximately  90  degrees  to  the direction of the street or highway and  at  a  place where  no  obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;

2.	The ATV  is brought to  a complete  stop  before crossing  the  shoulder  or main traveled way of the street or highway;

3.	The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that constitutes an immediate hazard;

4.	In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made only at an intersection of such street or highway with another public street or highway; and

5.	When crossing between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility, both front and rear lights must be illuminated.
 
B.	Age Restrictions.

1.	No person under 12 years of age shall make a direct crossing of a street or highway as the operator of an ATV.

2.	A person 12 years of age or older, but less than 16 years of age, may make a direct crossing of streets and highways as provided herein only if that person possesses a valid ATV safety certificate from the State Commissioner of Natural Resources as provided by Minnesota Statutes, Section 84.9256, as amended, and when accompanied by a person 18 years of age or older who holds a valid driver's license.

3.	Unless otherwise provided by law, it is a misdemeanor for the owner of an ATV to permit the ATV to be operated contrary to these provisions.

Subd. 4.	Operation  of ATVs.   The following  requirements  are  in addition to those already stated in this section:

A.	Operation Permitted.  ATVs:

1.	Must be primarily designed for off-road, rugged terrain and constitute what is customarily referred to by manufacturers as a Class 2 ATV or a side by side Class 1 ATV.

2.	Must be operated at a rate of speed reasonable or proper under all surrounding circumstances and in no event, at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour.

3.	Must follow the traffic provisions of the City Code and Minnesota Statutes chapters 169 and 169A, except for those provisions relating to required equipment and those which by their nature have no application.

4.	May not enter any intersection without yielding the right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection, or so close to the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.

5.	May be operated in connection with an approved PUPP application. In connection with an application for the Private Use of Public Property, if an entity or individual intends to use a Class 2 ATV for the event in a manner that is not compliant with the City Code, the individual or  entity  must include in the PUPP application a detailed description of the proposed use of the Class 2 ATV, as well as a description of all provisions of the City Code related to the use of ATVs that will not be met by the proposed use. It is within the City Council's discretion as to whether or not to approve the use of a Class 2 ATV in connection with such an application.

B.	Permit Required. No person shall operate an ATV pursuant to this section without a valid permit from the City. Permit applications shall be available at the police department.

1.	The City Council shall set fees for such permits by ordinance.
 

2.	Requirements for permit. Applicants  must present proof of registration of the ATV, if such registration is required by Minnesota Statutes, Section 84.922, as amended. Applicants  must  present  proof  of  insurance  from their insurance provider verifying that the applicant maintains liability insurance for the payment of tort liabilities arising out of the maintenance or use of the ATV in this state in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Section 65B.48, Subd. 5, as the same may be amended from time to time.

3.	An operator must have possession of a valid permit while operating an ATV pursuant to this section. A permit may be revoked at any time by the Red Wing Police Chief if there is evidence that the permittee cannot  safely operate the ATV on the right-of-way as provided herein. The Police Chief will give the permittee written notice of the revocation.  The  notice  will provide a description of the evidence demonstrating that the permittee cannot safely operate the ATV, and will inform the permittee that he or she may appeal the revocation and that failure to do so within 14 days of the date of the notice will terminate the permittee's right to an appeal. If an appeal is not filed within the timelines and in the manner specified herein, the Police Chief's decision will be final. An appeal must be in writing, must specify the grounds for the appeal, and must be filed with the Police Chief within 14 days of the date of the notice of revocation. The City Council will appoint a committee of the Council to conduct the appeal hearing, which will take place within 30 days of the receipt of the notice of appeal. The committee of the Council will issue a recommendation on the matter to the City Council within 14 days after the hearing. The City Council  may reverse, modify, or affirm, in whole or in part, the recommendation.

4.	All permits granted pursuant to this section shall be issued for a period not to  exceed one year and may be renewed annually by complying with the requirements of this section.

5.	Nothing in this section shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the City for any injuries to persons or property which may result from: the operation of an ATV by a permit holder; the grant of such permit; or the failure by the City to revoke said permit.

C.	Age Requirement. In order to operate an ATV on the right-of-way as permitted by this section, operators must be at least 18 years of age. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Class 2 ATV may be operated by a City seasonal employee, who is less than 18 years of age, to perform the functions of his or her job as a City seasonal employee.

D.	Passengerlimits.

1.	An operator 18 years of age or older may carry only one passenger on a Class 1 ATV.

2.	An operator 18 years of age or older may operate a Class 2 ATV while carrying up to the number of passengers for which the Class 2 ATV was designed.
 

E.	Equipment Required.  Unless otherwise provided by law, it is a misdemeanor for any person to operate an ATV contrary to these provisions. A person is prohibited from operating an ATV on the right-of-way as permitted  by  this section unless it is equipped with the following:

1.	A rear view mirror or left and right side view mirrors, located so as to reflect to the operator a view of the roadway for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of the vehicle.

2.	Standard mufflers as required by Minnesota Rule 6102.0040, subpart 4, as amended, which are properly attached and in constant operation,  and which reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass, straight pipe or similar device on an ATV motor.

3.	Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the ATV under normal operating conditions.

4.	A safety or so-called "deadman" throttle in operating condition. A safety or "deadman" throttle is defined as a device which, when pressure is removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged from the driving track.

5.	At least two clear headlamps and two red taillights. Such headlamps and taillights are to be lit at all times while operating ATVs.

The headlamps must have a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the hours of darkness or reduced visibility under normal atmospheric conditions. Such headlamps shall be aimed so that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an oncoming ATV or other motor vehicle operator.

The taillights must have a minimum candlepower of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear during hours of darkness or reduced visibility under normal atmospheric conditions.

In addition, when an ATV is operated before sunrise or after sunset, the ATV must be equipped with functioning rear-facing brake lights.

6.	Reflective material at least 16 inches square on each side, forward of the steering wheel, so as to reflect light at a 90 degree angle.

F.	Operation Prohibited. ATVs must not be operated:

1.	In the downtown district. For purposes of this Subdivision, "downtown district"	shall mean that portion of the City lying between East Avenue/Broad Street and Plum Street and between Levee Street  and Fourth Street.   However, Class 2 ATVs may be operated in the downtown
 
district by City employees (including seasonal employees) for the purpose of conducting official City business including, but not limited to, performing the maintenance and upkeep obligations of the City.

2.	On trunk highways, such as Minnesota State Highway 58 (also known as Bush Street and Plum Street) and U.S. Highway 61 (also known as Main Street), as provided in Minnesota Statutes, Section 84.928, Subd. 1(a), as amended.

3.	On interstate highways or freeways as provided in Minnesota Statutes, Section 84.928, Subd. 1U), as amended.

4.	On Old West Main Street between Withers Harbor and U.S. Highway 61.
However, Class 2 ATVs may be operated in said location by  City employees (including seasonal employees) for the purpose of conducting official City business including, but not limited to, performing the maintenance and upkeep obligations of the City.

5.	To tow any passengers, except that a disabled vehicle being towed by any means may contain one human passenger if necessary to steer the vehicle.

 
Subd. 5.
and remove the key.
 
Every person leaving an ATV in a public place shall lock the ignition
 

Subd. 6.       Operation of ATVs Prohibited.  Unless otherwise provided by law, it is a misdemeanor for any person to operate an ATV contrary to these provisions. Except as herein specifically permitted and authorized, a person is prohibited from operating ATVs:

A.	On a public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel  except  to  remove  snow from the sidewalk adjacent to the owner or operator's own premises or the premises of another person with the specific permission of that person.

B.	On boulevards within any public right-of-way.

C.	On private property of  another  without  specific  permission  of  the  owner  or person in control of the property.

D.	On any other public place, except as may be specifically permitted by other provisions of the City Code.

E.	Within 100 feet of any skating rink or sliding area.

F.	While under the influence of alcohol or drugs as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 169A.20, as it may be amended from time to time.

G.	At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all surrounding circumstances, but in no event at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour;

H.	In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner or heedlessly in disregard of the
 
rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger or cause injury or damage to any person or property.

I.	So as to intentionally chase, run over, or kill any animal.

J.	In inclement weather, or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions, or at any time when there is insufficient visibility to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a distance of 500 feet.

SECTION 8.09.	GOLF CARTS.

 
Subd. 1.
definitions apply:
 
Definitions.  For the purposes of this Section, the following
 

1.	"Golf Cart" - a motorized four-wheeled vehicle that is customarily referred to by manufacturers as a golf cart.

2.	"Owner" - a person, other than a lien holder, having a property interest in or title to a golf cart entitled to the use and possession thereof.

3.	"Operate" - to ride in or on and control the operation of a golf cart.

4.	"Operator" - every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a golf cart.

5.	"Right-of-way" - the entire right-of-way of a public roadway, including the traveled portions, banks, ditches, shoulders, and medians of a roadway that is not privately owned.

Subd. 2.	Operation of Golf Carts. Consistent with the limitations found in the remainder of this section, golf carts may be operated on the extreme right hand side of the right-of-way of streets, roadways, or alleys that are used for other public motor vehicle travel and that are under the jurisdiction of the City.  The following requirements shall apply to golf cart operation on all streets, roadways,  or alleys that are used for other public motor vehicle travel and that are under the jurisdiction of the City:

A.	Operation Permitted.  Golf Carts:

1.	May only be operated from May 1 to October 31 of each year.

2.	May only be operated from sunrise to sunset each day.

3.	Must be operated at a rate of speed reasonable or proper under all surrounding circumstances and in no event, at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour.
 
4.	Must follow the traffic provisions of the City Code, except for those provisions relating to required equipment and those which by their nature have no application.

5.	Must not enter any intersection without yielding the right of way to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection or so close to the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard.

6.	Must not be operated on any right-of-way in inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, or fog, or at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a distance of 500 feet.

8.	Permit Required.  No person shall operate a golf cart pursuant to this section without a valid permit from the City.  Permit applications shall be available at the police department.

1.	The City Council shall set fees for such permits by resolution.

2.	Applicant must present proof of insurance from their insurance provider verifying that the applicant maintains liability insurance for the payment of tort liabilities arising out of the maintenance or use of the golf cart complying with the provisions in Minnesota Statutes, Section 658.48, subdivision 5 and according to the limits contained in Minnesota Statutes, Section 658.49, subdivision 3, as the same may be amended from time to time.

3.	An operator must have possession of a valid permit while operating a golf cart pursuant to this section and must affix a rear-facing sticker
to the golf cart displaying the operator's permit number, as issued by
the City.

4.	All permits granted pursuant to this section shall be issued for a period not to exceed one year and may be renewed annually by complying with the requirements of this section.

5.	A permit may be revoked at any time if there is evidence that the permittee cannot safely operate a golf cart on the designated roadways.

6.	Nothing in this section shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the City for any injuries to persons or property that may
result from the operation of a golf cart by a permit holder, the grant of
such a permit, or the failure by the City to revoke said permit.

C.	Age Requirement.  In order to operate a golf cart on the right-of-way as permitted by this section, the operator must be at least 18 years of age
 
and have a driver's license that would allow operation of a motor vehicle in the State of Minnesota.

D.	Passenger Limits.  A person may operate a golf cart while carrying up to the number of passengers for which the golf cart was designed and equipped with seat belts.

E.	Equipment Required.  It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a golf cart on the right-of-way as permitted by this section unless it is equipped with the following:

1.	Headlamps;

2.	Front and rear turn signal;

3.	Tail lamps;

4.	Rear-facing brake and stop lamps;

5.	Reflex reflectors: one red on each side as far to the rear as practicable, and one red on the rear;

6.	An exterior mirror mounted on the driver's side of the vehicle and either an exterior mirror mounted on the passenger's side of the vehicle or an interior mirror;

7.	A parking brake;

8.	A windshield of AS-1 or AS-5 composition, that conforms to the American National Standard Institute's "Safety Code for Safety Glazing Materials for Glazing Motor Vehicles Operating on Land Highways," Z-26.1-1977, January 28, 1977, as supplemented by Z26.1a, July 3, 1980 (incorporated by reference; See 49 C.F.R.
§ 571.5);

9.	A VIN that conforms to the requirements of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 565 Vehicle Identification Number;

10.A Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly conforming to 49 C.F.R.
§ 571.209, Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 209, Seat Belt Assemblies, installed at each designated seating position;

11.An operable horn;

12.A displayed slow-moving vehicle emblem in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Section 169.522; and

13.An antenna with a flag.
 


Subd. 3.	Operation of Golf Carts in Connection with an Approve PUPP Application.   In connection with an application for the Private Use of Public Property, if an entity or individual intends to use a golf cart for the event in a manner that is not compliant with the City Code, the individual or entity must include in the PUPP application a detailed description of the proposed use of the golf cart, as well as a description of all provisions of the City Code related to the use of golf carts that will not be met by the proposed use.  It is within the City Council's discretion as to whether or not to approve the use of a golf cart in connection with such an application.



Subd. 4.	Operation of Golf Carts Prohibited.  Except as herein specifically permitted and authorized, it is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a golf cart:

A.	In any of the following areas:

1.	In the downtown district.  For purposes of this subdivision,
"downtown district" means that portion of the City lying between East Avenue/Broad Street and Plum Street and between Levee Street
and Fourth Street.

2.	On trunk highways, such as Minnesota State Highway 58 (also known as Bush Street and Plum Street) and U.S. Highway 61 (also known as Main Street).

3.	On interstate highways or freeways.

4.	On Old West Main Street between Withers Harbor and U.S. Highway 61.

B.	To tow any individuals.

C.	On a public sidewalk provided for pedestrian travel.

D.	On boulevards within any public right-of-way.

E.	On private property of another without specific permission of the owner or person in control of the property.

F.	On any other public place, except as may be specifically permitted by other provisions of the City Code.

G.	While under the influence of alcohol or drugs as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 169A.20, as it may be amended from time to time.
 
H.	At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all  surrounding circumstances, but in no event at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour.

I.	In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger or cause injury or damage to any person or property.

J.	So as to intentionally chase, run over, or kill any animal.

Subd. 5.	Golf Cart Crossing of Public Right-of-Way.  A person operating a golf cart may make a direct crossing of a street or highway, except an interstate highway or freeway or as otherwise provided in this section, provided:

1.	The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;

2.	The golf cart is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main traveled way of the street or highway;

3.	The operator yields the right of way to all oncoming traffic that constitutes an immediate hazard

4.	In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made only at an intersection of such street or highway with another public street or highway; and

5.	When crossing in conditions of reduced visibility, both front and rear lights must be illuminated.

Subd. 6.	Every person leaving a golf cart in a public place shall lock the ignition and remove the key.

SECTION 8.10	MINI-TRUCKS.

Subd. 1.	Permit Required.  Mini-trucks as defined in Minn. Stat§ 169.011, subd. 40a, are hereby allowed on the streets of the City of Red Wing not subject to the State of Minnesota jurisdiction, so long as a permit is obtained pursuant to this section, and the mini-truck complies with the terms of this section.

Subd. 2.     Application.  Anyone desiring a permit to operate a mini-truck on City streets pursuant to this section shall submit an application in the following form:
 



1.	Date
 
Application for Permit for Operating Mini-Truck on City Streets of Red Wing
 
2.	Applicant name and address.
 
3.	Street(s) on which applicant will drive.
4.	Time periods within which applicant will drive.
5.	Insurance company and policy number.
6.	Signature of applicant.

Subd. 3	Duties of Police Chief.  The Police Chief of the City of Red Wing shall be the issuing officer for permits under this section.  Upon approval, the Police Chief may designate on the permit the streets of operation and the hours of operation, as the officer determines is in the public safety interest.

Subd. 4.	Other Requirements.

A.		Permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed one year and may be renewed annually.

B.  A permit may be revoked at any time if there is evidence that the permittee cannot safety operate a mini-truck on the designated roadway.



SECTION 8.11.	CITY OF RED WING MOTORIZED CARTS.
The City of Red Wing shall be permitted to operate City-owned Cushman Haulster, Toro Workman or similar motorized carts for the purposes of City maintenance or city business, on City streets in addition to being operated on private property. These carts shall be equipped with flashing yellow warning  lights to the front and rear and/or a yellow or blue flashing light on top and a  slow-moving  vehicle emblem to the rear. The City of Red Wing shall also be permitted to operate City­ owned mini-trucks, as defined in Minn. Stat. § 169.011, subd. 40a, for the purposes of recycling collection or other City business. Only authorized City personnel with a valid driver's license shall operate motorized carts or mini-trucks. The City shall be exempt from the permit requirements contained in this ordinance.


 
SECTION 8.12.	VIOLATION MISDEMEANOR.
 
A	MISDEMEANOR	OR	PETTY
 

Subd. 1.	Upon  conviction  of violating  this  Chapter  a  person  shall  be punished for a misdemeanor if:

A.	The provision makes violation a misdemeanor; or

B.	A violation  is committed  in a manner or under circumstances  so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property; or

C.	The violator  is convicted  of violation  of any  provision  of this  Chapter, exclusive   of   violations	relating  to   the   standing	or   parking   of   an
 
unattended  vehicle,  for  a third  or subsequent  time  within  a  12-month period.

Subd. 2.	As  to  any  violations  not  constituting  a  misdemeanor  under Subdivision 1, the violator shall be punished as for a petty misdemeanor.

Subd. 3.	As to any violation  of a provision adopted  by reference, the violator shall be punished as specified in such provision, so adopted.
 



CHAPTER 9
 
Title

PARKING REGULATIONS
 
Page
 

Section	9.01	Definitions	9-1
	9.02	Application	9-1
	9.03	Scope and Orders of Officers	9-1
	9.04	Presumption	9-1
	9.05	General Parking Prohibitions	9-1
	9.06	Recreational Camping Vehicle Parking	9-2
	9.07	Vehicle Parking	9-3
	9.08	Parking Hours	9-3
	9.09	Truck Parking	9-4
	9.10	Parking Rules in City-Owned Parking Lots, Ramps	
		and Non-Roadway Areas	9-5
	9.11	Emergencies	9-5
	9.12	Unattended Vehicle	9-6
	9.13	Vehicle Repair on Street, Public Parking Lot or	
		Ramp, or Other Public Property	9-6
	9.14	Advertising for Sale Prohibited	9-6
	9.15	Physically Disabled Parking	9-6
	9.16	Unauthorized  Removal	9-7
	9.17	Removing and Impounding Vehicles	9-7
	9.18	Residential Parking Only	9-7
	9.19	Parking Violation  Notice	9-7
	9.20	Violation a Misdemeanor or Petty Misdemeanor	9-8
 
CHAPTER 9 PARKING REGULATIONS

SECTION 9.01. DEFINITIONS.  Except as otherwise defined in the City Code, or where the context clearly indicates a contrary intent, the words and terms defined in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 169 shall be applicable to this Chapter.

SECTION 9.02. APPLICATION. The provisions of this Chapter, are applicable to the drivers of all vehicles and animals upon streets, including, but not limited to, those owned or operated by the United States, the State of Minnesota, or any county, town, city, district, or other political subdivision.

SECTION 9.03.	SCOPE AND ORDERS OF OFFICERS.

Subd. 1.    Scope.   The  provisions  of this  Chapter  relate exclusively  to the streets, alleys and private roads in the City, and the operation and parking of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation and parking of vehicles upon such streets, alleys and private roads.

Subd. 2. Orders of an Officer. It is a misdemeanor for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police or peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.

SECTION 9.04. PRESUMPTION. If the driver of any vehicle parked in violation of this Chapter is not present, it shall be presumed that the owner of the vehicle or a person acting as the agent of the owner parked the vehicle.

SECTION 9.05.	GENERAL  PARKING  PROHIBITIONS.	It is unlawful
for any person to stop, leave standing, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the specific directions of a police officer or traffic control device in any of the following places:

1.	On a sidewalk;

2.	In front of a public or private driveway;

3.	Within an intersection;

4.	Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant;

5.	On a crosswalk;

6.	Within 20 feet of a striped crosswalk at any intersection, or within 20 feet of an assumed crosswalk at any intersection, as measured from the intersecting perpendicular right-of-way line;
 
7.	In a sign-posted fire lane;

8.	Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;

9.	Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;

10.	Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of said entrance when properly sign-posted;

11.	Alongside  or  opposite  any  street  excavation  or  obstruction  when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;

12.	On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;

13.	Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street;

14.	At any place where official signs prohibit or restrict stopping, parking or both;

15.	In any alley, except for loading or unloading and then only so long as reasonably necessary for such loading and unloading to or from adjacent premises;

16.	On any boulevard which has been curbed;

17.	At any place where there is a yellow painted curb.

18.	Within 10 feet either direction of a mailbox between 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday

SECTION 9.06.	RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE PARKING.

Subd. 1.	Definition.	The  term  "recreational  camping  vehicle"  means any of the following:

1.	"Travel Trailer" - a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses, permanently identified "Travel Trailer" by the manufacturer of the trailer.

2.	"Truck Camper" - a structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.

3.	"Motor Home" - a portable, temporary  building to be used for travel,
 
recreation  and  vacation,  constructed  as  an  integral  part of  a self­ propelled vehicle.

4.	"Camping  Trailer"  -  a  folding  structure,  mounted  on  wheels  and designed for travel, recreation and vacation uses.

Subd. 2. Unlawful Act. It is unlawful  for  any  person  to  park  a recreational camping vehicle on or within the limits of any street or right-of-way for a continuous period in excess of six hours, except where signs are posted designating the place as a campsite or in a mobile home park. During such six hour period, however, such vehicle shall not be occupied as living quarters.

SECTION 9.07.	VEHICLE  PARKING.

Subd. 1. Parallel Parking. Except where  angle parking is specifically allowed and indicated by curb marking or sign-posting, or both, upon a two-way road, each vehicle stopped or parked where there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the  vehicle  parallel  with,  and within 12 inches of, the right-hand curb, and, where painted markings appear on the curb or the street, such vehicle shall be within such markings, front and rear. Upon a one-way road, all vehicles shall comply with the parking requirements for a two-way road, except that the left-hand wheels of the vehicle may be parallel with and within 12 inches from the left-hand curb, but the front of the vehicle shall be in the direction of the flow of traffic upon the one-way street. It is unlawful to park in violation of this Section.

Subd. 2.      Angle  Parking.   Upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked within the angle markings to the curb indicated by such signs or marks and the front right wheel shall be no further than 12 inches away from the curb. It is unlawful to park in violation of this Section.

Subd. 3. Streets Without  Curbs.  Upon  streets  without  curbs,  each vehicle shall be stopped or parked parallel and to the right of the paving, improved or main traveled part of the street.  It is unlawful to park in violation of this Section.

 
SECTION 9.08.
as follows:
 
PARKING HOURS.  Parking on streets shall be limited
 

Subd. 1.    It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any vehicle or equipment upon any street, public parking lot or ramp,  or other public property, for a continuous period in excess of 20 hours, without an approved parking permit or private use of public property application.
 
Subd. 2.	The Council has authority to designate specific parking rules on certain streets or blocks. It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any vehicle in the following:

A.  Sign posted no parking.

B.	Sign posted limitations i.e. two, three, four hour parking, etc.

C.	Sign posted limitations in the downtown area apply between the business hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.

D.	Sign posted limitations between 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. in the downtown area and other business districts.

E.	Sign posted limitations no parking November through April.

Temporary parking limitations that are posted at least twenty four hours in advance. Such zones shall be established whenever necessary to minimize traffic hazards or to accommodate street maintenance operations i.e.  snow  removal, street construction, special events, etc.

Subd. 3. Loading zones shall be restricted for purposes of loading and unloading materials from vehicles for delivery to or from adjacent property. Vehicles shall only be parked in loading zones for the amount of time it takes to safely load or unload to or from the adjacent property.

Subd. 4. It is unlawful for any person  to  remove,  erase,  conceal, obscure or
otherwise obliterate any mark or sign placed upon a tire or other part of a vehicle
by a parking enforcement  officer for the purpose of measuring the length of time such vehicle has been parked.

Subd. 5. For the purpose of enforcement of this Section, any vehicle moved less than 300 feet or re-parked in the block in which it was originally parked in a limited time parking zone shall be deemed to have remained stationary. A block consists of the area enclosed by intersecting streets and includes both sides of the intersecting streets. Accordingly, a car re-parked on the opposite side of the block from that on which it was originally parked shall be deemed to have remained stationary.

SECTION 9.09.	TRUCK PARKING.

Subd. 1. It is unlawful to park a detached semi-trailer upon any street, City-owned parking lot or ramp, or other public property except streets as specifically designated and sign-posted.
 
Subd. 2. It is unlawful to  park  a  semi-trailer,  truck-tractor,  or  a combination thereof, within an area zoned as a residential district, except for the purpose of loading or unloading.

Subd. 3.    It is unlawful to park a commercial vehicle  of  more  than   3/4 ton capacity within any parking space, but parking such vehicle for a period of not more than 20 minutes shall be permitted in such space for the purpose of necessary access to abutting property for loading or unloading when  access cannot reasonably be secured from an alley or from an adjacent street where truck parking is not restricted.

Subd. 4. It is unlawful to park a commercial truck or other commercial vehicle equipped with a trailer, or extended body or other extension or projection beyond the original length of such vehicle, or any passenger bus, diagonally along any street. Such vehicles may be parallel parked for a time sufficient to load or unload. If, however, the weight or bulk of the load makes parallel parking impracticable, a truck may stand backed up to the curb only for a period of time sufficient to load or unload.

SECTION 9.10.	PARKING RULES IN CITY-OWNED  PARKING LOTS,
RAMPS AND NON-ROADWAY AREAS. In City-owned  parking lots and ramps, the Council may limit the sizes and types of motor vehicles to be parked thereon, permitted, hours of parking, and prescribed method of parking, provided that such limitations and restrictions are marked  or sign-posted. It is unlawful to  park or leave standing any vehicle backed into a parking space, to drive in a direction opposite the flow of traffic marked by "one-way" signs or arrows, or to park any vehicle contrary to the restrictions or limitations marked or sign-posted therein. Unless otherwise posted or authorized by special permit obtained by the Public Works Department, vehicles and equipment shall not be stored for more than 72 hours in City parking lots, ramps and non-roadway areas.

SECTION 9.11. EMERGENCIES. To facilitate movement of traffic and promote public convenience in times of emergency, the following  additional parking restrictions shall be in effect:

Subd. 1. Emergency Defined.  For  purposes  of  this  section,  an emergency means a condition created on City streets because of the presence of snow, freezing rain, sleet, ice or snow drifts, or other natural phenomenon which create or are likely to create hazardous road conditions or impede or are likely to impede the free movement of fire, police, health,  emergency or other vehicular traffic when an emergency has been duly declared by the Public Works Director or the Police Chief.

Subd. 2.     Declaration of an Emergency.  Whenever,  in the discretion of the Public Works  Director, Police Chief, or their designees,  an emergency exists,
 
an announcement declaring the emergency shall be made to the local  news media.

Subd. 3.    Unlawful Act.   During a declared emergency, it is unlawful for any person to allow a vehicle or other obstruction to remain parked on any residential street or alley after the time announced for the beginning of the emergency, provided that the announcement has been made at least eight hours prior to the start time. This prohibition shall remain in effect in any given block until the street has been cleared or plowed the full width.

Similarly, during a declared emergency, it is unlawful for any person to park or allow any vehicle or device to be parked within 75 feet of either side of an area which has not been plowed the full width ..

SECTION 9.12.	UNATTENDED VEHICLE.

Subd. 1. It is unlawful for any person to  leave  a  motor  vehicle unattended while the engine is running.

Subd. 2. It is unlawful for any person to  leave  a  motor  vehicle unattended with the key in the ignition.

Subd. 3. It is unlawful for any person to leave a detached trailer unattended upon any street, public parking lot or ramp, or other public property for a continuous period in excess of 20 hours without an approved parking permit or private use of public property application.

SECTION 9.13.	VEHICLE  REPAIR  ON  STREET,  PUBLIC  PARKING
LOT OR RAMP, OR OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY.  It is unlawful for any person to service, repair, assemble or dismantle any vehicle parked upon a street, public parking lot or ramp, or other public property, or attempt to do so, except to service such vehicle with gasoline or oil or to make emergency repairs, but in no event for more than six hours.

SECTION 9.14.	ADVERTISING	FOR	SALE	PROHIBITED.	It	is
unlawful for any commercial establishment to park a vehicle on any street, public parking lot or ramp, or other public property, for the sole purpose of advertising the vehicle for sale.

SECTION 9.15.	PHYSICALLY DISABLED PARKING.

Subd. 1. Statutory  parking  privileges  for  physically  disabled  persons shall be strictly observed and enforced. Police officers are authorized  to  tag vehicles on either private or public property which are in violation of such statutory privileges.
 
Subd. 2. It is unlawful for any  person,  whether  or  not  physically disabled, to stop, park, or leave standing, a motor vehicle: (1) in a sign-posted fire lane at any time; or (2) in lanes where, and during such hours as, parking is prohibited to accommodate heavy traffic during morning and afternoon rush hours.

SECTION 9.16. UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL.  It is  unlawful  for  any person to move a vehicle not owned by such person into any prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.

SECTION 9.17.	REMOVING  AND  IMPOUNDING  VEHICLES.	When
any police officer finds a vehicle upon a street, City-owned parking lot or ramp, or other public property in violation of any parking regulation, the  officer is hereby authorized to require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to remove the vehicle to a position in compliance with this Chapter and with state law.

When any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street, City­ owned parking lot or ramp, or other public property, in violation of any parking regulation, the officer is hereby authorized to impound the unlawfully  parked vehicle and to provide for the removal thereof to a convenient garage or other facility or place of safety. If any fee is placed against the vehicle for cost  of removal or storage, or both, the fee shall be paid by the owner or agent of the owner prior to removal from such place of storage or safekeeping.

SECTION 9.18.	RESIDENTIAL PARKING ONLY.

Subd. 1.      The Council may, by motion, designate certain streets, blocks or portions of streets or blocks as "Residential Parking Only Zones." Such zones shall be established whenever the Council deems it necessary to preserve parking for owners and/or residents of property located within the zone, and/or guests of those individuals. Residential Parking Only Zones shall be marked by signage indicating such.

Subd. 2.    Residential  Parking Only Zone Defined.   For the purposes of this section, a Residential Parking Only Zone is a specific legally signed street, block, or portions of streets or blocks wherein parking is restricted to vehicles operated by owners and/or residents of property  located within the zone, and/or guests of those individuals.

Subd. 3.      It is unlawful for any individual who is not an owner or resident of property located within the zone, or a guest of such an owner or resident to park a vehicle in a Residential Parking Only Zone.

Subd. 4.       Notwithstanding Subdivisions 2 and 3 of this Section, nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of emergency vehicles, authorized City of Red Wing vehicles and/or other utility company vehicles providing services to park in Residential Parking Only Zones.
 

SECTION 9.19.	PARKING  VIOLATION  NOTICE.	Notices  of  parking
violations may be ticketed by envelopes stating a general description of the vehicle, the nature of the offense, and the fine. Violations of parking regulations which are a petty misdemeanor under this Chapter shall incur a fine in accordance with the fee ordinance.

 
SECTION 9.20. MISDEMEANOR.
 
VIOLATION	A	MISDEMEANOR	OR	PETTY
 

Subd. 1.	Upon conviction of violating this a person shall be punished for a misdemeanor if :

A.  The provision makes violation a misdemeanor; or

B.	A violation is committed in a manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property; or

C.	The violator is convicted of violation of any provision of this Chapter, exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking  of  an unattended vehicle, for a third or subsequent time within a 12-month period.

Subd. 2.	As  to  any  violation  not  constituting  a  misdemeanor  under Subdivision 1, the violator shall be punished for a petty misdemeanor.

Subd. 3.	As  to  any violation  of a provision adopted  by  reference  the violator shall be punished as specified in such provision, so adopted.
 
Title	Page

CHAPTER10	PUBLIC PROTECTION, CRIMES AND OFFENSES

Section	10.01	Storage, Separation, Deposit, Collection, and Disposal of Solid Waste for Residential and Multiple Dwellings and Industrial and Commercial Service	


10-1
	10.02	Collection of Commercial and Industrial Solid Waste,
and Construction and Demolition Debris Solid Waste	
10-9
	10.03	Special Waste Collection and Disposal	10-13
	10.04	City Environmental Service Charge	10-14
	10.05	Firearms, Bows and Dangerous Weapons	10-18
	10.06	Dog and Cat Regulation and Licensing	10-20
	10.07	Animals and Fowl - Keeping, Transporting,
Treatment,  Housing	
10-30
	10.08	Deer Feeding Prohibition	10-37
	10.09	Animal Waste	10-39
	10.10	Trespass	10-39
	10.11	Harassment	10-43
	10.12	Prospective Tenant Background Checks	10-43
	10.13	Tree and Shrub Care	10-43
	10.14	Shade Tree Pest Control	10-45
	10.15	Declared Shade Tree Pests, Control Measures,
and Control Areas	
10-49
	10.16	Curfew	10-52
	10.17	Noise	10-53
	10.18	Public Parks	10-54
	10.19	Minnesota State Fire Code	10-60
	10.20	Cannon Valley Trail Regulations; Unlawful Acts	10-64
	10.21	Junk Items Stored on Public or Private Property	10-69
	10.22	Abandoning a Motor Vehicle	10-72
	10.23	Loitering in Streets or Public Places	10-73
	10.24	Maintenance of Private Property	10-73
	10.25	Graffiti	10-73
	10.26	Disorderly Property	10-75
	10.27	Manufacture, Delivery, Possession, Sale, Advertisement,
and Use of Drug Paraphernalia	
10-78
	10.28	Smoking and Use of Electronic Delivery Devices	10-83
	10.29	Alternative Civil Remedy	10-85
	10.30	Violation a Misdemeanor	10-85
 
CHAPTER10

PUBLIC PROTECTION, CRIMES AND OFFENSES



SECTION 10.01. STORAGE, SEPARATION, DEPOSIT, COLLECTION, AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE FOR RESIDENTIAL AND MULTIPLE DWELLINGS AND INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICE.

Subd. 1.	Purpose and Goals.

A The purpose of this Section is to benefit the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City. This Section also provides for the orderly and efficient handling of Solid Waste within the City, and allows the City to provide quality Solid Waste management at an economical price.

Subd. 2. Definitions. The following terms, as used in this Section and Sections 10.02 and 10.03, shall have the meanings stated:

1.	"Agricultural Waste" - waste generated from agriculture operations such as farming, winery operations, livestock operations, and other agricultural services.

2.	"Backyard Compost Site" - a site that meets all the requirements of Subdivision 9 of this Section and that is used to compost  food scraps, garden wastes, weeds, lawn cuttings, leaves and prunings from	a single family or household, apartment buildings, or responsible tenant of the property.

3.	"Building Agent" - the  material  added  to  a  compost  system  to provide	structural  support  and  prevent  the  settlement   and compaction of the decomposing waste.

4.	"City Environmental Service Charge" or "CESC" - the city service charge established in Section 10.03.

5.	"City Service" - collection of Residential and Multiple Dwelling Mixed Municipal Solid Waste,  Recyclable Materials and Yard Waste.

6.	"Collection" - the aggregation of Solid Waste,  Mixed Municipal Solid Waste,  Commercial  and  Industrial  Solid  Waste,  Construction  and Demolition Debris Solid Waste, Yard Waste (together "Waste"), and Recyclable	Materials   from	the	place	at   which	the   Waste	or Recyclable Materials are generated  and includes all activities  up to
 
the time when the Waste or Recyclable Materials are delivered to a waste management or recycling facility.

7.	"Commercial or Industrial Establishment" - any premises where a commercial,	industrial, or  institutional enterprise of any kind is conducted, including restaurants, clubs, churches, and schools and other institutions.

8.	"Commercial and Industrial Solid Waste" -

(a)	Garbage, refuse, and other Solid Waste from Commercial or Industrial	Establishments that the generator of the waste aggregates for collection.

(b)	Commercial and Industrial Solid Waste does not include tanning shavings, leather scraps and rubber and polyurethane composite leather-ware components, auto hulks, street sweepings, ash, construction and demolition debris, mining  waste, sludge, tree waste, waste from agricultural activities, tires, lead acid batteries, motor and vehicle fluids and filters, and materials separated from solid waste by the generator that are separately collected and delivered for reuse in their original form or for use in a manufacturing process; but does not include source separated compostable  materials.

9.	"Commercial Service" - collection of Commercial and Industrial Solid Waste, and Construction and Demolition Debris Solid Waste.

10.	"Composting" - the controlled microbial degradation of organic waste to yield a humus-like product.

11.	"Construction and Demolition Debris Solid Waste" -

(a)	Solid Waste resulting from construction, remodeling, and repair of buildings, roads and other structures and from demolition of buildings, roads and other structures, except for materials from such activities that are or will be separated from Solid Waste by the generator, separately collected, and delivered for  reuse  in their original form or for use in a manufacturing process.

(b)	Construction and Demolition Debris Solid Waste does not include asbestos	waste, lead paint or materials with lead paint, contaminated soils, or regulated hazardous waste.
 
(c)	Any Construction and Demolition Solid Waste contaminated with mixed municipal solid waste shall be considered Mixed Municipal Solid Waste.

12.	"Contaminated" - not in its pure state; tainted, purified or polluted.

13.	"Hauler" - a company or person that owns, operates or leases vehicles	for the purpose of collection, conveyance, and transportation	of Commercial and Industrial Solid Waste and Construction and Demolition Debris Solid Waste for hire.

14.	"Inert Material" - the uncompostable material remaining in a compost system after decomposition. Inert material does not include soil particles or other naturally-occurring materials that may be found in the compost system.

15.	"Mixed Municipal Solid Waste" -

(a)	Garbage, refuse, and other Solid Waste that the generator of the waste aggregates for collection, except as provided in subsection
(b)	of this definition.

(b) Mixed Municipal Solid Waste does not include auto hulks, street sweepings, ash, construction debris, mining waste, sludges, tree and agricultural wastes, tires, lead acid batteries, motor and vehicle	fluids and filters, and other materials  collected, processed, and disposed of as separate waste streams, but does include source-separated  compostable materials.

16.	"Multiple Dwelling" - any building used for residential purposes consisting of more than four dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each.

17.	"Putrescible Waste" - solid waste containing matter capable of being decomposed	by microorganisms and of such a character and proportion as to cause obnoxious odors and to be capable of attracting or providing food for birds or animals.

18.	"Recyclable Materials" - materials such as office paper, cardboard newsprint, glass, bottles, jars, aluminum cans, tin cans, recyclable plastics, or other materials designated for separate collection by the City Council.

19.	"Refuse" - includes all drained organic material resulting from the preparation of food and spoiled or decayed food from any source, contaminated  bottles,  cans,  glassware,  paper  or  paper  products,
 
crockery, rags, discarded clothing, and other waste products, except human waste, compost materials, or waste resulting from building construction or demolition,  except  for  designated  recyclable materials.

20.	"Residential Dwelling" - any single building consisting of one through four dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each.

21.	"Responsible  Tenant"  -  any  occupant,  tenant,  owner,  manager, operator	or  custodian  of  any  Residential  Dwelling   or   Multiple Dwelling, and any person owning or  operating  a  Commercial  or Industrial Establishment in the city.

22.	"Rural or Remote Service" - garbage, refuse and other solid waste collected in areas with a density of less than one dwelling unit per half mile.

23.	"Self Hauler" - a Commercial or Industrial Establishment that, using its  own employees and its own equipment, collects and transports Commercial and Industrial Solid Waste and/or Construction and Demolition	Debris  Solid  Waste  that  is  generated  by   the Establishment for proper management.

24.	"Solid Waste" -  has  the  meaning  given  it  in  Minnesota  Statutes, Section 116.06, Subd. 22, as amended.

25.	"Source Separation" - to divide or separate out from the main body, to make distinguishable from, to isolate, to seclude.

26.	"Yard Waste" - garden wastes, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds, shrub and  tree waste, and prunings.  Yard waste  is a source  separated compostable material.

Subd. 3.	City Service; Residential Collection Requirements.

A All Responsible Tenants of Residential and Multiple Dwelling premises shall only dispose of Mixed Municipal Solid Waste via the City Service and shall not transport or dispose of Mixed Municipal Solid Waste  by any other means. However, in unusual cases where the collection or disposal	of Mixed Municipal Solid Waste by the City Service is impractical, or in cases where large quantities of excess volumes need to be disposed of, the owner or occupant of any Residential or Multiple Dwelling premises may, upon receiving written approval from the City Service, transport and dispose of such Mixed Municipal Solid Waste in each individual case pursuant to Federal, State, County, and Local permitted facilities.   Said facilities shall be annually disclosed by the City
 
of  Red Wing  and  on file  in the  Public Works  Department  and  Solid Waste Boiler Facility.

Subd. 4.	Storage, Transportation and Disposal.

A It is unlawful for any Responsible Tenant to store Mixed Municipal Solid Waste on Residential Dwelling premises for more than one week. All such storage shall be in plastic bags and placed in a city provided automated 48 or 96 gallon cart. These containers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. On at least a bimonthly basis, recyclable materials shall be set out for collection in containers approved by the city. Large articles of Mixed Municipal Solid Waste that do not fit in the container cannot be transported by the City Service. These items may be disposed of by the Responsible Tenant in a manner approved by the City Public Works Director. All Mixed Municipal Solid Waste set out for disposal by the Responsible Tenant shall be set out for disposal so that designated	Recyclable Materials are separated from the Mixed Municipal Solid Waste except if employed in the disposal of other Mixed Municipal Solid Waste if the material has been contaminated: A list of designated Recyclable Materials will be published and made available.

B.	It is unlawful for any Responsible Tenant to store Mixed Municipal Solid Waste on multiple dwelling premises for more than one week. Such storage shall be in containers as for Residential Dwelling premises, except that so-called "dumpsters" with close-fitting covers may be substituted provided the Mixed Municipal Solid Waste is first placed in plastic bags. Collection of household refuse not capable of being recycled shall be one per week as designated by the City Council. Materials shall be placed at the curb for automated collection and recycling collection by the Responsible Tenant, unless  otherwise approved by the Public Works Director.

C.	It is unlawful for any person other than a Minnesota Pollution Control Agency-permitted solid waste facility to store putrescible Waste on Commercial or Industrial Establishment premises for more than  48 hours, or Waste of any type for more than one week, unless written approval is received from the city authorizing a longer storage period. Commercial	or Industrial Establishments that regularly generate significant amounts of putrescible Waste may, in the alternative, satisfy the 48-hour requirement by obtaining collection service on Monday, Wednesday and Friday of each week. Such storage shall be in containers as for Residential Dwelling premises, except that so-called "dumpsters" with close-fitting covers may be substituted provided the Mixed Municipal Solid Waste is first placed in plastic bags.
 
D.	The City shall provide for collection and disposal of all Mixed Municipal Solid Waste and Recyclable Materials. This will be done in a sanitary manner to insure the health, safety and general welfare of its residents, and shall set all fees and charges in relation thereto, under such terms and conditions as the City may, from time to time, deem appropriate. The City may collect such fees and charges in a civil action or, in the alternative and at the option of the City, as provided in Section 3.04, Subdivision 6, of the Red Wing City Code.

Residents who are physically unable to take the automated carts to the designated collection areas should contact the Director of Public Works or authorized representative to apply for special service.

Following are the requirements for city provided residential refuse collection:

1.	All residential refuse containers must be placed in  their  proper collection location by 6:30 am on collection day. If that location is a curbside location the container must be removed within 24 hours of collection.

2.	Automated refuse carts shall not be placed within four feet of any obstacle that prevents unobstructive access, such as telephone poles, additional refuse carts, parked cars, signs, trees,  recycling carts, fire hydrants, fences, snow banks, etc. Carts shall be placed with the lid opening and identification number facing  the  street. Carts must be placed on a flat surface; do not place them on top of any	object including snow banks. Carts not meeting these requirements will be charged a service fee for the driver to move the container(s) for servicing.

3.	All refuse must be bagged and tied. Lids on the containers should be closed. If the lid is not closed and refuse falls out of the cart while it is  being  emptied  the  resident  will  be  charged  for  extra  refuse according to  the  fee  schedule.  Extra  bags  of  refuse  should  be placed at least four feet from the automated cart.   Extra volume will also be charged to the property owner based on the fee schedule.

4.	Each household will be issued one 48-gallon refuse cart at no cost.
This cart  is the  property of the  City of  Red Wing  and shall  not be removed from  the  address  if the  resident  should  move.	The  cart shall   only	be   removed   from   the	property	by   duly   authorized personnel of the Solid Waste  Department.		If the cart is stolen, the resident shall report the theft to the Red Wing Police Department and the	Public   Works	Department.	The	property		owner	will	be responsible for the replacement  cost of the cart.	The  Solid Waste
 
Department will maintain an automated cart  in  good  working condition upon notification by the resident that repairs are needed. Damage to the automated carts due to negligence by the property owner shall result in a fee being assessed for repair or replacement costs.

5.	Carts will be emptied once per week. If a single 48-gallon cart is not sufficient for the amount of refuse generated weekly, residents may request additional carts or a larger cart. Residents will be charged according to the fee schedule. Residents who generate more than 48 gallons of refuse on three or more occasions in a single month will be required to increase the size of their container.

6.	Construction material (sheetrock, concrete, brick, rocks,  shingles), yard waste (grass, leaves, brush), dirt, electronics (TV's, computers, VCR's, DVD players, CD players, cell phones, fax machines, and printers), and hazardous waste (liquid paint, fluorescent light bulbs, etc) are considered unacceptable waste for  disposal with your residential refuse. Carts containing unacceptable waste shall not be emptied until such time as the items are removed from the cart. Construction debris and yard waste can be disposed of at the Solid Waste Management Campus for a fee. Electronics should  be brought to a recycling center. Hazardous waste can only   be disposed of at a Hazardous Waste Collection Center.

7.	It shall be illegal to use another Person's Solid Waste Storage container for disposal of refuse without the consent of that person.

E.	The City shall provide for the collection of  designated  Recyclable Materials every other week from  Residential  Dwellings.   This collection day shall be every other week on the same  day  as  the  scheduled collection day of Mixed Municipal Solid Waste.

Each household will be issued one (1) 96 gallon recycling cart  at  no cost. This cart is the property of the City of Red Wing and shall not be removed from the address if the resident should move. The cart should only be removed from the property by authorized personnel of the Solid Waste Department. If the  cart is stolen,  the  resident  shall  report the theft to the Red Wing Police Department and the Public Works Department. The property owner will be responsible for the replacement cost of the cart. The  Solid Waste Department will maintain an automated cart in good working condition upon notification by the resident that repairs are needed. Damage to the automated cart due to negligence by the property owner shall result in a fee being assessed for repair or replacement costs.
 
Responsible Tenants of Residential Dwellings shall set out designated Recyclable Materials in City provided carts at curbside locations prior to 6:30 a.m. of the scheduled day of collection. Responsible Tenants of Multiple Family Dwellings and  or  Commercial  or  Industrial Establishments shall set out designated Recyclable  Materials  prior  to 6:30 a.m. of the scheduled day of collection in City issued carts in locations determined as being readily accessible to the Recyclable Materials collector. Preparation of designated Recyclable Materials by the Responsible Tenant shall be as follows:

1.	Recycling shall be done utilizing a co-mingled method. All designated Recyclable Materials may be placed together in the recycling Cart. All food and Beverage containers shall be emptied, cleaned and rinsed.

2.	Designated Recyclable Materials shall be placed loosely  in the recycling cart. Bagged items will not be accepted.

3.	A list of designated Recyclable Materials will be published and made available.

4.	City Council can by resolution amend or expand preparation requirements.

F.	Anti-Scavenging  Clause.   Ownership  of  the  Mixed  Municipal  Solid Waste or designated Recyclable Materials set out for collection shall be vested in the collector and transporter of Mixed Municipal Solid Waste or Recyclable Materials as designated  by the  Red Wing  City Council.    It shall be unlawful  and an offense  against  this  Section for  any  person other than City Service or licensed Hauler to pick up said materials.

G.	It is unlawful to store organic Waste unless it is  drained,  wrapped, and/or stored in a leak-resistant container.

Subd. 5. Deposit. It is unlawful for any person  to  deposit  any nonrecyclable material, Waste, garbage, rubbish, offal, or the body of a  dead animal, in any place other than an approved container for collection or Waste management facility as permitted by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, or other similar state or federal permitting authority.

Subd. 6. Fire Danger. It is unlawful for any person to store, deposit or dispose of any Waste which is in flames or heated to the point where it could cause danger of fire in other Waste or cause combustion when in contact with other waste. The City of Red Wing prohibits the placement of Lithium Ion batteries and rechargeable batteries from smart phones and other electronic devices  in refuse and recycling carts.
 
Subd. 7.	Spring and Fall Collection.

A The Public Works Director or  authorized  representative  will  schedule and publicize a spring and fall cleanup when authorized by the City Council.

B. Residents may drop off brush for no charge at the Solid Waste Campus during spring and fall cleanup dates as scheduled by the Public Works Director.

SECTION 10.02. COLLECTION OF COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL SOLID WASTE, AND CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS SOLID WASTE.

Subd. 1.	Purpose and Goals.

A The purpose of this section is to benefit the public health, safety and welfare of the residents and commercial and industrial establishments of the city and to protect the environment. This section also provides for the orderly and efficient handling of Solid Waste within the City,  and allows the City to provide quality Solid Waste management at an economical price, while at the same time seeking to achieve State of Minnesota Solid Waste management policies and goals  as outlined  in the	Minnesota  Waste  Management  Act  (Minnesota   Statutes, Chapter 115A).

Subd. 2.	Commercial Service.

A In furtherance of the City's goals of protecting the health, safety  and welfare of the community, the City has added Commercial Service to its City Service.

Subd. 3.	Commercial Service Contract Haulers.

A The City may contract with Haulers to assist in Commercial Service. The City may enter into such collection service contracts after issuing a Request for Proposals from Haulers interested in contracting  with  the City to perform such services. The City shall bill all Commercial or Industrial Establishments for services provided  by  the  Commercial Service according to the procedures in Section 10.01, Subdivision 4. D. Haulers under contract to the Commercial Service shall be paid using City Service revenues.

Subd. 4.	Commercial Service Collection Licenses.
 
A  Collection  License Required.  No person shall engage  in the Collection of Solid Waste within the City unless such person shall first secure from the City a license to do so and pay the license fee prescribed in this Section. Pursuant to Subdivision 3 of Section 10.01, collection licenses shall not be issued for collection of Mixed Municipal Solid Waste from Residential and Multiple Dwellings.  Further, the City has no obligation to issue or renew a commercial or construction demolition collection license.

B.	Application. Eligible Haulers shall make application to the Permits and License Manager.  The application shall accurately state:

1.	The name, address and contact information of the owner or licensee.

2.	A description of the kind of service to be rendered.

3.	A  description   of  each  motor  vehicle  to  be  used  for  collection, including the license number thereof.

4.	The manner and kind of service proposed to be given, the types of customers and scheduled pick ups.

5.	The collection area to be served.
C.	Insurance. No such license shall be issued until the applicant files with the Permits and License Manager a Certificate of Insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state covering all vehicles to be used by the applicant in the  business.  The  minimum limits of coverage for such insurance shall be as follows: Such policy shall  be  an  umbrella  or  all-perils  policy  in  the  minimum  amount  of
$1,000,000. Such insurance shall be kept in force during the term of the license and shall provide for notification of the city prior to termination or cancellation. Any  license issued under this section shall automatically be revoked upon notice of termination or cancellation of such insurance and shall remain revoked until, and unless, other insurance is provided as required in this section.

D.	Fee; Term. The annual license fee shall be as duly set by the City Council by ordinance. Unless otherwise provided by resolution of the City Council, such licenses shall expire December 31 of each year.

E.	Vehicles. All vehicles of licensees under this section shall be operated in accordance with the following regulations:

1.	Each  collection  vehicle  shall  be  marked  on  the  outside  so  as  to identify the licensee.

2.	Every vehicle  used for  hauling Solid Waste  shall be covered,  leak­ proof, durable, and of easily cleanable construction.
 

3.	Every vehicle used for hauling Solid Waste shall be sufficiently airtight so as to prevent unreasonable quantities of dust, paper, or other collected materials to escape.

4.	Every vehicle shall be kept clean to prevent nuisances, pollution or insect breeding, and shall be maintained in good repair.

F.	Collection Prohibited During Certain Hours. No collection  of  Solid Waste shall take place before 5:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. of any day. Deviations from this requirement may occur only upon the written approval of the City.

G.	Weight or Volume-Based Pricing. Collection licensees shall impose charges for collection of Commercial and Industrial Solid Waste and Construction and Demolition Debris Solid Waste that increase with the weight or volume of waste collected.

H.	Report Required. By January 31 of each year, each licensed collector shall provide to the City, on a form provided by the Permits and License Manager, a report regarding collection services provided within the City including, but not limited to, information regarding: amounts  of  Solid Waste collected; types of Solid Waste collected; description of the types of Solid Waste generators served; and description of where such Solid Wastes were disposed of, recycled, or otherwise managed.

I.	Self Haulers. Self Haulers shall annually register with the City on a form provided by the Permits and License Manager, and shall submit to the city an annual report similar to that in Section 10.02, Subdivision 4H above, on a form provided by the Permits and License Manager.

Subd. 5. Recycling Required. Responsible Tenants at Commercial or Industrial Establishments are hereby required to conduct recycling activities for Commercial Service at their premises to assist the City in meeting a goal of 50 percent recycling of all Solid Waste generated in the City.

The City also hereby establishes a goal for recycling 50 percent of Construction and Demolition Debris Solid Waste generated in the City and recycling 90 percent of Construction and Demolition Debris Solid Waste. Further, city contracts with Haulers shall require the Hauler to offer recycling services to  all of the Commercial and Industrial Establishments serviced by the Hauler.

Subd. 6.        Violations.
 
A		A separate offense shall be deemed committed  upon  each  separate day during or which a violation occurs or continues.

B. This section, in addition to other remedies, may be enforced by injunction, action to compel performance or other appropriate remedies in District Court to prevent, restrain, correct or abate violations.

Subd. 7.	License Revocation or Suspension.

A The City Council may revoke or  suspend,  for  a  period  not to exceed sixty days, a license granted under the provisions of this Section, or impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000, for each violation on a finding that the licensee has failed to comply with a statute, regulation or provision of the City Code relating to Solid Waste management. The Council may revoke the license upon conviction of any licensee or agent or employee of a licensee for violating any law relating to Solid Waste management.	If it shall be made to appear at the hearing thereon that such violation was not willful, the Council may order suspension, provided that revocation shall be ordered upon the third such violation or offense. No suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the Council, a committee	of the Council, or a hearing under the Administrative Procedures Act, as may be determined by the Council. Such hearing shall be called by the Council upon written notice to the licensee served in person or by certified mail not less than fifteen nor more than thirty days prior to the hearing date, stating the time, place and purpose thereof.

SECTION 10.03.	SPECIAL  WASTE   COLLECTION   AND   DISPOSAL.
The City can provide a separate collection and disposal of various problem materials not collected as part of the weekly collection service. This includes nonhazardous wastes from Residential and Multiple Dwellings, and Commercial or Industrial Establishments. Arrangement of special collection for  disposal  of specific Wastes or Recyclable Materials must be  addressed  in  each  individual case pursuant to permission applied to and granted by the Public Works Director, and under his or her direction. Management of all such Waste and Recyclable Materials must be at State, County, and local permitted facilities.

Rural and remote waste collection service areas shall have mixed municipal solid waste collection performed at a minimum of every two weeks.

Agricultural  waste  collection  and  disposal  in  agricultural  areas  shall  be accomplished a minimum of once a month for any putrescible waste.

However,  in cases  where  the  collection  of  special  waste  by  the  City  is impractical,  unavailable,  or contracted  through  others,  the  owner  of the  special
 
waste may transport and dispose of such waste in each individual case pursuant to Federal, State, County, and Local permitted methods and facilities.  Said methods and facilities shall be annually disclosed by the City of Red Wing and on file in the Public Works Department Integrated Solid Waste Management Campus.

Subd. 1.	Compost Sites and Facilities.

A All Backyard Compost Sites shall be constructed and operated in accordance with the following standards:

Location. The compost site shall be located only in backyards, shall be a minimum of four feet from any lot line and shall be screened from view of the public right-of-way. No  responsible  tenant  shall  operate  more than one backyard compost site.

Area Specifications.  The compost site shall be no greater than ten feet in diameter and five feet in height. All compost sites shall be fenced or enclosed on at least three sides to prevent scattering of compost material unless the dimension standards are varied by permit of the City.

Composition and Operation.  Backyard compost sites must be managed in a nuisance-free condition to prevent odor and the stockpiling of material that does not readily decompose within a calendar year, including but not limited to refuse, fibrous material and prunings. To prevent the attraction of rodents and other animals, no meat, bones, grease, whole eggs, or dairy products shall be added to compost sites. The pile must be turned regularly and all inert material must be removed from compost sites at least once every six months.

B.	Any compost site other than a backyard compost site as defined in this ordinance must be licensed and constructed in accordance with both the Goodhue County Waste Management Ordinance and any rules and regulations adopted by the City of Red Wing.

C.	The City of Red Wing allows drop off of yard waste at the Solid Waste Management  Campus  location.   Residents  can  bring  grass,  leaves, brush and compostable yard waste to this site for disposal. Disposal charges will be determined by the fee schedule.

Subd.2	Violations.

A A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each separate day during or which a violation occurs or continues.
 
B. This Section, in addition to other remedies, may be enforced  by injunction, action or compel performance or other appropriate remedies in District Court to prevent, restrain, correct or abate violations.

SECTION 10.04.	CITY  ENVIRONMENTAL  SERVICE  CHARGE.	The
following provisions are enacted pursuant to Section 8.04 of the Red Wing City Charter, which authorizes the City to create and to impose service charges within the City's jurisdiction for Solid Waste management and related services.

Subd. 1.	Purpose.

A The purpose of this Section is to establish a City Environmental Service Charge (CESC) to fund city solid waste management and related environmental protection services intended to protect the public health and welfare and the environment pursuant to State mandates governing solid waste management and environmental  protection.

Subd. 2.	General Provisions.

A The CESC is imposed upon Responsible Tenants that generate Mixed Municipal Solid Waste for Solid Waste management and related environmental protection services provided within the City. Responsible Tenants that generate Mixed Municipal Solid Waste shall pay the CESC imposed in the manner set forth herein in amounts as established by the City Council. CESC rates shall be just and reasonable. A copy of the current rate schedule shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. In establishing or revising the rate schedule, the City Council may take into account all factors relevant to Solid Waste management and related environmental protection programs. Such factors include but are not limited to: the character, kind and quality of service and of Solid Waste; the method of disposition; and all other factors that enter into the cost of providing citywide solid  waste programs including, but not limited  to, depreciation and payment of principal and interest on money borrowed by the City for the acquisition and betterment of Solid  Waste management facilities; public education; recycling programs; household hazardous	waste management; Solid Waste management facility operating costs; and related environmental protection programs of the City.

B.	The City Council shall act to establish and adjust the amount or rates of the CESC by - ordinance and shall state the effective date of the amount or rates of the CESC.

C.	A Guidance  Document  approved  by  the  City  Council  and  revised  to meet the solid waste management needs of the City of Red Wing shall be  incorporated  into Chapter  10 for  administration  and standardization
 
of  the  application  of  the  CESC  and  reporting  by  all  affected  parties, licensed haulers, and responsible tenants.

Subd. 3.	Hauler-Collected Service Charge and Remittance.

A As a condition of maintaining its License, each Hauler  shall  bill  the CESC to and collect the CESC from all Responsible  Tenants  from whom they collect Mixed Municipal Solid Waste, according to the rates and provisions established herein. The city shall bill Self-Haulers for the CESC.

B.	The CESC  is imposed on the amount of Mixed Municipal Solid Waste generated and shall be collected by the Hauler  according  to  CESC schedule adopted by the City Council.

C.	If a person does not pay the CESC to a Hauler or directly to the city, the city may directly bill the responsible tenant of the property at which the Mixed Municipal Solid Waste was generated.

D.	The CESC collected by Haulers must be remitted to the city.  Failure to remit the CESC collected may result in the revocation of the Hauler's License by the city, and/or criminal prosecution pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 609.445, as amended.

E. Each Hauler shall remit the CESC by the last day of the month following the month in which the CESC was collected by a Hauler. The City, if requested in writing by a Hauler, may grant a variance from this 30-day payment requirement due to Hauler billing practices. The duration of the variance will be determined by the City.

F. In the event a Hauler does not receive the full amount billed on a statement or invoice when the statement or invoice includes the CESC, all payments the Hauler actually receives shall be divided on a pro-rata basis between the amount owed the Hauler and the CESC owed the City.	The Hauler must remit the pro-rata amount of the CESC to the City. The City may directly bill the responsible tenant for the balance of the CESC owed.

Subd. 4.	CESC Itemized on Statements.

A Each Hauler shall separately itemize the CESC on any  statement  or invoice issued for  payment of collection services. The CESC  must be identified as "City Environmental Service Charge," and no other name or description.	Failure to separately itemize the CESC or to properly identify the CESC is a violation of this ordinance and the Hauler's Collection license.
 

B. Each Hauler is required to provide notification of the CESC to  all persons that are billed for Hauler services. This notification is required through a letter jointly developed with the city. For any person billed for Hauler services that has not received such notification, each Hauler is required to provide a notification of the CESC through a letter jointly developed with the city at the time the person receives the first statement or invoice on which the CESC is billed.

Subd. 5. CESC Reports. Each Hauler shall complete a CESC report in accordance with instructions and on forms provided by the City. The CESC report must accompany payment of the CESC.

Subd. 6.     Recalculation of CESC.  If the City determines, after review of the CESC report, or upon failure of a Hauler to submit the CESC report, that the Hauler has not supplied appropriate or accurate information, the City may recalculate the CESC in accordance with this subsection. If the City finds that the information supplied by the Hauler is inaccurate, incomplete or understated, the City may determine an appropriate amount for the  CESC  due from the  Hauler. The City shall send the Hauler a notice, by Certified Mail, setting forth the recalculated CESC amount. The notice shall include a statement of reasons why the CESC has been recalculated. The City may base the recalculation on information in city records or on any data currently or previously supplied by the Hauler.
Subd. 7.	Examination  of  Records.	The  City  or  its  duly  authorized
agents shall have the right to examine records, including access to computer records, maintained by a Hauler. The term "record" shall include, but is not limited to, all accounts of a Hauler. The City shall be allowed access at all reasonable times to inspect and copy at reasonable cost all business records related to a Hauler's Collection, Transportation, and/or Disposal of Mixed Municipal  Solid Waste to the extent necessary to ensure that all CESCs required to be collected or paid have been remitted to the City. Such  records shall be maintained by the Hauler for no less than six years.

Subd. 8. Late Payment. A late payment penalty in the amount of one- half-of-one-percent (0.5%) per month, or the maximum  interest  rate allowed  by law, shall be imposed upon CESCs collected from Responsible Tenants but not remitted by the Hauler to the City on or before the last day of the month following collection. If a Hauler fails to bill and collect the CESC, the Hauler shall pay the CESC plus the late payment penalty. The late payment shall be calculated from the date the CESC should have been billed.

Subd. 9. Collection Actions. Exercise  of  any  remedy  under  this subsection does not preclude exercise of other remedies.
 
A If a Responsible Tenant fails to pay the CESC to a Hauler in a timely manner, the City may use any available legal  remedies to collect the overdue, unpaid CESCs from the Responsible Tenant, including, but not limited to, collection of the CESC via a special assessment.

B.	If a Hauler has collected CESCs and failed to remit them to the city in a timely manner, the city may use any available legal remedies to collect the CESCs from the Hauler.

Unpaid CESCs may be collected from tax-exempt properties.

Subd. 10.  Right of Appeal.  Any  person aggrieved  by a decision of the City in accordance with the provisions of this Section 10.03 shall have the right to appeal the decision by serving the City Council with a request for hearing. The request for hearing must be received within 30 days after the  person  receives written notice of the decision. If the person fails to request a hearing within the time prescribed, the person shall forfeit any right to a public hearing.

SECTION 10.05.	FIREARMS, BOWS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS.

Subd. 1.  Definitions.  The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated:

1.	"Archery Only Hunting Zone" - a clearly delineated area on the hunting map annually approved by the City Council wherein hunting is allowed with bow and arrows, but is not allowed with firearms. The City Council may establish further restrictions on hunting within this zone.

2.	"Bow" - any device capable of propelling an arrow or similar projectile for a distance of greater than 50 feet.

3.	"Carry" - the handling or transportation of a firearm or bow  and arrows concealed or otherwise outside a person's domicile.

4.	"Cased Bow" - a bow in a case expressly made to contain a bow, when the case fully encloses the bow by being zipped, snapped, buckled, tied or otherwise fastened, with no portion of the bow exposed.

5.	"Cased Firearm" - an unloaded firearm in a gun case expressly made to contain a firearm, when the case fully encloses the firearm by being zipped, snapped, buckled, tied or otherwise fastened, with no portion of the firearm exposed.

6.	"Dangerous  Weapon"  - any device designed or  used as a weapon
 
and capable of producing death or great bodily harm, any combustible or flammable liquid or other device  or  instrumentality that, in the manner it is used or intended to be used, is calculated or likely to produce death or great bodily harm, or any fire that is used to produce death or great bodily harm, including, but not limited to, brass or metal knuckles, blackjacks, and "McGyver bombs."

7.	"Firearm" - a gun that discharges shot or a single projectile by means of an explosive, a gas, or compressed air.

8.	"Great Bodily Harm" - bodily injury which creates a high probability of  death, or which causes serious permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any body, member, or organ or other serious bodily harm.

9.	"Hunting" - taking birds or mammals.

10.	"Hunting Map" - a map of the City approved  by the  City  Council which clearly delineates all hunting zones within the City. Said map shall also show approved shooting ranges.

11.	"No Hunting Zone" - a clearly delineated area on the hunting map wherein no hunting is allowed.

12.	"Shooting" - the firing or discharge of any firearm or bow.
13.	"Single Projectile" - any single projectile, whether contained in a metallic, paper, plastic, or other cartridge including any method of loading a muzzle loader which results in  a single projectile being discharged.

14.	"Taking" - pursuing, shooting, killing, capturing, trapping, or snaring wild animals. Taking includes attempting to take and assisting another person in taking.

15.	"Unrestricted Hunting Zone" - a clearly delineated area on the hunting map wherein hunting is allowed without city  restrictions. State hunting laws shall govern hunting in the unrestricted hunting zone.

Subd. 2. Restrictions on  Firearms  and  Bows.  It  is unlawful  for  any person to  display in a threatening manner, carry, or shoot any firearm  or  bow. This Subdivision shall not apply to the following:

A  Any law enforcement or military personnel acting in the line of duty.
 
B.	Any person acting to resist or prevent an imminent offense which that person reasonably believes exposes  himself or another to great  bodily harm or death.

C.	A certified firearms safety training instructor while participating in a Department of Natural Resources approved Firearms Safety Program.

D.	Any person while participating in a Department of Natural Resources approved Firearms Safety Program.

E. Any person on a shooting range established and  permitted  in accordance with the Zoning Chapter and shown on the hunting map.

F.	Any  person  possessing,  transporting,  or  carrying  handguns  as specifically allowed by state law.

G.	Possession, transportation, or carrying of unloaded firearms or bows which are cased or enclosed in the trunk of a car.

H.	Slaughtering farm animals which are owned by the party or with the owner's permission.

I.	Any person  lawfully  hunting  in  established  unrestricted  hunting  or archery only hunting zones established in accordance with Subdivision 4 of this Section.

J.	Any person authorized by the City Council to carry and/or shoot  a firearm or bow for a specified purpose.

Subd. 3.        Dangerous Weapons.   It is unlawful for any person, other than a law enforcement officer in the line of duty, to display in a threatening manner, possess, carry, sell or offer for sale dangerous weapons. Firearms and bows are not considered dangerous weapons for the purpose of this Subdivision.

This Subdivision is not intended to prohibit the lawful sale, display, or use of devices which have a bona fide lawful use but may meet the definition of a dangerous weapon when used in a manner other than the bona fide lawful use.

Subd. 4.  Hunting Zones.   The City Council shall approve by motion a map delineating no hunting, archery-only hunting, and unrestricted hunting zones. The Council may place additional rules on hunting  in the  archery-only  hunting zone as it deems necessary. Such rules when adopted by the City Council shall be in full force and effect as if enumerated herein and violation of said rules shall be deemed a violation of this Section. The hunting map shall  be  reviewed annually by the Police Chief, Engineering Director and Public Works Director, (or their  designated  representatives),  with final  review  by the  Council Administrator.
 
Not later than August  14, the results of this review shall be reported to the City Council for consideration of an amendment to the hunting map.

SECTION 10.06.	DOG AND CAT REGULATION AND LICENSING.

Subd. 1.	Definitions.

1.	"Owner/Handler'' - a person who owns, harbors, feeds, boards, or keeps an animal hereby regulated.

2.	"At Large" - off the premises of the owner and not under the custody and control of the owner or other person, either by leash, cord, chain, or otherwise restrained or confined.

Subd. 2.    Running at Large Prohibited.   It is unlawful for the owner of any dog and cat to permit such animal to run at large. Any dog or cat shall be deemed to be running at large with the permission of the owner unless it is on a durable leash or chain secured to an  object which it cannot move and on the premises of the owner, or on such leash or chain  and under the control of an accompanying person of suitable age and discretion, or confined within a motor vehicle, or confined within a building, fence (electronic wireless fences are not allowed) or other enclosure of construction sufficient to prevent the dog or cat from escaping.

Subd. 3.   License Required.   It is unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat, six months of age or more, to fail to obtain a license therefor from the City of Red Wing Animal Control Unit or its designee.

Subd. 4.       Application.   Application for a dog or cat license shall be upon a form supplied by the City of Red Wing Animal Control Unit or its designee and accompanied by a certificate of a veterinarian, duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine, which certificate shall state that the dog or cat for which application for a license is made has been inoculated against rabies for at least the period for which the license is applied. An application for license renewal, accompanied by such certificate, should be made at least 30 days before expiration of a license.

Subd. 5.  Limitation.   A  household  may  not  contain  more  than  three dogs over the age of six months.

Subd. 6. Period. All dog and cat licenses shall expire when the next rabies inoculation is due.

Subd. 7.   Tag Required.  All licensed dogs and cats shall wear a collar and have a tag firmly affixed thereto evidencing such license for the current year. A duplicate for a lost tag may be issued by the City of Red Wing Animal Control Unit  or  its  designee  upon  presentation  of  the  receipt  showing  payment  of  the
 
license fee for the current year. Tags shall not be transferable, and no refund shall be made on any license fee because of leaving the city or death of the dog or cat before the expiration of the license.

Subd. 8.    Notice of  Impounding.   Upon the  impounding  of any dog or cat, the owner shall be notified or, if the owner is unknown, written notice shall be posted for five days at the current City of Red Wing Animal Control Unit or its designee describing the dog or cat and the place and time of taking.

Subd. 9.    Confinement  Facility (the Goodhue County Humane Society). Any dog or cat found in the City running at large shall be placed in the confinement facility, and an accurate record of the time of such placement shall be kept for each dog. Every dog or cat so placed in the confinement facility shall be held for redemption by the owner for a period of not less than five regular business days, unless the cat is determined to be feral, in which case the feral cat will be destroyed. A "regular business day" is one during which the confinement facility is open for business to the public for at  least four  hours  between  8:00  a.m.  and 7:00 p.m. lmpoundment records shall be preserved for a minimum of six months and shall show:

A  The description of the animal by specie,  breed, sex, approximate  age, and other distinguishing traits;

B.	The location at which the animal was seized;

C.	The date and time of seizure;

D.	The  name  and  address  of  the  person  from  whom  any  animal  was received; and

E.  The  name  and  address  of  the  person  to  whom   any  animal  was transferred.

F.  The date and time animal was transferred.

If unclaimed, such animal may be humanely destroyed and the carcass disposed of, or may be placed or adopted into a home, under authority of Minnesota Statutes, Section 35.71. Adoption of all animals is under the discretion of the City of Red Wing Animal Control Unit or its designee and governed by the Agency's policies and procedures.

Subd. 10. Release from Confinement Facility. Dogs and cats shall be released to their owners as follows:

A   If such dog or cat is owned by a resident of the City, after purchase of a license as aforesaid, and payment of the impounding fees.
 
B.	If such dog or cat is owned by a person not a resident of the City, after immunization of any such dog or cat for rabies, and payment of  the impounding fee for the period for which the dog or cat was impounded.

Subd. 11. Immobilization of Dogs or  Cats.  For  the  purpose  of enforcement of this Section, any peace officer, employee or other person assisting a peace officer or employee of the City of Red Wing Animal Control Unit or its designee may use a so-called tranquilizer gun or other instrument for the purpose of immobilizing and catching a dog or cat.

 


cat to:
 
Subd. 12.	Other Unlawful Acts.  It is unlawful for the owner of any dog or
 

1.	Fail to have the license tag issued by the City of Red Wing Animal Control Unit or its designee firmly attached to a collar worn at all times by the licensed animal, or

2.	Own or keep a dog which is dangerous, as defined in Subdivision 13, without applying for proper registration from the City within one month of obtaining the dog, or

3.	Interfere with  any  peace officer, or other City of Red Wing Animal Control Unit or its designee affiliated with the City of  Red Wing Police, in the performance of his or her duty to enforce this Section, or
4.   Fail  to  keep  dog  from  barking,  howling  or  whining,  or  cat  from
emitting loud or unusual noises for a continuous period of more than five minutes with less than one minute of interruption.

Subd. 13.	Dangerous Dogs. A  Definitions.
1.	"Dangerous Dog" - any dog that has:

(a)	without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human being on public or private property;

(b)	killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's property; or

(c)	been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
 
2.	"Potentially Dangerous Dog" - any dog that:

(a)	when unprovoked, bites a human or domestic animal on public or private property;

(b)	when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person,  including a person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property, other than the dog owner's property,  in  an apparent attitude of attack; or

(c)	has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic animals.

3.	"Hearing Officer" - an impartial employee appointed by the city, or an impartial person retained by the City, to conduct a record review or hearing under this section.

4.	"Proper Enclosure" - securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen  or structure suitable to  prevent  the  dog from escaping and providing protection from the  elements  for  the dog. A proper enclosure does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or other structure that would allow the dog to exit of its own volition, or any house or structure in which windows are open or in which door or window screens are the only obstacles that prevent the dog from exiting. Muzzling and chaining or tying out the dog does not provide the necessary proper enclosure.

5.	"Owner" - any person, firm, corporation, organization, or department possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in, or having care, custody, or control of a dog.

B.	Registration.

1.	No person may own a dangerous dog in the City unless the dog is registered as provided in this Section.

2.	The City will, upon application by the owner, issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog if the owner presents evidence that:

(a)	a proper enclosure exists for the dangerous dog;

(b)	a warning sign, including a warning symbol for children, has been placed informing of the presence of the dangerous dog;
 
(c)	the owner has procured a surety bond  issued  by  a  surety company authorized to do business in Minnesota, in a form acceptable to the City in at least the sum of $300,000 payable to any person injured by the dog or, alternatively, the owner has in place a policy of insurance providing the same protection;

(d)	the owner has paid to the City an annual fee as provided in the fee ordinance in addition to the regular license fee for a dog;

(e)	the owner has had microchip identification implanted in the dangerous dog, and the City has been provided with the name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number of the microchip;

(f)	the dangerous dog has a standardized tag identifying the dog as dangerous and containing the uniform dangerous dog symbol, which is affixed to the dog's collar at all times.

C.	Regulation of Dangerous Dogs.

1.	An owner of a dangerous dog shall  keep  the  dog,  while  on  the owner's property,  in a proper enclosure.  If the  dog  is outside the proper enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under the physical restraint of a responsible person.
2.	An owner of a dangerous dog must renew the registration of the dog
annually until it is deceased. After moving to the City, an owner of a dog that has been designated as a dangerous dog in another jurisdiction  must register the dog as a dangerous dog with the City. If a dangerous dog is removed from the City, it must be registered as a dangerous dog in its new jurisdiction. The obligation to register in the new jurisdiction rests solely on the dog owner; it is not the responsibility of the City.

3.	An owner of a dangerous dog must notify the City in writing of the dog's death or transfer to a new location within 30 days of death or transfer, and must execute an affidavit of death or transfer as prescribed by the City. Upon transferred to a new location the Police Chief  or designee  shall  notify all  residences within  500 feet  of the new	location that a dangerous dog will be residing in  their neighborhood.

4.	An owner of a dangerous dog must  have  the  dangerous  dog sterilized at the owner's expense. The owner must provide proof of sterilization of the dog to the City. If the owner does not have the dog sterilized within 30 days of the dangerous dog determination, the City
 
shall  seize  the  dog  and  have  the  dog  sterilized  at  the  owner's expense.

5.	A person that owns a dangerous dog and rents property from another must notify the property owner, prior to signing the lease agreement or at the time of any lease renewal, that a dangerous dog will reside at the property.

6.	A person that transfers a dangerous dog must notify the new owner that the dog has been identified as dangerous, and must also notify the  City in writing, providing the  new owner's  name,  address  and telephone number.

D.	Confiscation.

1.	The City shall seize a dangerous dog if:

(a)	After 14 days after the owner has notice  that  the  dog  is dangerous, the dog is not validly registered as a dangerous dog;

(b)	After 14 days after the owner has notice  that  the  dog  is dangerous, the owner has not secured the required  liability insurance or surety coverage;

(c)	The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure;
(d)	The dog is outside the proper enclosure  and  not  under  the physical restraint of a responsible person; or

(e)	The dog is not sterilized within 30 days of being designated a dangerous dog.

2.	A seized dog  may be reclaimed upon payment of impounding and confinement  costs  and  proof that  the  requirements  of  this  section have been met. A dog not reclaimed within seven days following notification to the owner may  be destroyed,  and the owner  will  be liable for all costs incurred in confining and disposing of the dog. A person claiming an interest in a seized dog may prevent disposition of  the dog by posting security in an amount sufficient to provide for the  dog's actual cost of care and keeping. The  security  must  be posted within seven days of the seizure inclusive of the date of the seizure.

E.  Dangerous Dog Designation Review.

Six  months  after  a dog  is declared  a dangerous  dog,  an owner  may request that  the  City  review the  designation.	One year  following  the
 
six-month dangerous dog designation review, and once a  year thereafter, the owner may request the City review the designation.  The owner must provide evidence that the dog's behavior has changed due to the dog's age, neutering, environment, completion of obedience training that includes modification of aggressive behavior, or other factors. If the City finds sufficient evidence that the dog's behavior has changed, the City may change the dangerous dog designation to a potentially dangerous dog designation. Upon the rescinding of the dangerous designation, the Police Chief or designee shall  attempt  to notify the persons that have suffered injury or damage of the  dog's change in designation.

F.	Destruction of Dog in Certain Circumstances.

Notwithstanding anything in this Subdivision to the  contrary,  the  City may destroy a dog that has:

1.	inflicted substantial  or great  bodily  harm on a human on  public or private property without provocation;

2.	inflicted  multiple  bites  on  a  human  on  public  or  private  property without provocation;

3.	bit multiple human victims on public or private property in the same attack without provocation; or
4.	bit a human on public or private property without  provocation in an
attack where more than one animal participated in the attack.

Destruction of the dog may occur after the dog owner has been notified of the intended destruction and had at  least seven days to request a hearing challenging the decision to destroy the animal. The hearing shall be before a hearing officer.

Nothing contained in this Section shall apply to dogs used for law enforcement purposes by a law enforcement agency.

G.	Determination of Status.

Whether a dog is "dangerous" or "potentially dangerous" as that term is used herein shall be determined by the Police Chief or designee, in consultation with the City Attorney, if necessary, subject to appeal and review by a hearing officer. The owner shall be given written notice of the determination.  The notice shall provide:

1.	A  description  of  the  dog;  the  authority  for  and  purpose  of  the potentially  dangerous   dog  or  dangerous   dog  determination,   and
 
seizure, if applicable; the time, place, and circumstances  under which the dog was declared potentially dangerous or dangerous; and the telephone number and contact person where the dog is kept;

2.	That the owner of the dog may appeal the potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog determination, and failure to do so within 14 days of the date of the notice will terminate the owner's right to an appeal;

3.	Even if the owner of the dog timely appeals a dangerous dog determination, the dangerous dog requirements contained in Section 10.06, Subdivision 13C.1. and 3. must be immediately followed until the hearing officer issues a decision;

4.	That if the hearing officer  affirms the potentially dangerous or dangerous dog determination, the owner  will  have  14 days  from receipt of that decision to comply with all other requirements of this Subdivision;

5.	That all actual costs of the care, keeping, and disposition of the dog are  the responsibility of the person claiming an interest in the dog, except  to the extent that a court or hearing officer finds that the seizure or impoundment was not substantially justified by law; and

6.	A form for notifying the City of an appeal and requesting a hearing under this Subdivision;
7.	The City may also provide oral or written notice of the determination
to any persons that have suffered injury or damage due to the dog.

H.	Appeals.

1.	Potentially dangerous dog determination appeals shall consist of a record review by the hearing officer. The owner must state in writing the basis for which he or she believes the potentially dangerous determination was incorrect and provide written evidence and/or affidavits to the City that dispute the determination within 14 calendar days of the notification of  the determination. The owner shall be notified, in writing, of the record review results within  14 calendar days of receipt. The individual conducting the review shall have the authority to amend the declaration or order as appropriate and to establish specific requirements. In the event that the potentially dangerous dog determination is upheld by the hearing officer, actual expenses of the record review, up to a maximum of $500, may be the responsibility of the dog's owner.

2.	Dangerous dog determination appeals shall be conducted  pursuant to the following procedures:
 

(a)	A written notice of appeal  must be filed with the  City within  14 days of the date of the notice of dangerous dog determination;

(b)	The City Council shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct  the hearing;

(c)	The hearing shall be open to the public;

(d)	The hearing shall take place within  14 days of the receipt of the request for a hearing;

(e)	In the event that the dangerous dog determination is upheld by the hearing officer, actual expenses of the hearing, up to a maximum of $1,000, may be the responsibility of the dog's owner; and

(f)	The hearing officer shall issue a decision, in writing, on the matter within ten days after the hearing. The decision must be delivered to the dog's owner by hand delivery or registered mail as soon as practical and a copy must be provided to the City.

I.	Microchip Identification.

Any dog designated as potentially dangerous or dangerous must have a microchip implanted in the dog for identification, and the  name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number of the microchip must be provided to the City. If the microchip is not implanted by the owner, the City may implant the microchip and all costs related to the implantation of the microchip shall be borne by the owner. Failure to have a microchip implanted in a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog or removal of a microchip from a potentially  dangerous  or dangerous dog is a violation of the law.

Subd. 14. Fees and Charges. All fees and charges under this Section including, but not limited to, licenses fees, impounding fees, and maintenance charges, shall be fixed, determined and categorized by the City of  Red Wing Animal Control Unit or its designee, upon presentment and approval by the Council, adopted by ordinance and uniformly enforced.

Subd. 15.   Kennels.  The number of dogs or cats required for designation by the City as a kennel is contained in Chapter 11 of the City Code.

Subd. 16. Any person who violates or fails,  neglects,  or  refuses  to comply with the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished therefor as provided by Minnesota
 
Statutes, except that violations of Subdivisions 12(3) and 13 shall constitute a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon  each separate day during or which a violation occurs or continues.

SECTION 10.07.	ANIMALS AND FOWL - KEEPING, TRANSPORTING, TREATMENT,  HOUSING.

 
Subd. 1.
shall apply.
 
Definitions.	As  used in this Section, the following definitions
 

1.	"Farm Animals" - cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, swine (except Miniature Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs, subject to Subdivision 9 of this Section), ponies, ducks, geese, turkeys, chickens, guinea hens and honey bees.

2.	"Animals" - includes farm animals and all other animals, reptiles and feathered birds or fowl except dogs, cats, gerbils, hamsters  and caged household birds.

Subd. 2.	Keeping.	It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal not in transit, except:

A  farm  animals  kept  in  that  portion  of  the  city  zoned  for  agricultural purposes, or,

B.  animals kept as part of a show licensed under the City Code, or,

C.  animals used in a parade for which a permit has been issued, or,

D.  animals kept in a laboratory for scientific or experimental purposes, or,

E.  animals kept in an animal hospital or clinic for treatment  by a licensed veterinarian.

Subd. 3.	Animals  in Transit.	It is unlawful for any person to transport animals unless they are:

A  securely confined within a vehicle, cage or other means of conveyance so that the animal has no possible means of escape, or

B.  farm  animals  being  transported   in  a  portion  of  the  city  zoned  for agricultural purposes, or

C.  restrained  by  means  of  bridles,   halters,  ropes  or  other   means  of individual restraint.
 
Subd. 4. Treatment. It is unlawful for any person to treat any animal as herein defined, or any other animal, in a cruel or inhumane manner.

Subd. 5. Housing. It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal as herein defined, or any other animal, in any structure infested by rodents, vermin, flies or insects, or inadequate for protection against the elements.

Subd. 6.   Trespasses.   It is unlawful for any person to herd, drive or ride any animal over and upon any grass, turf, boulevard, city park, cemetery,  garden or lot without specific permission therefor from the owner.

Subd. 7.	Harboring carrier pigeons.

A.	Definitions. As used in this Subdivision, the following definitions shall apply:

1.	"Carrier Pigeon" - any homing or racing pigeon which has the name of the owner stamped upon the wing or tail or is banded upon the leg with the name or initials of the owner.

2.	"Homing Pigeon" - racing pigeon mean a pigeon registered with a national pigeon racing organization and used as a game and competitive bird.

3.	"Loft" - one or more structures in which carrier pigeons are housed.

4.	"Pigeons" - a member of the family Columdidae.

B. Carrier pigeon permit required. It is unlawful for  any person to keep, harbor, maintain, possess or otherwise  control  any  carrier  pigeon without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City. The fees for a permit hereunder shall be established by the Council by resolution from time to time. Permits issued hereunder shall be annual permits based upon the calendar year.

C.	Permit Application. An application for a permit hereunder shall be filed with the Permits and License Manager upon an  application  form furnished by the city. A permit hereunder may not be renewed unless an application for renewal is filed pursuant to this section and the premises and existing lofts are approved after inspection by the animal control officer. The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

1.	The name and address of the applicant and  the  owner  of  the property on which the applicant seeks to keep pigeons;
 
2.	The location of the premise on which carrier pigeons are sought to be kept;

3.	The number of carrier pigeons sought to be kept on the premises;

4.	Verification of identification marks stamped on each carrier pigeon or that each carrier pigeon is banded upon the leg with the  name or initials of the owner;

5.	A sketch plan of the premises on which carrier pigeons are sought to be  kept, including the location,  dimensions  and design  of the  lofts and their approximate distance from any neighboring structures; and

6.	Any other and further information as the city deems necessary to the consideration of the application.

D.	Granting or denying issuance of permit. The Council may at its discretion grant or refuse to grant a permit hereunder. The Council may refuse to grant a permit for the following enumerated reasons, or based upon a written determination that issuance of the permit would not be in the public interest:

1.	The application  is  incomplete  or  contains  false,  fraudulent  or deceptive statements.

2.	The applicant has not complied with one or more of the provisions hereunder.

3.	The premises, a portion thereof or the loft for which the permit is sought is not in compliance with all provisions of this Subdivision, or other City Code provisions or state laws relating to zoning, health, fire, building or safety regulations.

4.	The applicant or owner of the premises or carrier pigeons harbored or   kept thereon has been convicted   of  a  violation  under  this Subdivision or under a similar Subdivision in another location.

5.	The proposed  harboring or keeping of pigeons is incompatible with the surrounding property use.

E.	Conditions of Permit. A permit granted by the Council hereunder shall be subject to the following conditions and to such other conditions as the Council may deem necessary and expedient for the protection of health, safety and general welfare of the city:
 
1.	Inspection. The premises and loft(s) thereon for which a permit is issued shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the animal	control officer or any other city official to determine compliance with this Subdivision, other City Code provisions or state laws relating to zoning, health, fire, building or safety regulations.

2.	Transferability of permit. Any permit issued hereunder shall be nontransferable except upon application to and with the consent of the Council. An application for the transfer shall be made as an application for issuance of the initial permit and shall conform in all respects with the provisions of  subparagraph  B,  above,  governing the filing of the original application. The application for transfer is to be accompanied by a transfer fee as to be determined by the Council.

3.	Specifications. The construction and location of the loft shall be in compliance with the building and zoning regulations of the City and the following requirements:

(a)	No more than one loft, which shall  not be greater  in size than 24 feet x 12 feet x 14 feet shall be on the premises.

(b)	No more than 50 pigeons over three months of age shall be kept or harbored on the premises for which the permit applies.

(c)	No loft shall be within 50 feet of any inhabited dwelling.

(d)	Each loft shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and kept in good repair, including the removal and disposal of all pigeon waste weekly or more often as required to keep the loft in a sanitary and odor-free condition.

(e)	Each loft shall have at least two square feet of floor space for each mature carrier pigeon kept therein.

(f)	All carrier pigeons shall be fed within the confines of the loft, and all feed for the carrier pigeons shall be stored in such containers as to protect against infestation of rodents and other vermin.

(g)	All pigeons shall be confined to the loft, except for limited periods necessary for exercise, training and competition; provided no carrier pigeon shall be released for flying within eight hours of its feeding.

(h)	No pigeon shall perch or linger on the buildings or property of others.
 

F. Revocation of permit. Any violation of any provision of this section or any conditions of the permit issued hereunder or any misdemeanor and petty	misdemeanor conviction of the permit holder under this Subdivision shall constitute grounds for revocation of a permit issued hereunder.

Subd. 8.	Wild Animals.   It is unlawful to keep any wild animal within the City limits, except as permitted pursuant to this section.

A Wild Animal Defined. "Wild animal," as used in this section, shall have the following meaning: Any animal that is of a species which is wild by nature or of a species that due to size, vicious nature or other characteristics is inherently dangerous to human beings. Examples of wild animals include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.	Any large cat of the family Felidae, such as lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars and ocelots, except domestic house cats;

2.	Any member of the family Canidae, such as wolves, hybrid wolves, coyotes, dingoes and jackals, except domesticated dogs;

3.	Any crossbreed  such  as  crossbreeds  between  dogs  and  coyotes, dogs and wolves, but not including crossbred domesticated animals;

4.	Any poisonous snake including, but not limited to, rattlesnakes, coral snakes, water moccasins, puff adders or cobras;

5.	Any skunk,  raccoon,  fox  or  animal  protected  under  State  of Minnesota or Federal wildlife regulations;

6.	Any bear, ape, monkey in excess of five pounds, or badger;

7.	Any  other  animal,  bird or  reptile that  is commonly  considered wild and not domesticated.

B.	Animals which are not considered wild include the following:

1.	Nonpoisonous snakes, domesticated birds, hamsters, mice, rabbits, lizards spiders and other similar small animals capable of being kept in cages;

2.	Medically prescribed companion animals;

3.	Wildlife rehabilitators may  only  possess  wild  animals  with  a Minnesota  Department of Natural Resources permit.   Such animals
 
will  be kept in a manner  as to  not create  unsanitary  conditions  or unreasonable  noise;

4.	Birds  and  birds  of  prey  if  kept  pursuant  to  a valid  U.S.  Fish and Wildlife Services permit.

C.	Exceptions. Any person desiring to keep a wild animal within the City limits may apply for a temporary Conditional Use Permit from the City Council. The City may issue such a permit for entertainment, exhibition or show purposes, for persons keeping animals for a public zoo as volunteers, docents or otherwise, or for persons with a disability  using the animal as a personal helper. If such a permit is issued by the City, the animal must be kept in conformance with conditions as specified by the City in the permit. Before the issuance of any temporary or permanent Conditional Use Permit, the applicant shall provide the City with	proof of insurance, including public  liability  coverage.  The insurance	shall provide coverage for liability resulting from the ownership or possession of the specific animal or animals  being permitted.

D.	Impounding of Wild Animals. Any wild animal kept in violation of this ordinance may be impounded by the City unless such impounded animal is reclaimed and removed from the City or issued a permit  to allow it to remain in the City or the owner petitions the District Court for a determination that the animal is exempt from the provisions of this ordinance.	Such an impounded animal may be destroyed, sold, or otherwise removed from the City fifteen (15) days following notice to the owner of the animal's impoundment.

E. Costs. The owner of a wild animal shall be responsible to the City for all costs incurred for handling the wild animal. These costs may include, but are not limited to, transporting, impounding, boarding, feeding, and otherwise caring for the wild animal.

F. Existing Wild Animals. Any owner of such an illegal animal within the City limits shall have 30 days from the time of the  adoption  of  this section in which to remove the animal from the City. If the owner fails to remove the animal, the City may impound the animal as provided for in this section.

Subd. 9.  Miniature  Vietnamese  Potbellied  Pig.  It  is  a   petty misdemeanor to keep a Miniature Vietnamese Potbellied Pig within the City limits, except as permitted pursuant to this section.

A Definitions. As used in this Subdivision, the following definition shall apply:  "Miniature Vietnamese Potbellied Pig" - a purebred Vietnamese
 
Potbellied Pig which does not exceed 125 pounds in weight and 22 inches in height and registered through a North American Vietnamese Potbellied Pig Registry or observed by a licensed veterinarian and believed to be a Vietnamese Potbellied Pig.

B.	Requirements for Keeping Potbellied Pigs.

1.	It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, or raise more than one potbellied pig in any one household within the city.

2.	A potbellied pig shall reside in the residence of the owner as a pet and shall not be kept outdoors. A person may permit potbellied pigs outdoors for brief periods as necessary for exercise or for the elimination of waste.

3.	It is unlawful for the owner of any potbellied pig to permit such animal to run at large. Any potbellied pig shall be deemed to be running at large with the permission of the owner unless it is on a durable leash or chain secured to an object which it cannot move and on the premises of the owner, or on such leash or chain and  under  the control of an accompanying person of suitable age and discretion, or confined within a motor vehicle, or confined within a building, fence, or other enclosure of construction sufficient to prevent the potbellied pig from escaping.

4.	A potbellied pig shall not be allowed to reside in any multi-family or duplex unit.

5.	The tusks, if any, shall be removed or trimmed so as not to endanger any person or animal.

6.	All potbellied pigs kept within the city must be  either  spayed  or neutered. Under no circumstances may a person engage in the propagation or breeding of potbellied pigs within city limits not zoned as agricultural.

7.	All potbellied pigs kept within the  city  must  be vaccinated  against rabies.

8.	All potbellied pigs kept within the city must be registered with the City of  Red Wing within 14 days from the time the animal is taken to its place   of  residence.     The  following   requirements  shall  apply  to registration of all Miniature Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs:

(a)	Document of proof that pet is a Miniature Vietnamese Potbellied Pig;
 

(b)	The filing of a current health certificate from a licensed veterinarian;

(c)		Payment of an annual fee as provided in the fee ordinance if the rabies vaccination remains current to the Permits and License Manager's office; and

(d)	Obtaining   a   registration   certificate   from   the   Permits   and License Manager's office.


9.	All locations where  potbellied pigs are kept shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Exercise areas shall be cleaned of swine excrement on a daily basis.

C.	Suspension, Revocation, or Denial of Registration. The Permits and License Manager  shall have the right to suspend or revoke any registration once granted or deny annual renewal thereof when it appears that any owner of a potbellied pig has violated any of the provisions of this Section, or any ordinance or law involving cruelty or mistreatment of  the animal or the unlawful possession of the  animal. Prior to the suspension or revocation of any registration or the denial of an application for a renewal thereof, written notice of the reason for such action shall be given to the owner of the potbellied pig.  Such  notice shall state that the applicant may pursue an appeal to the City Council or its designee by filing a request within ten days of such notice.

SECTION 10.08.	DEER FEEDING PROHIBITION.

Subd. 1.    Purpose.  The purpose of this Section is to protect, preserve, and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City through the management of recreational feeding of white-tailed deer within the City as part of a comprehensive strategy to reduce or eliminate negative impacts experienced as a result of an increasing deer population in the City.

Subd. 2.	Findings.

A Recreational feeding of deer often causes deer concentrations which develop into depredation and other public safety problems;

B.	Depredation of garden crops and landscaping plants  is  increasing  as deer habitat decreases and deer populations increase within particular areas and neighborhoods in the City;

C.	High deer populations can result in increased  car/deer  crashes within the community, causing public safety concerns and negative economic impacts such as increased car insurance premium costs;
 
D.  High deer densities also contribute to the possible spread of chronic diseases among deer populations and Chronic Wasting Disease; and

E. The intent of the City Council is not to unreasonably infringe upon the recreational enjoyment of City residents who observe  wildlife  and enhance wildlife habitat on their property. However, the purpose of this artificial feeding ban is to eliminate these deer attractions which, when combined with other management strategies, should reduce, over time, the depredation impacts to adjacent residents, as well as assure the safety of the traveling public on City streets and thoroughfares.

Subd. 3.  Prohibition.   It shall  be unlawful for  any  person or group to place or permit to be placed  on the ground, or within five feet  of  the  ground surface, either on property owned or controlled by such person or  on  property owned by others, any grain, fodder, fruit, vegetables, nuts, hay or other edible materials, which may reasonably be expected to intentionally result in deer feeding, unless such items are screened or protected in a manner that prevents deer from feeding on them. Also prohibited are salt licks and powder or liquid deer attractants, unless legally used for deer management control purposes. Living fruit trees and other live vegetation shall not be considered as deer feeding.

Subd. 4.	Exceptions.  This prohibition shall not apply to:

A Veterinarians, City animal control officers or  county,  state  or  federal game officials, who are in the course of their duties, have deer  in custody or under their management;

B. Persons authorized by the City to implement the deer management program approved by the City Council; or

C. Any food placed upon the property for purposes of trapping or otherwise taking deer where such trapping or taking is pursuant to a permit issued by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.

D.  Persons feeding birds using self-enclosed feeding devices or containers.

E. The use of straw, hay or straw-related materials for erosion control, mulching, gardening or other landscape purposes.

F. Persons on property with a livestock operation not intentionally feeding deer. For the purposes of this section, "Livestock Operation" means an operation commonly associated with the keeping of animals. Including but not limited to: the keeping of horses, cattle or chickens, raised for home use or profit.

Subd. 5.	Enforcement.
 
A Responsible Authority. The City Police Department and the City Engineering Department shall enforce the provisions of this Ordinance

B.	Civil Remedies. This Section may be enforced by injunction, action for abatement, or other appropriate civil remedy to eliminate a public nuisance.

C.	Criminal Penalties. Notwithstanding anything in City Code to  the contrary, a person who violates any provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The first violation of this section  shall result in a written warning. Any subsequent violation shall result in a citation for the petty misdemeanor offense. Each act of violation and each day a violation occurs or continues is a separate offense. In all cases the City shall be entitled to collect the cost of prosecution to the extent outlined by law, the Rules of Criminal Procedure, and the Rules of Court.

Subd. 6. Severability. If  any  prov1s1ons  of  this  Section  or  the application of a provision to a particular situation is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions of the Section and the application of the Section to any other situation shall be considered  severable,  and  shall  be given in effect to the maximum extent possible.

SECTION 10.09.	ANIMAL WASTE.

Subd. 1. Definition. For  the purpose of this Section, the  term "owner/handler" means any person who harbors,  feeds,  boards,  possesses, keeps or has custody of a dog, cat or other animal.

Subd. 2.	Unlawful Acts.  It is unlawful for any owner/handler to:

A Cause or permit a dog, cat, or other animal to defecate upon public property, without  immediately removing the excrement and disposing of it in a sanitary manner.

B.	Cause or permit a dog, cat, or other animal to be upon public property, unless such animal is in the custody of an owner/handler of suitable age and discretion having in their possession equipment and supplies for excremental removal.

C.	Permit dog, cat, or other animal excrement to accumulate for a period in excess of seven days, or in excess of three days if there are multiple animals, on premises occupied by the  owner/handler  without  removal and sanitary disposal.
 
D.	Allow a dog, cat or other animal to purposely be on private property without the property owner's consent, and in the case  of  a  pet defecating on private property of another, the owner/handler must immediately remove the excrement and dispose of it in a sanitary manner. An owner/handler must have in their possession the necessary equipment and supplies for excrement removal when pets defecate on private property of another.

SECTION 10.10.	TRESPASS.

Subd. 1.    Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to allow an owner of real property to which the public has some implicit right of access to exclude a person from that property if the person has committed a crime on the property or has violated the properly posted or otherwise provided rules of conduct for the property.

Subd. 2.  Definitions.  For the  purposes  of this  Section,  the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

1.	"Covered Premises" - any improved real property, or portion thereof, within the City of Red Wing, to which the public has an implicit right of access, including, but not limited to, places of worship, shopping malls,	retail sales facilities, hotels, motels, nursing homes, restaurants, multiple dwellings, hospitals, medical and dental offices, clubs, lodges, office buildings, government buildings, banks and financial	institutions; transit stations, athletic  and  recreational facilities, personal service establishments, theaters, and day care facilities.

2.	"Tenant" - any authorized occupant of a covered premises, or the agent thereof, but excluding an occupant of a domestic use, such as a renter or lessee of a dwelling or apartment, resident in a nursing home, or a hotel or motel guest.

3.	"Property Manager'' - any owner of a covered premises, or the agent of the owner or any tenant who is authorized by the owner to exercise control over the covered premises, including its public common areas.

4.	"Public Common Areas" - all areas of the covered premises, other than private common areas, maintained for the  common use of its tenants or of the general public incidental to the normal and legitimate activities upon the covered premises, including but not limited to: the yard of courtyard, parking lots and ramps, private roadways,   sidewalks,   walkways,   recreational   facilities,   reception
 
areas,	rotundas,	waiting	areas,	hallways,	restroom	facilities, elevators, escalators, and staircases.

5.	"Private Common Areas" - other common areas within the covered premises, normally within the exclusive control of a tenant  but subject	to reasonable regulations by the property manager, including, but not limited to, sales floors, store restroom facilities accessible to customers or clients, checkout lanes, and customer service areas.

6.	"Private Areas" - areas within the covered premises not normally accessible to members of the public without explicit permission of the person in direct control of the area, including, but not limited to, individual	apartment units, employee rest areas and facilities, banquet halls, meeting rooms, and private offices.

7.	"Trespass Notice" - a written notice that contains minimally the following  information:

(a)	Verbatim copies of Subdivisions 5 and 6 of this Section.

(b)	The name, date of birth, and address of the person to whom the notice is issued and the name of the person's custodial parent or guardian if the person is a juvenile.

(c)	A description of the specific conduct that forms the basis for the issuance of the notice.

(d)	A description of the specific covered premises or portion thereof to which the notice applies.

(e)	The period during which the notice is in effect, including the date of its expiration.

(f)	The name, title, address, and telephone number of a person with authority to modify, amend, or rescind the notice.

(g)	The method by which the notice was served upon the person to whom it was issued.

Subd. 3.   Issuance of Trespass  Notice.   A property manager or tenant may issue a trespass notice to a person only if there is probable cause to believe the person has, no more than 30 days before the issuance of that notice:

A   Committed an act prohibited by the State statute or city ordinance while on the covered premises; or
 

B. Violated any rule of conduct for the covered premises that has been conspicuously posted at all public entrances to the covered premises or that the property manager or tenant has provided to the person  in writing.

Subd. 4.	Coverage of Trespass Notice.

A If issued by a property manager, a trespass notice is effective only as to those public common areas and private areas within the property manager's exclusive control, except that a trespass notice may  also cover private common areas and other private areas provided the tenant or tenants in control of such areas have agreed in writing to be precluded from inviting onto the premises any person to whom a trespass notice has been issued under this Section. Such a trespass notice must state that the tenant or tenants of the covered premises are precluded from inviting onto the covered premises any person to whom a trespass notice has been issued under this section.

B.	If issued by a tenant, the trespass notice is effective only as to those private common areas and private areas over which the tenant has control.

C.	A notice broader in coverage than authorized by this Section shall not be  invalid, but  shall  be  valid  only  to  the  extent  authorized  by  this Section.

Subd. 5.	Prohibited Conduct.

A No person shall trespass in or upon any covered premises of another and, without claim of right, refuse to depart therefrom on demand of the property manager, or a tenant authorized  to exercise control over the covered premises or portion involved.

B.	No person served with a trespass notice in conformity with this Section shall enter in or upon the premises described therein during its effective period without the written permission of the notice issuer, agent, or assign.

C.	No person shall enter any public facility, utility, or grounds thereto, or any covered premises or portion thereof in violation of conspicuously posted signs prohibiting or restricting access thereto, including, but not limited to, the following:  "No  Trespassing,"  "Authorized  Personnel Only," "Private," "Employees  Only," "Emergency  Exit Only."

Subd. 6.	Additional  Provisions.
 

A   No trespass notice shall be effective for more than one year.

B.	All  trespass  notices  issued pursuant  to this  Section  must  be properly served upon the person named therein as follows:

1.	Personal service documented by either a receipt signed by the person to whom it was issued or an affidavit of the issuer; or

2.	If the person is arrested or detained by a police officer, the officer may personally serve the notice on behalf of the property manager or tenant and document service in the officer's official police report detailing the incident.

Subd. 7. Severability. If any segment or portion of any segment of this Section is deemed invalid or unconstitutional  by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of other segments or portions of segments of this Section.

SECTION 10.11.	HARASSMENT.

Subd. 1.  Definition.  As  used  herein,  the  term  "harassment"  means either a willful repeated course of conduct consisting of acts, words, or gestures which, the perpetrator knows or reasonably should know, will alarm, anger  or disturb the intended target of the harassment; or willful repeated, intrusive, or unwanted acts, words or gestures, which, the perpetrator knows or  reasonably should know, will adversely affect the safety, security or privacy of the intended target of the harassment.

Subd. 2. Unlawful Acts. It is unlawful for any person  to  commit harassment against another, after being notified not to do so  by the  intended target of the harassment or by the City's law enforcement agency.

SECTION 10.12.	PROSPECTIVE TENANT BACKGROUND CHECKS.

Subd. 1.   Any owner or resident manager of rental property may request that the Police Department conduct a criminal history/background  investigation of a prospective tenant as provided under Subdivision 2 of this  Section.  Such request shall be on a form approved or provided by the Police Department and shall be accompanied by an investigation fee established by resolution of the City Council.

Subd. 2.  The  Police  Department  shall   conduct   criminal history/background investigations on prospective tenants in rental property within the City of Red Wing upon request of the owner or resident manager of such property as provided in Subdivision  1 of this Section.   No such investigation shall
 
be conducted using the state Criminal Justice Data Communications Network (CJDN) and no information obtained from the CJDN shall be disseminated unless the landlord presents a signed informed consent/waiver form from the prospective tenant in a form acceptable to the Police Department and in conformance with the requirements of the Minnesota Data Practices Act.

SECTION 10.13.	TREE AND SHRUB CARE.

Subd. 1.  Care of Street Trees.   The City of Red Wing shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within  the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds as may be necessary to insure the public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.

Subd. 2. Removal of Trees Endangering Utilities or Other Public Improvements. The City may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree, shrub or plant or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electrical power lines, gas lines, water lines, communication lines, sidewalks, curbing, or other public improvements and appurtenances.

Every tree or shrub overhanging any street or right-of-way within the City shall be pruned so that the branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection, and so that there shall be a clear space of at least 14 feet above the street or sidewalk.

Subd. 3.       Trees on Private Property.   The City shall have the authority to order the trimming, treatment, and removal of trees, shrubs or  plants  upon private property, as provided herein, when such action is deemed necessary  to public safety. Any tree or shrub situated upon private property, but so situated as to extend its branches over the improved portion of a public street or highway easement, shall be trimmed by the owner of the real property  upon which  the same is located, so there is a clear height of at least 14 feet over that portion of such easement that is used for vehicular traffic and/or pedestrian travel. Any tree or shrub obstructing traffic control signs or devices from the view of the pedestrian or motorist shall be pruned to a height established by the City to insure proper safety of motorists and pedestrians.

All orders to trim or remove shrubs, or plants given pursuant to this section, shall be in writing and shall be served in person or by first class mail upon the owner of the property where such trees, shrubs,  or  plants  are  located.  Such orders shall afford the owner of the property not less than 14 days from the date of the mailing of such notice to comply with such order. It shall be unlawful for any owner of property receiving such an order to fail to comply with the order in the time specified.
 
The City shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead, diseased, hazardous or infectious trees on private property within the City. For purposes of this section, "hazardous" means a tree with defects or damages that may cause injury or damage to person or property including, but not limited to cracks, weak branches, decay, and insect infestation.

If the required action is not taken by the property owner within the specified time, and if an appeal under Subdivision 5 of this Section is not undertaken by the owner, the City may cause the trees, shrubs, or plants concerned to be trimmed or removed, with the costs being borne by the property owner.  If not voluntarily paid to the City by such owner, the costs of such trimming or removal may be recovered by the City by special assessment upon the property owner.

Subd. 4.     Destruction of Trees on Public Property.   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter, or destroy any street tree or park tree without the prior authorization of the City.

Subd. 5.   Right of  Review by City  Council.   Any  person aggrieved  by any ruling or order of the City may appeal to the City Council, which shall hear the matter and make a final decision. The City Council may modify, affirm, or reverse any determination of the City.

Subd. 6. Existing  Tree  Regulations.  This  Section  shall  operate  to impose regulations in addition to those in Sections 10.14 and 10.15 pertaining to Tree Disease.

SECTION 10.14.	SHADE TREE PEST CONTROL.

Subd. 1. Declaration of policy. The health of the trees in the city  is threatened by shade tree pests, and the loss or ill health of trees growing upon public and private property impairs the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the public. In addition to and in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Sections 89.001, 89.01, and 89.51-.64, the provisions of this section are adopted as an effort to control and prevent the spread of these shade tree pests.

Subd. 2. Declaration of a shade tree pest.  The  Council  may  by ordinance declare any vertebrate or invertebrate animal, plant pathogen, or plant threatening to cause significant damage to a shade tree or  forest  in  the community, as defined by Minnesota Statutes, Section 89.001, to be a shade tree pest and prescribe control measures to effectively eradicate, control,  or manage the shade tree pest, including necessary timelines for action.

Subd. 3. Public nuisances defined. A shade tree pest, as defined by Section 10.15, occurring within a defined control zone is a public nuisance.
 
Subd. 4. Shade tree pest nuisances are unlawful. It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as defined in this section to remain on any premises the person owns or controls within the City.  The  nuisance  may  be abated as provided in this section.

Subd. 5. Tree inspector.  The Council hereby appoints the Director of Public Works as tree inspector to coordinate the activities of the city relating to the control and prevention of damage by shade tree pests. The Director of Public Works may designate a representative, also known by the term "tree inspector," to carry out activities in this section. The tree inspector will  recommend  to  the Council the details of any program for the declaration, control, and prevention of shade tree pests. The tree inspector is authorized to enforce or cause to  be enforced the tasks incident to such a program adopted by the Council.

Subd. 6.	Abatement of shade tree pest nuisances.

A In abating a nuisance,  as defined in Subdivision 3 of this Section, the organism, condition, plant, tree, wood, or material identified as injurious to the health of shade trees shall be removed or effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of the shade tree pest. Such abatement procedures shall be carried  out  in accordance with the control measures and areas prescribed by Section 10.15.

B. In addition, if the appropriate abatement procedure is removal, and the tree(s) and/or shrub(s) are within the limits of a highway in a rural area within the city's jurisdiction, Minnesota Statutes, Section 160.22 shall be complied with as necessary.

Subd. 7.  Reporting  discovery  of  shade  tree  pest.  Any  owner   or occupier of land or any person engaged in tree trimming or removal who becomes aware of the existence of a public nuisance caused by a shade  tree  pest  as defined under subdivision 3 shall report the same to the tree inspector.

Subd. 8. Registration of  tree  care  firms.  Any  person,  firm,  or corporation that provides tree care, tree trimming, or removal of trees, limbs, branches, brush, or shrubs for hire must be registered with the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture under Minnesota Statutes, Section 18G.07.

Subd. 9.	Inspection and application of control measures.

A The tree inspector is authorized  to inspect premises and places within the city to determine whether shade tree pests exist thereon and to investigate all reported incidents of shade tree pests. The tree inspector is	authorized to take all reasonable measures to prevent the maintenance of public nuisances  and  may  enforce  the  provisions relating to abatement in this section.  Diagnosis of shade tree pests may
 
be by the presence of commonly recognized symptoms; by tests as may be recommended by the commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Agriculture or the commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources; or other reliable means.

B. No person, firm, or corporation shall interfere with the tree inspector or with anyone acting under the tree inspector's authority while engaged in activities authorized by this section.

Subd. 10. Standard abatement procedure. Except as provided  in Subdivisions 11 and 13 of this Section, whenever a tree inspector determines with reasonable certainty that a public nuisance, as described  by this  ordinance,  is being maintained or exists on premises in the city, the tree inspector is authorized to abate a public nuisance according to the procedures in this subdivision.

A The tree inspector will notify in writing the owner of record or occupant of the premises that a public nuisance exists and order that the nuisance be terminated or abated. The notice may be given in person or by mail. Failure of any party to receive the mail does not invalidate the service of the notice. A copy of the notice shall be filed with the City Clerk.

B.	The notice of abatement shall state that unless the public nuisance is abated by the  owner or occupant, it will be abated by the  city at the expense of the owner or occupant. The notice shall specify the control measures to be taken to abate the nuisance, and provide a reasonable amount of time to abate the nuisance. The notice will also state that the owner or occupant has the right to appeal the determination that a public nuisance exists by submitting a request in writing to the City Clerk within seven calendar days after service of the notice, or before the date by which abatement must be completed, whichever comes first.

C.	If no timely appeal is submitted, and the control measures prescribed in the notice of abatement are not complied with within the time provided by the notice or any additional time granted, the tree inspector or designated person shall have the authority to obtain permission or an administrative	search warrant, enter the property, and carry out abatement in accordance with the notice of abatement.

Subd. 11. High-cost abatement.  If the tree inspector determines that the cost of abating a nuisance will exceed $2,000 based on a reasonable, good faith estimate, the written notice referred to in Subdivision 10 of this Section  must provide that if the nuisance is not abated within the reasonable amount of time provided, the matter will be referred to the City Council for a hearing. The date, time, and location of the hearing must be provided in the notice.
 
Subd. 12.   Appeal procedure.   If the City Clerk receives a written request for a hearing on the question of whether a public nuisance exists, the City Council shall hold a hearing within 14 calendar days following receipt by the Clerk of the written request. At least three calendar days notice of the hearing shall be given to the individual who made the written request for the hearing. The Council may modify the abatement notice or extend the time by which abatement must be completed. Each owner, agent of the owner, occupant, and lienholder  of  the subject property or properties in attendance, if any, shall be given the opportunity to present evidence at the hearing. After holding the hearing, the City Council may issue an order requiring abatement of the nuisance.

Subd. 13.	Abatement procedure in event of imminent danger.

A If the tree inspector determines that the danger  of  transmission  of  a shade tree pest to other shade trees is imminent, and delay in control measures may put public health, safety, or welfare in immediate danger, the	tree inspector may provide for abatement without following Subdivision 10 or 11 of this Section. The tree inspector must reasonably attempt to notify the owner or occupant of the affected property of the intended action, and the right to appeal the abatement and any cost recovery, at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting.

B. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition that poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.

Subd. 14.	Recovery of cost of abatement; liability and assessment.

A The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement, including administrative costs. As  soon  as  the  work  has  been completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk or other official shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner.  Thereupon  the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City Clerk.

B.  After  notice  and  hearing,  as  provided  in Minnesota  Statutes,  Section
429.061 (which may be amended from time to time), the City Clerk shall, on or before Sept. 1 next following abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges as well as other charges for current services to be assessed under Minnesota Statutes, Section 429.101 and the City Code against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable. The City Council may then certify the charges against the property to the county auditor for collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments as the City Council may determine  in each case.
 

Subd. 15.	Penalty.

A		Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.

B.	The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this section shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.

C.	In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any person, firm, or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this section, the City Council or any official designated by it may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct, or abate the violation.

Subd. 16. Severability. Should any part or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part held to be invalid.

SECTION 10.15. DECLARED SHADE TREE PESTS, CONTROL MEASURES, AND CONTROL AREAS.

Subd. 1.	Emerald Ash Borer.

A Declaring emerald ash borer a shade tree pest. Emerald ash borer is a shade tree pest and is defined as the beetle Agrilus planipennis. It attacks and kills all North American species of ash  (Fraxinus)  trees. Adult EAB beetles live outside of trees during the summer months and can fly. Larvae live underneath the bark of trees and in ash wood products and ash wood debris.


B.	Prescribed control measures. Control  measures that may be taken to abate emerald ash borer are:


1.	Use of insecticide. Insecticides  may be effective  in killing emerald ash borer larvae in some infested trees. When a  qualified  tree service or qualified person treats an infected tree with insecticide in accordance with University of Minnesota Extension suggestions, and has provided evidence to the Tree Inspector, emerald ash borer shall be considered abated for as long as the treatment is effective and the tree remains healthy.

2.	Removal and disposal of trees. Any living or dead tree, log, firewood,  limb,  branch,  stump,  or other  portion of a tree from  any
 
species of the genus Fraxinus existing within the control area defined that has bark attached and that exceeds one inch  in diameter  or three inches in circumference and could contain emerald ash borer can be ordered disposed of.

Acceptable methods of disposal are chipping or grinding, bark removal or incineration. Chipping or grinding must result in pieces of wood that are less than one inch in cross-section diameter. Pieces may be of any length.

Wood may be retained for use as firewood or saw logs if it is debarked or covered with four-mil plastic from May 1 to September 1 in the two calendar years after it is cut. The edges of the cover must be buried or sealed to the ground.



C.	Timelines for action.  For trees identified as infested with emerald ash borer prior to April 1 of a calendar year, the property owner or other responsible party shall abate the nuisance by April  15 of  the  same calendar year after service of notice as provided in  Section 10.14 is accomplished.

For trees identified as infested with emerald ash borer April  1  to August 31, the property owner or other responsible party shall abate the nuisance after September 1 of the current calendar year and by April 15 of following calendar year after  service   of  notice  as  provided  in Section 10.14 is accomplished.

For trees identified as infested with emerald  ash  borer  after September 1 of a calendar year, the property owner or other responsible party shall abate the nuisance by April 15 of the following calendar year after service of notice as provided in Section 10.14 is accomplished.

D.	Definition of control areas. The control area for emerald ash borer is defined as:

All lands within the city except for all wetlands, lands with a slope that exceeds 30 percent, and lands in these zoning districts:

Agricultural (A)
Agricultural Residential (AR) Agricultural  Conservation (AC) General Industrial (1-1)
Heavy Industrial (1-2)

The Tree Inspector shall maintain a map of the control area.
 

Subd. 2.        Dutch Elm Disease.

A Declaring Dutch elm disease a shade tree pest. Dutch  elm disease is declared a shade tree pest and defined as a disease of elm trees caused by the fungus Ophiostoma ulmi or Ophiostoma novo-ulmi. It affects all species of elm (Ulmus) and can travel from tree to tree through grafted root systems. The fungus can reproduce in any infested tree and be carried from tree to tree by elm bark beetles.

B.	Control measures that may be taken to abate Dutch elm disease are:

1.	Use of fungicide. Fungicides may be effective in preventing  Dutch elm disease when injected into living trees that do not already show symptoms of Dutch elm disease.

2.	Removal and disposal of trees. Any  living or dead tree,  log, firewood, limb, branch, stump, or other portion of a tree from any species of the genus Ulmus existing within the control area defined that has bark attached and that exceeds three inches in diameter or ten inches in circumference and could contain bark beetles can be ordered disposed of.

Acceptable methods of disposal are chipping, grinding, bark removal or incineration.

Wood may be retained for use as firewood or saw logs if it is debarked or covered with four-mil plastic from April 15 to October 15 in the first calendar year after it is cut. The edges of the cover must be buried or sealed to the ground.

C.	Timelines for action.   For trees that show symptoms of Dutch elm disease prior to July 15 of a calendar year, the property owner or other responsible party shall abate the nuisance within 20 days after  service  of  notice  as provided in Section 10.14 is accomplished.

For trees that show symptoms of Dutch elm disease on or after July 15 of a calendar year, the property owner or other responsible party shall abate the nuisance prior to April 1 of the following calendar year after service of notice as provided in Section 10.14 is accomplished.

D.	Definition of control areas. The control area for Dutch  elm  disease  is defined as:
 
All  lands within  the  city  except  for  all wetlands,  lands with  a  slope  that exceeds 30 percent, and lands in these zoning districts:

Agricultural (A)
Agricultural Residential (AR) Agricultural  Conservation (AC) General Industrial (1-1)
Heavy Industrial (1-2)

The Tree Inspector shall maintain a map of the control area.

SECTION 10.16.	CURFEW.

Subd. 1.      It shall be unlawful for any minor of the ages provided herein at the times specified herein to be present in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places or public buildings, places of entertainment or amusement, vacant lots and other unsupervised places open to the public in the City of Red Wing.

A For a minor under 15 years the  hours  of  restriction  are  between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. daily, commencing at 10:00 p.m. Sunday evening and terminating the following Friday at 5:00 a.m. The hours of restriction during the remaining portion of the week are between 11:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m. daily commencing Friday evening at 11:00 p.m. and
terminating on the following Sunday at 5:00 a.m.

B. For any minor who has attained 15 years of age and is under 18 years of age the hours of restriction are between 12:01 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the same day.

Subd. 2. It shall be unlawful for the parent,  guardian,  or  other  adult person having charge of a minor to permit or by lack of supervision and control allow that minor to violate this Section.

Subd. 3. It shall be unlawful for  any  business  proprietor  to  permit  a minor to remain at the proprietor's establishment during the  hours prohibited  by this Chapter. It shall be unlawful for a minor to continue to remain at such an establishment after the proprietor of the establishment orders the minor to leave; the proprietor shall immediately notify the police department of the violation.

Subd. 4. The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to a minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, to a minor who is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the presence of said minor in said place or places is connected   with   or required by some legitimate business,
 
trade  or profession or occupation  in which  said minor  is permitted  by law to  be engaged.

Subd. 5.	Penalty.

A.	The first violation of this Section by any person shall be punished as a petty misdemeanor.

B.	The second and any subsequent violations of this Section by the same person shall be punished as a misdemeanor.

SECTION 10.17.	NOISE.

Subd. 1. No person shall make, continue or cause to be  made  or continued, any loud, and/or unnecessary noise, which is reasonably likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others provided that this section shall not be construed to apply to  singing  or playing of musical instruments and other mechanical means inside churches, nor entertainments carried on in public buildings, where an admission fee is charged therefor, nor noise of manufacturing institutions.

Subd. 2. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but their enumeration here shall not be deemed exclusive, nor the list exhaustive:

A Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place, except as a danger warning; the creation, by  means  of any such signaling device, of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.

B.	Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to  be played, used or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of persons in the vicinity or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.,  in a manner as to be plainly audible at a
 
distance of fifty feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence for a violation of this section.

C.	Loudspeakers and amplifiers. The using, operating or permitting use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the purpose of commercial advertising, campaigning, or the attraction of attention of the public to any building or structure.

D.	Yelling,  shouting,  etc.  Yelling  or  shouting,  particularly  between  the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., or at any time  or  place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,  comfort,  or  repose  of  any  person  in the vicinity whether outdoors, or within a structure.

E. Building construction work.  The undertaking or allowing the undertaking of construction or demolition related activities between the hours  of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. standard time or  between  the  hours  of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. during daylight savings time.

F. Use of dynamic engine brakes. The use or operation of or allowing the use or operation of dynamic engine brakes commonly referred to as "Jake Brakes," engine brakes or compression brakes, except when necessary for the aversion of imminent danger.

Subd. 3.	Exemptions.

A City Essential Services. Noise created by the operation of city essential services shall be exempt from this provision. City essential services are those operations performed by the City to protect the health safety and welfare of citizens including, but not limited to, the following: police, fire, street maintenance, water, wastewater and refuse collection services.

B. Special Events. Permission to exempt an event from the above restrictions may be granted by the City Council for community activities that are reasonably likely to create noise which would  be a violation of this section, and which cannot reasonably be conducted  in a  manner that would not produce such noise.

Subd. 4.	Penalty.

A The first violation of this Section by any person shall be punished as a petty misdemeanor.

B.	The second and any subsequent violations of this Section by the same person shall be punished as a misdemeanor.
 
SECTION 10.18.	PUBLIC PARKS.

 
Subd. 1.
shall apply:
 
Definitions.	As  used in this  Section,  the following  meanings
 

1.	"Director'' - the Director of Public Works or designee.

2.	"Park" - a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center, or any other area in the City, owned or used by the City, and devoted to active or passive recreation.

3.	"Vehicle" - any wheeled conveyance, whether motor powered, animal-drawn or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description. Exception is made for City­ owned vehicles in the service of the City parks and the Police Department.

Subd. 2.	Park Property.

A	Buildings and Other Property.  It is unlawful for any person in a park to:

1.	Disfiguration and Removal - Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices, or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.

2.	Restrooms and Washrooms - Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition.

3.	Removal of Natural Resources - Remove or carry away beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down-timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency, without permission of the Director.

4.	Erection of Structures - Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character,  or place any public service utility into, upon or across such  lands, except with the permission of the Director.

B. Trees,  Shrubbery,  Lawns.  It is unlawful for any  person in a park to: (1) damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or pick the flowers or seeds, of any tree or plant; (2) attach any rope, wire, or
 
other contrivance to any tree or plant; or, (3) dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.

Subd. 3.	Sanitation.  It is unlawful for any person in a park to:

A Pollution of Waters - Throw, discharge,  or otherwise  place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.

B.	Recyclables, Refuse, Trash and Ash Disposal - Deposit or leave any recyclables, bottles, broken glass, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash. No such recyclables, refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all recyclables, refuse or trash shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. It shall be unlawful and an offense against this Section for any person other than City Service or licensed Hauler to pick up said materials.	All persons responsible for the presence of recyclables in parks where recyclable receptacles are available shall be required to deposit said recyclables in recyclable receptacle containers instead of trash containers. Charcoal broilers shall be dumped in the ash pits that have been provided. Ashes shall not be dumped onto the grass or into garbage containers.

C.	Glass Beverage  Containers  - Possess any glass beverage containers.
Persons using the Public Access Boat ramps or having leased boat mooring space may possess glass beverage containers  but  may  not use, deposit, or leave said containers in the park area. Violations of this subsection constitute a petty misdemeanor.
Subd. 4.	Traffic.  It is a petty misdemeanor for any person in a park to: A   Speed  of Vehicles  -  Operate  a vehicle  at  a rate of  speed  exceeding
15 miles per hour, except upon such roads as the City may designate,
by posted signs, for speedier travel.

B.	Operation Confined to Roads - Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas and temporary roadways by the City.
 
C.	Parking in Designated Areas - Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area for more than 72 hours without a permit issued by the City.

D.	Posted Regulations - Ride or drive  a vehicle contrary to posted regulations as from time to time may be authorized by the Council.

E. Enforcement of Traffic Regulations - Fail to obey all traffic officers and park employees, such persons being hereby authorized  and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on the highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and such supplementary regulations as may be issued subsequently by the Director.

F.	Obey Traffic Signs - Fail to observe carefully  all traffic signs indicating speed, direction,  caution, stopping or parking, and all others posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property.

Subd. 5.	Recreational Activities. A	Bathing and Swimming.
1.	Designated Areas - It is a petty misdemeanor for any person in a park to: (a) Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or water-ways in or adjacent to any park, or adjacent to any riverbank protected  by riprap, specifically the shoreline just north of the upper harbor continuous to the private residential area by the Izaak Walton property. This area includes Pottery Pond, Upper/Lower Harbor, Bay Point and Levee Park. Also, the upper marina at Colvill Park, around the park to the lower marina and back to the main channel, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted; or, (b) frequent any waters or places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat when such activity is prohibited by the Director upon a finding that such use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.

2.	Certain Hours - It is a petty misdemeanor for any person in a park to: frequent	any waters or places designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, except between such hours of the day as shall be designated by the Director.

B.	Firearms - It is unlawful for any person in a park to: (1) Possess or use firearms of  any description, or air-rifles, spring-guns, bow-and-arrows, slings or any other forms of weapons  potentially harmful to wildlife and
 
dangerous to human safety, or any instrument that can be loaded with blank cartridges, or any kind of trapping device; or, (2) shoot into park areas  from  beyond  park  boundaries,  except  as  provided  in  Section
10.05.  This Subparagraph B shall not apply to Minnesota peace officers
in performance of their duties.

C.	Picnic Facilities and Use.

1.	Availability - It is a petty misdemeanor for any person in a park to: encumber the free use of picnic facilities by attempting to reserve facilities in advance,  or by using more facilities than are necessary, to the detriment of other potential users. The Director shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use of the comfort and convenience of all visitors. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end.

2.	The Colvill Park Pavilion, Colvill Park Courtyard and Picnic Shelters.
Facilities  may  be  reserved for  groups  at  fees  established  by  City Council.

D.	Overnight Use.

1.	It is a petty misdemeanor for any person in a park to: set up tents, recreational vehicles or any other temporary structure or temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight use or camping, nor leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be used for  such  purpose,  such  as  house­ trai ler, camp-trailer, motor home or the like.

2.	The Director or designee may grant temporary permission for the overnight use of a park by nonprofit organizations and government sponsored organizations, for the purpose  of conducting charitable, educational, or similar community purpose events.  Said use of parks shall be in accordance with public park overnight use  policies established by the City Council.

The   charges   for   overnight	use  of   City  parks  pursuant  to  this Subdivision shall be provided for by ordinance.

3.	Private Use of Public Property Application for perm1ss1on  for overnight use of a park shall be submitted not less than 30 days prior to the first day of the event. Applications are available at the public works department.
 
E. Games - It is a petty misdemeanor for any person in a park to: play games such as baseball, softball or other specifically identified sports activities except on the fields or areas provided therefor. Golf is prohibited in all parks.

F. Horse, or Similar Animals or Livestock - It is a petty misdemeanor to allow or ride a horse or similar animal or livestock in a park except as specifically	permitted through a Private Use of Public Property Application.  Applications are available at the public works department.

Subd. 6.	Behavior.  It is unlawful for any person in a park to:

A Fires - (1) Start or maintain any fire, except in barbecue pits, charcoal grills,  fireplaces,   or  any  other  location  designated  by  the  City;  or,
(2) throw or other-wise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material,  within  any  park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto. Violations of this subsection constitute a petty misdemeanor.

B.	Going Onto Ice - Go onto the ice of any of the waters except such areas as are designated as skating or fishing areas. Violations of this subsection constitute a petty misdemeanor.

C.	Disorderly Conduct - Engage in boisterous,  threatening,  abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in brawling or fighting  or  in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending reasonably to arouse alarm, anger, or resentment in others,  knowing or having reasonable grounds to know that such language or behavior will, or will tend to, alarm, anger or disturb others or provoke an assault or breach of the peace.

G.	Dogs Leashed or Otherwise Restrained - Possess a dog unless at all times the dog is on  a leash or similar type of restraining device  not greater than six feet in length except in Soldiers Memorial Park Prairie Restoration Area, Levee Park (east of Pottery Pond, west of the boat storage area and south of Levee Road) and Billings/Tomfohr (Coon Hill) Recreation Area. Violations of this  subsection constitute a petty misdemeanor.

H.	Defecation - Cause or permit a dog to defecate upon park  property without immediately removing the excrement and disposing of it in a sanitary manner except in areas where running at large is permitted.

Subd. 7.  Park Hours.   It is a petty misdemeanor  for  any  person in a park to be present in, occupy or use any park except during the hours that the park is open for use by the public, as hereinafter set forth.
 
A  All parks shall be open from sunrise until 10:30 p.m. of each day.

B.	The Director may extend the hour of closing upon written request and upon so doing, shall notify the Police Department of said extension.

C.	Persons using the Public Access Boat Ramps or having leased boat mooring space, or their guests, may occupy and use Colvill or Bay Point Park outside of the designated open hours for arrivals and departures and may leave their vehicle in the parking lot for the duration of their excursion.

D.	Bay Point Walking Path - Persons may use the Bay Point Walking Path outside of the designated open hours, and may leave their vehicle in the parking lot while they use the Bay Point Walking Path. The remainder of Bay Point Park shall only be used during the designated open hours.

E.  Alcohol Consumption.  Alcohol consumption in parks is regulated in Chapter 5, Section 5.05, Subdivision 5.

SECTION 10.19.	MINNESOTA STATE FIRE CODE.

Subd. 1. Adoption. The Minnesota State Fire Code, as  it  may  be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as though set forth verbatim herein. This shall also include appendices B and C. One copy of said Code shall be marked CITY OF RED WING - OFFICIAL COPY and kept on file in the office of the Fire Chief and open to inspection and use by the public.

A.	Appendix K of the Minnesota State Fire Code, regarding Fires or Barbecues on Balconies or Patios, is hereby adopted  as though set forth verbatim herein, subject to the following exception:


1.	Individuals who live in buildings that were constructed prior to January 1, 2012, may apply to the City Council for a variance from	the requirements of Appendix K if their building is constructed of non-combustible materials, has non-combustible patios		and/or balconies, is protected throughout with a compliant fire suppression system, and approved storage areas are provided. The City Council may only approve such a variance when it is determined that an undue hardship exists. An "undue hardship,'' for purposes of this section, is defined as excessive cost or other unwarranted hardship that would be necessary	to strictly comply with Appendix K where the individual will still substantially be in compliance with the Fire Code, and the safety of the public and occupants of the building will not be jeopardized.
 

2.	If an undue hardship has been proven and the variance request has been approved, listed portable gas-fired barbecue grills that are permanently mounted and maintain a minimum clearance of eighteen (18) inches on all sides (unless listed for lesser clearances) may be installed on balconies and patios. Such barbecue grills shall be equipped with fuel cylinders not to exceed 4.5 lbs/1 gallon total capacity (3.6 lbs fuel). One additional cylinder (4.5 lbs/1 gallon total capacity) shall be permitted in an approved storage area.

Subd. 2.	Fire Suppression Systems.

A The limits set forth at Section 105.7.1 and  105.7.6 of  the  Minnesota State Fire Code in which construction permits are required for the installation or modification of fire protection systems are hereby adopted as the limits for the city.

1.	The party wanting such installation permit shall make application to the  Permits and License Manager for a construction permit at least
30 days prior to the date on which the installation or  modification shall begin. At this time plans conforming to NFPA 13 or NFPA 72 (or other applicable standards) shall be submitted in duplicate that include all drawings, calculations, and spec sheets.

Subd. 3.	Open Burning:

A  The limits set forth at Section 105.6.30 of the Minnesota State Fire Code in which operational permits are required for open burning are hereby adopted as the limits for the city.

1.	The party wanting such permit shall make application to the Permits and License Manager for an operational   permit at least three days prior to the date on which burning shall commence. Open burning is prohibited when burning restrictions or bans are in place.

2.	The Fire Chief or his/her authorized designees  shall  set  forth  the time and conditions by which the fire may be started  and burned. The permittee shall have the permit on his or her person during the fire and shall produce the permit for inspection when requested to do so by the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, any firefighter, DNR employee, or other peace officer. A person shall not start or cause a fire to be started on any land that is not owned or under the person's legal control without the written permission of the owner, lessee, or agent of the owner or lessee of the land. The permittee shall remain with the  fire  at  all  times  and  before  leaving  the  site  shall  completely
 
extinguish the fire. Smoke from the burning process  shall not obscure any roadway or create a public nuisance at any time. The permit shall specifically list the materials that can and cannot be burned. Burning piles shall not  be located within 100 feet of any structure owned by the permit holder, or within 200 feet of any structure not owned by the permit holder. A suitable means of controlling or extinguishing the fire must be available  at  all times. This may be accomplished by the use of a water hose, shovel and dirt or sand, fire extinguisher, or heavy equipment. Burning permits may be suspended by the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, any firefighter, DNR employee, or other peace officer if local weather conditions warrant or if open burning is deemed to be a public nuisance. The Goodhue County Sheriff's office shall be notified at 651-385-3155 before the fire is started and after the fire is extinguished on a daily basis. Violating or exceeding any regulations listed on the permit application shall be cause for the permit to be revoked and can result in a misdemeanor violation.

Subd. 4.	Recreational Burning:

A   Recreational fires may be held without any permit provided the following regulations are adhered to:

1.	Recreational fires shall be in a commercially purchased or fire department approved burning appliance or contained in a pit below grade.

2.	Pits shall be a maximum of three feet in diameter and a minimum of one foot deep. Flames from the fire shall not  exceed  three  feet above ground level. Any fires larger than this shall be considered open burning and be regulated by permit.

3.	Burning appliances and fire  pits  shall  be  located  a  minimum  of 25 feet from any structure; 15 feet from any power line or property line.

4.	Conditions which could cause a fire to spread to any structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition.

5.	The regulation form shall specifically list the materials that can and cannot be burned.

6.	All burning materials shall be contained within the burning appliance or fire pit at all times.
 
7.	A responsible adult shall be in attendance at all times during recreational fires.

8.	A suitable means of controlling or extinguishing the fire must be available at all times. This may be accomplished by the use of a water hose, shovel and dirt or sand, or fire extinguisher.

9.	The Goodhue County Sheriff's office shall  be  notified  at 651-385-3155 prior to ignition.

10.	The Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, any firefighter, DNR employee, or other peace officer is authorized to require burning to be immediately discontinued if local  weather  conditions  warrant  or  if  recreational burning is deemed to be a public nuisance.

11.	Recreational fires are prohibited when burning restrictions  or  bans are in place.

12.	Violating  or  exceeding  any  regulations  listed on the form  shall  be cause for immediate extinguishment of the fire. If party remains non compliant, it can result in a misdemeanor violation.

Subd. 5.	Outdoor Fireworks Displays.

A		The limits set forth at Section 105.6.14 of the Minnesota State Fire Code in which operational permits are required for the public display of fireworks are hereby adopted as the limits for the city.

1.	The party wanting such permit shall make application to  the  City Clerk for an operational permit at least 15 days prior to the date on which	the display shall take place. At this  time,  the  permit application and all required attachments shall be submitted  in duplicate to demonstrate compliance with the ordinances and codes of  the  City  of  Red Wing,  the  Minnesota  Fire  Code,  MN  Statute
624.20	through 624.25, National Fire Protection Association Standard 1123, and applicable federal laws. The permit fee must be submitted with the application.

2.	Pursuant to Minnesota Statutes section 624.22, the City's Fire Chief or designee will determine whether the fireworks display operator is certified, whether the operator is competent, and whether  the fireworks display conforms to the safety guidelines issued  by  the state fire marshal.  If the Fire Chief or designee determines that the above criteria are met, the City Clerk shall issue a permit for the fireworks.
 
Subd. 6.	Penalties.	In addition  to  the  penalties  set forth  at  Section
10.29 of this Code, the following shall also apply.

A Civil: If a violation is suspected, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, any firefighter, DNR employee, or other peace officer may enter the property on which the suspected violation has occurred. A violator shall be informed of such violation and be given a time from the date of such notice to correct or remedy such violation to the satisfaction of the Fire Department.	In the event the violation is not corrected or  remedied within such  time period, The Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, any firefighter, DNR employee, or other peace officer may correct or remedy a violation in such manner as the Fire Department, in its sole discretion, shall determine and shall charge the cost and expense, if any, for doing so back to the property owner.

B.	Criminal. The imposition of one penalty for any violation  shall  not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. When not otherwise specified, each five days that the prohibited conditions remain shall constitute a new and separate offense. The application of any criminal penalties shall not be held to prevent the correction or remedy of the violation by the Fire Department.

Subd. 7.  Nuisance.  For purposes of this Section, the tern "nuisance" refers to anything that affects the general public and is injurious to health, or indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.

 
SECTION 10.20.	CANNON UNLAWFUL ACTS.
 
VALLEY	TRAIL	REGULATIONS;
 

Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of this  Section,  which  is  enacted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 375, is to secure the quiet, orderly, and suitable use and enjoyment by the public of the Cannon Valley Trail.

Subd. 2.       Definitions.  For the purpose of this Section, the terms defined in this Section shall have the following meanings:

1.	"Cannon Valley Trail" - the Cannon Valley Trail established.

2.	"Board" - the appointed and elected members of the Cannon Valley Trail Board.

3.	"Trail" - any land or water area, and all facilities thereon, under the jurisdiction, control, or ownership of the Cannon Valley Trail Board.
 
4.	"Ranger'' - those Cannon Valley Trail employees vested with the authority and primary duties to enforce laws and ordinances relating to the Cannon Valley Trails.

5.	"Vehicle" - every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power.

6.	"Motorized Recreation Vehicle" - any self-propelled, off-the-road, or all-terrain conveyance including, but not limited to, a snowmobile, mini-bike, amphibious vehicle, motorcycle, go-cart, trail bike, or dune buggy.

7.	"Weapon" - any device, including, but not limited to, firearms, bows, slings, and spring guns, from which a shot or a projectile of any type can be discharged or propelled by means of an explosive, gas, compressed air, or other means.

8.	"Wildlife" - all living animals, not human, wild by nature, including, but not limited to, mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, reptiles, crustaceans, mollusks, and insects.

9.	"Natural Resources" - all flora and fauna within the Cannon Valley Trails and the physical factors upon which they depend, including the air, water, soil, and minerals.

10.	"Controlled Substance"  - any drug, substance, or immediate precursor in Schedules I through V of Minnesota Statutes, Section 152.02.

11.	"Pollutant" - any substance, liquid or gas, which could cause contamination of any air, land or water so as to create or cause a nuisance or render unclean or noxious or impure so as to be actually or potentially harmful or detrimental or injurious to public health, safety, or welfare to wildlife.

12.	"Pet" - any animal that is tamed and domesticated and kept as a companion.

Subd. 3.	General Conduct.  It is unlawful for any person to:

A Intentionally or with knowledge that his conduct is likely to cause public inconvenience,	annoyance, or alarm: (1) engage in  fighting, threatening, or violent or tumultuous behavior; (2) make unreasonable noise  or  coarse  utterance,  gesture,  or  display;  or  address  abusive
 
language to any person present; or (3) otherwise create a hazardous or physically offensive condition.

B.	Serve, possess, or consume any alcoholic beverage within the Cannon Valley Trail unless authorized by permit from a Ranger. Alcoholic beverages may be served, possessed, or consumed only at locations designated by the Cannon Valley Trail Board.

C.	Bring beer into the Cannon Valley Trail in kegs, barrels, or other bulk tap quantities.

D.	Use, possess, or sell any controlled substance.

E. Intentionally deface, vandalize, or otherwise cause destruction to park property.

F.	Intentionally disturb, harass, or interfere with a Cannon Valley Trail visitor's property.

G.	Deposit, scatter, drop, or abandon in or on the Cannon Valley Trail bottles, cans, broken glass, hot coals, ashes, sewage, waste, or other material, except in receptacles provided for such purposes.

H.	Place any debris or other pollutant in or upon any body of water in the Cannon Valley Trail.

I.	Start a fire in the Cannon Valley Trail except in a designated area, and then only in fire rings, portable stoves, or grills.

J.	Leave a fire unattended or fail to fully extinguish a fire.

K.	Scatter or leave unattended lighted matches, burning tobacco, paper, or other combustible material.

L.	Sell, solicit, or conduct any commercial enterprise in the Cannon Valley Trail unless authorized by the Board.

M.	Discharge waste water or any other wastes in the Cannon Valley Trail except into designated containers, drains, or dumping stations.

N.	Dig trenches, holes, or other excavations in the Cannon Valley Trail without authorization from a Ranger.

0. Distribute or disseminate leaflets, pamphlets, or other written or printed material, or use loudspeakers or other amplifying systems in the Cannon Valley Trail except with authorization from a Ranger.
 

P. Bring or allow a pet into or on the Cannon Valley Trail, except for dogs brought on the trail by hunters while getting to or from hunting areas. The hunting dog must be on a leash while on the trail.

 


to:
 
Subd. 4.	Protection of Natural Resources.   It is unlawful for any person
 

A   Intentionally remove, alter, injure, or destroy any tree, other plant, rock, soil, or mineral.

B.	Kill, trap, hunt, or in any manner disturb or cause to be disturbed, any species of wildlife.

C.	Discharge any missile or other projectile from a weapon upon, over, or across the boundaries of the Cannon Valley Trail.

D.	Possess  any  uncased  and/or  loaded weapon  within  the  boundaries  of the Cannon Valley Trail.

E.  Release or abandon on the Cannon Valley Trail any animal or introduce any plant, chemical, or other agent without authorization from a Ranger.

Subd. 5.    No Camping.   It is unlawful for any person to camp in or on the Cannon Valley Trail except in areas provided and designated for that purpose.

Subd. 6.      Horseback Riding.   It is unlawful for any person to ride, lead, or allow a horse on the Cannon Valley Trail.

Subd. 7.   Bicycling.  It is unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle on any area of the Cannon Valley Trail except on bikeways and roadways. Bicycles shall be operated as close to the right-hand side of the bikeways and roadways as conditions will permit.

Subd. 8.      Motorized Recreation Vehicles.   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized recreation vehicle on the Cannon Valley Trail.

Subd. 9. Meetings, Speeches,  Demonstrations,  and  Parades.  It  is unlawful for any person or persons to conduct public meetings, assemblies, worship services, entertainment, parades, or demonstrations  on  the  Cannon Valley Trail without first obtaining a use permit from a Ranger.

Subd. 10.	Vehicles.   It is unlawful for any person to: A   Operate any vehicle on the Cannon Valley Trail.
 
B.  Park or leave a vehicle standing on the Cannon Valley Trail.

Subd. 11.	Park Operation and Enforcement.

A It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of a use permit granted by a Ranger.

B. It is unlawful for any person to use, without payment, any facility or area for which a fee or charge has been established.

C. Any part of the Cannon Valley Trail may be declared temporarily closed to the public at any time or to certain uses, as the Board shall find reasonably  necessary.

D. Rangers shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this Section, and may issue citations of arrest, arrest with or without warrant, and eject from the Cannon Valley  Trail persons acting in violation of this Section.

E. Rangers shall have the authority to seize, confiscate, and impound any substance, plant, animal, vehicle, or other article which upon probable cause they find to be used or possessed in violation of this Section.

F. A Ranger shall have the authority to revoke for good cause any special permit.	Any special permit or reservation may be revoked upon the violation by the permittee of any  ordinance, rule, or regulation of the Cannon Valley Trail.

G. Nothing in this Section shall prevent employees or agents of the Cannon Valley Trail from performing their assigned duties.

H. The Board shall have  the right  to issue the rules and regulations to enhance or supplement this Section.

I.	The trail shall be open from sunrise to 10:00 p.m.

SECTION 10.21.	JUNK	ITEMS	STORED	ON	PUBLIC	OR	PRIVATE PROPERTY.

Subd. 1.	Definitions.	For purposes  of this  section,  these  terms  shall have the following meanings:

1.	"Abandoned Motor  Vehicle" - A motor vehicle that  has  remained illegally outdoors  on public  property within  the  City for  a period of more than 48 hours or has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on private property without consent of the person in control of
 
such property or in an inoperable condition such that it has no substantial potential for further use consistent with  its  usual functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building. It shall also mean a motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered  by  its owner to the City or a duly authorized agent of the City.

2.	"Junk Motor Vehicle" - A motor vehicle that is located outdoors on property in the City that meets any of the following criteria shall be defined as a junk vehicle:

(a)	Any motor vehicle that is partially dismantled.

(b)	Any motor vehicle that is a source of repair or replacement parts for other vehicles.

(c)	Any motor vehicle that lacks vital component parts.

(d)	Any motor vehicle that is not currently registered and properly licensed for operation.

3.	"Junk" - any worn out or discarded materials or items which are no longer used for the purposes for which they were manufactured or made, including, but not limited to, abandoned or junk motor vehicles or parts thereof, motor vehicle waste, household appliances or parts thereof,	tools, building materials, tin cans, glass, furniture, mattresses, box springs, crates, cardboard, tires, or any other unsightly debris, brush or materials, the accumulation of which may have an adverse effect upon the neighborhood or property values, health, safety, or general welfare of the public.

4.	"Motor vehicle" - Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires. Motor vehicle does not include an electric personal assistive mobility device or a vehicle moved solely by human power.

5.	"Motor Vehicle Waste" - has the meaning given in Minnesota Statutes, Section 1688.011, Subd. 10.

6.	"Unregistered Motor Vehicle" - for the purposes of this section, a vehicle that does not have a current and valid state registration.

7.	"Vital Component Parts" - those parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including but not limited to, the motor, drive train, and wheels.
 
An abandoned motor vehicle, junk motor vehicle, or junk that is fully enclosed in a lawfully constructed building is not subject to the restrictions contained in this section.

Subd. 2.      It is unlawful to park or store any junk on any property, public or private, unless fully enclosed within a lawfully erected building. The first violation of this subdivision by any person shall be punished as a petty misdemeanor. The second and any subsequent violations  of this subdivision by the same person within a 12-month period shall be punished as a misdemeanor.

Subd. 3.  Alternative  Civil  Remedy.  Without  affecting   any   other provision herein, the City, with respect to any violation of this Section may pursue a criminal prosecution and penalty or, either  in the  alternative  or  in conjunction with a criminal prosecution, declare through the City Council that there exists upon publicly or privately owned lands or premises a public nuisance. Upon seven days written notice to the owner of such premises or lands as shown by the records in the office of the County Auditor, or upon oral notice delivered to the owner or his agent or attorney in open court, the City may remove the nuisance and certify the cost of such removal as any other special assessment.

Subd. 4.	Towing.

The City, or its duly authorized agent, may take into custody and impound any abandoned or junk motor vehicle. A vehicle may be impounded after notice of such proposed impoundment (in a form similar to that set forth herein) has been securely attached to and conspicuously displayed on the vehicle for a period of five days prior to such impoundment excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and City holidays for the following reasons:

A	When  such  vehicle  is  parked  and/or  used  in  violation  of  any  law, ordinance or regulation; or
B.	When such vehicle is an abandoned or a junk motor vehicle as defined
in Subdivision 1.

Subd. 5.	Immediate Sale.

When an abandoned motor vehicle is more than seven model years of age, lacks vital component parts, and does not display a license plate currently valid in Minnesota or in any other state or foreign country, it shall immediately be eligible for sale by a duly authorized agent of the City or at public auction and shall not be subject to the notification or reclamation procedures established by this Chapter.

Subd. 6.	Notice.
 
When a motor vehicle is towed pursuant to this section and does not fall within the provisions of Subdivision 5, the towing contractor shall  give notice of taking within five days.

The notice shall:

A Set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make, model, and serial number of the vehicle and the place where the vehicle is being held.

B. Inform the owner and any readily identifiable lienholders of record of the towing charges then accrued against the vehicle and shall provide a schedule of storage and other charges to be made by the towing contractor.

C. Inform the owner and any readily identifiable lienholder of record of their right to reclaim the vehicle.

D. State that failure of the owner or readily identifiable lienholders of record to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within 15 days from the date of the notice shall be deemed a waiver by them of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public sale or auction and that the vehicle will be sold after the expiration of such 15 day period.

E. The notice shall be sent by registered mail to the registered owner, if any, of the vehicle and to all readily identifiable lienholders of record.  If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lienholders, the notice shall be published once in the City's official newspaper.

Subd. 7.	Sale.

A An abandoned or junk motor vehicle taken into  custody  and  not reclaimed under Subdivision 6 becomes the property of the duly authorized agent of the City or shall be sold to the highest bidder at public auction or sale, following notice published a reasonable time in advance. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form prescribed by the registrar of motor vehicles, which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership.

B. Abandoned vehicles not sold pursuant to subpart (A) shall be disposed of in accordance with Minnesota Statutes.
 
C.	From the proceeds of the sale under this section of abandoned motor vehicles, the agent of the City shall reimburse itself for the  cost  of towing, preserving, and storing the vehicle and all administrative, notice, and publication costs incurred in handling the vehicle. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days and then shall be deposited in the City's general fund.

Subd. 8.	Disposal Authority.

The City may contract with others and may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the inventory of abandoned motor vehicles and abandoned scrap metal, and if no bids are received, may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the collection, storage, and transportation of abandoned motor vehicles and abandoned scrap metal; provided, however, that a unit of government may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the collection and storage of not more than five abandoned motor vehicles without advertising for or receiving bids in any 120- day period.

Subd. 9. This Section shall not apply to  premises  on  which  a  duly licensed junk  dealer properly carries on such licensed business, nor shall it apply to a disposal area operated by a governmental unit.

SECTION 10.22.	ABANDONING A MOTOR VEHICLE.	It is unlawful for
any person to abandon a motor vehicle on any public or private property without the consent of the person in control of such property. For the purpose of this Section, a "motor vehicle" is as defined in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 169.

SECTION 10.23.	LOITERING IN STREETS OR PUBLIC PLACES.

Subd. 1.   Definition.   The term "loiter," as used in this Section,  means and includes (1) obstruction of a sidewalk or public way or the free and unhampered passage of pedestrians or vehicles; (2) interfering with any person lawfully on the premises by obstructing passage; (3) refusing to move on when so requested by a peace officer when the request is made to prevent  such obstruction or interference.

Subd. 2. Unlawful Act. It is unlawful for any person to loiter upon public property, including streets and sidewalks.

SECTION 10.24.	MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY.

Subd. 1.     It is the primary responsibility of any owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land to maintain any weeds or grass growing thereon at a height of not more than six inches; to remove all public health or safety hazards therefrom;
 
to	install	or	repair   water	service	lines   thereon;	and   to   treat	or	remove insect-infested or diseased trees thereon.

Subd. 2. If any such owner or occupant fails to assume the primary responsibility described in Subdivision 1 of this Section, and after notice given by the Public Works Director has not within seven days of such notice complied, the City may cause such work to be done and the expenses thus incurred shall be a lien upon such real estate. After an initial citing for non-compliance, property becoming non-compliant, after the first notice, shall be cause for immediate action without notice to bring the property into compliance. The City Clerk shall certify to the County Auditor of Goodhue County a statement of the amount of the cost incurred by the City. Such amount together with interest shall be entered  as a special assessment against such lot or parcel of land and be collected in the same manner as real estate taxes. The City shall set a fee for each out-of-compliance parcel by Ordinance, and said fee shall cover administrative costs in addition to any costs incurred in the cleanup and maintenance work that the City causes to be completed.

SECTION 10.25.	GRAFFITI.

Subd. 1. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the terms defined herein shall have the meaning indicated:

1.	"City" - the City of Red Wing, State of Minnesota.

2.	"Deface" - to negatively alter the appearance of something by removing, distorting, adding to, or covering all or any part thereof.

3.	"Graffiti" - any writing, printing, mark, sign, symbol, figure, design, inscription or other drawing scratched, scrawled, printed, drawn or otherwise placed on any natural edifice, surface of a building, wall, sidewalk, sign, phone pole or train car or any permanent structure on public or private property which has the effect of defacing the property.

4.	"Graffiti Materials" - includes includes painting, aerosol or pressurized containers of paint, indelible markers, ink, dye or any other substance capable of defacing property.

5.	"Vandalism" - willful damage, destruction, or defacement of public or private property.

6.	"Owner" and "Property Owner" - any public entity or any person leasing, occupying, having the right to possession and/or control of any property real or personal located within the City boundaries.
 
Subd. 2.
Graffiti Material.
 
Unlawful  Conduct,   Creation  of  Graffiti  and  Possession  of
 

A It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally place graffiti on any surface located on public property, or on any exterior surface located on private property.

B. It shall be unlawful for any property owner to allow graffiti to be placed on any exterior surface on the owner's property.

Subd. 3.	Owner's Responsibility.

A The owner shall notify the Police Department within 24 hours upon discovering graffiti that has been placed upon the property.

B. After they have notified the Police Department, the owner of such property shall remove or cover over any graffiti which has been placed upon the property.

C. Within 48 hours after notifying the Police Department the owner of such property shall initiate efforts to cover or remove said graffiti explained in Subdivision 3D below.

D.	Within 120 hours after notifying the Police Department, the graffiti shall be completely removed or covered over by the following methods:

1.	Owner shall, at their expense remove or cover over, or cause to be removed or covered over, all graffiti on exterior surfaces of owner's property.

2.	If the owner is unable to remove or cover over the graffiti from private property, the owner shall immediately request the City  remove  or cover over the graffiti. The City may make arrangements for the removal or coverage of the graffiti with an independent agency. The cost of cleanup shall be borne by the City and the agency working with the City and shall not be passed on to the  private  property owner.

3.	In the event the person or persons responsible for the graffiti are convicted and the Court orders the offender(s) to pay restitution for the cost of the cleanup, and the property owner or the City have expended funds to remove and/or cover  over  the  graffiti,  the restitution shall be directed to the property owner or the City in the amounts that they expended removing or covering over the graffiti.
 
Subd. 4.      Cost of Cleanup of Graffiti.   In the event the City or an agent of the City removes and/or covers over the graffiti, an accurate record of the cost incurred therefor shall be kept.

SECTION 10.26.	DISORDERLY  PROPERTY.

Subd. 1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to enhance the public health, safety and welfare by prohibiting continued or repeated nuisance events at properties in the community and to recoup extraordinary costs incurred in policing such events.

Subd. 2.  Definitions.  Whenever used in this section the following terms shall have the meaning given below:

1. "Disorderly Property" - a building, dwelling, establishment,  premises or place where nuisance events occur. If the building, dwelling, establishment,	premises or place is a multi-unit dwelling or residence, hotel or motel, or commercial or office building, this definition only includes the specific areas or units in which the nuisance events occur.

2.	"Nuisance Event" - an event requiring special police services in order to protect the public peace, health, safety and welfare. A nuisance event includes, but is not limited to, the following:

(a)	Unlawful sale, possession, storage, delivering, g1v1ng, manufacture, cultivation or use of a controlled substance or paraphernalia for use of a controlled substance;

(b)	Prostitution or prostitution related activity;

(c)	Illegal gambling or gambling related activity;

(d)	Unlicensed sale of alcohol beverages or unlawful sales or gifts of alcoholic	beverages by an unlicensed person or unlawful consumption of alcoholic beverages;

(e)	Loud and boisterous conduct, noises, and activities that disturb the peace;

(f)	Events between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. which disturb  the peace and tranquility of the neighborhood;

(g)	Congregating in a tumultuous, noisy or rowdy crowd;

(h)	Fighting or use of obscene or inflammatory language;
 

(i)	Loud music constituting a nuisance or disturbing the peace;

(j)	Activities  causing  excessive  pedestrian  or  vehicular  traffic  and parking problems and congestion;

(k)	Indecent exposure or lewd conduct.

3.	"Owner" - a person or persons shown on the official property records of the County to be the record owner of the property.

4.	"Responsible Person" - a person who owns and/or is in charge of a disorderly property and/or a person who organized and hosted a nuisance event. If a responsible person is a minor, the responsible person's parents shall also be considered responsible persons for purposes of recouping City costs  associated  with  extraordinary police measures.

5.	"Extraordinary Police Measures" - police officers, equipment and services required for policing a subsequent nuisance event at a disorderly property after the responsible person or persons have received the notice required under this section.

6.	"Last Known Address" - the address shown on the official property records of the County or a more recent address of which the Police have actual knowledge. In the event no address is listed or known to the police, the address shall be that obtained by the police after a reasonable search.

7.	"Notice of Disorderly Property" - a notice stating that a  nuisance event has occurred on the property and that the property may be charged the costs of providing extraordinary police measures in the event of a future nuisance event within 60 days. The notice shall be served upon the responsible person or persons after the initial nuisance event at a property.

8.	"Service of Notice" - the notice required by this section may be served by personal service or by mailing the notice first class with the United States Postal Service addressed to the responsible person at their last known address.

Subd. 3.	Prohibited conduct.

A No person shall own,  operate,  manage,  maintain,  or  conduct  a disorderly property, or invite or attempt to invite others to visit or remain in such disorderly property.
 

B.	No person shall visit or remain in a disorderly property for the purpose of aiding, abetting, or engaging in prohibited conduct occurring in such disorderly property.

C.	No person shall visit or remain in a disorderly property knowing,  or having reason to know, that prohibited conduct in violation of this section is then occurring.

D.	No person shall, as owner or agent, let a building or portion thereof knowing it is intended to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section, nor permit a building or portion thereof to be used for any such prohibited purpose.

E. No person shall fail or refuse to pay fees properly assessed for extraordinary police services under this ordinance.

Subd. 4.	Police response and services.

A Initial response to nuisance event. After any police officer responds to any nuisance event and determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety, or general welfare, the police officer may serve a written notice of disorderly property to the responsible person or persons.

B.	Response to subsequent nuisance event. If, after a written notice of disorderly property is served pursuant to this section, a subsequent nuisance event at the property within 60 days of the original event requires extraordinary police measures, the responsible  person  or persons shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred in providing the extraordinary police measures up to $1000 per nuisance event in addition to any criminal charges that may arise from the event. The City reserves the right to seek reimbursement for costs exceeding
$1000 through other legal remedies or procedures.

C.	Costs; collection. The Police Chief shall notify the City Finance Director in writing of the provision of extraordinary police measures, and shall include in such notification the name and address of the responsible person or persons, the date and time of the nuisance event giving rise to the measures, and a description of the police measures provided, complete with a detailed breakdown of  the  costs for  such  measures. The Finance Director shall make the appropriate billings and take all steps necessary and available to collect upon them.

D.	Administrative Appeal. An  administrative   appeal  of  a  fee  for extraordinary  police measures  may be made to the City Council.   The
 
request for an appeal hearing shall be submitted to the Finance Director within 10 days of receipt of the billing. The request for an appeal shall state with specificity the grounds for appealing the charges, and shall state the exact relief requested. The Council may modify or excuse the charges upon a finding that the  appellant made a good faith effort to prevent or remedy the situation that led to the fee, or that the required notice was not served upon the responsible person.

SECTION 10.27	MANUFACTURE,  DELIVERY, POSSESSION, SALE, ADVERTISEMENT,  AND USE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA


Subd. 1.	Purpose.  The purpose of this Section is to:

A   Regulate the manufacture, delivery, possession, sale, advertisement, and use of drug paraphernalia and thereby deter the illegal use of controlled substances in the City of Red Wing;

B.  Reduce the availability of drug paraphernalia in order to prevent their availability from inducing, promoting, suggesting, or increasing the public acceptability of controlled substances; and

C. Protect and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by prohibiting the manufacture, delivery, possession, sale, advertisement, and use of drug paraphernalia.

Subd. 2.	Definition.  As used in this Section, the term "drug paraphernalia" means:

All equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body, a controlled substance in violation of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 152, as amended.  The term "drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to:

A   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance is or can be derived;

B.	Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing one or more controlled substances;
 
C.	Isomeric or isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;

D.	Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances;

E.  Scales and/or balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;

F.	Diluents and adulterants such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;

G.	Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana;

H.	Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;

I.	Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;

J.	Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;

K.	Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenternally injecting controlled substances into the human body; and

L.	Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, including, but not limited to:

1.	Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;

2.	Water pipes;

3.	Carburetion tubes and devices;
 
4.	Smoking and/or carburetion masks;

5.	"Roach clips," meaning objects used to hold burning material such as a marijuana cigarette, which has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;

6.	Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;

7.	Chamber pipes;

8.	Carburetor pipes;

9.	Electric pipes;

10.	Air-driven pipes;

11.	Chillums and/or "one hitters" or "one hit pipes;"

12.	Bongs; and

13.	Ice pipes or chillers.


Subd. 3.  Evidence. In determining whether an object is "drug paraphernalia," a court or other authority may consider, in addition to all other relevant factors, the following:

A	Statements by an owner, or by anyone in control, of the object, concerning its use;

B.	Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or anyone in control, of the object under any State or federal law relating to controlled substances and/or drug paraphernalia within the ten (10) year period immediately preceding an alleged violation of this Ordinance;

C.	The proximity of the object, in space and time, to any controlled substance;

D.	The existence of any residue of any controlled substance or substances on or in the object;

E.		Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or anyone in control, of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this Section; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control, of the object, as to a direct violation of this Section shall not prevent a
 
finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;

F.	Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;

G.	Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;

H.	National, Statewide, and/or local advertising concerning the object's use, intended use, and/or design;

I.	The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;

J.	Whether the owner, or anyone in control, of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products, a medical or dental care provider, or a pharmacist;

K.	Direct and/or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object( s) to the total sales of a business enterprise;

L.	The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and/or

M.	Expert testimony, including testimony by law enforcement officers, concerning the use of the object.

Subd. 4.	Offenses.

A		Possession and Use. It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, any drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body any controlled substance in violation of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 152,
as amended, or any other State or Federal law, rule, or regulation
governing the manufacture, delivery, sale, advertisement, possession, and/or use of controlled substances.

B.	Manufacture, Sale, or Delivery.  It is unlawful for any person or entity to sell, deliver, possess with the intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver drug paraphernalia knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human
 
body a controlled substance in violation of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 152, as amended, or any other State or Federal law, rule, or regulation governing the manufacture, delivery, sale, advertisement, possession, and/or use of controlled substances.

C.	Advertising.   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale or delivery of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia, or display or advertise any object for sale knowing, or under circumstances where one should know, that the object will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate,  grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 152, as amended, or any other State or Federal law, rule, or regulation governing the manufacture, delivery, sale, advertisement, possession, and/or use of controlled substances.

D.	Minors.  Any person 18 years of age or over who violates Paragraph 2 of this Subdivision by selling or delivering drug paraphernalia and said sale or delivery is to a person who is under 18 years of age and at least 3 years his or her junior shall be considered to have violated this Paragraph, as well as Paragraph 2 of this Subdivision.

E.		Separate Offenses.  Each violation of this Section, as well as each day of a continued violation shall be considered a separate offense.

F.	Civil Forfeiture. All drug paraphernalia as defined in this Section are subject to forfeiture, subject to all applicable provisions of Minnesota Statutes.

G.	Severability.  If any provision of this Section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or application of this Section which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application; to this end, the provisions of this Section are severable.

H.	Violation a Misdemeanor.   Every person or entity who violates this Section, or any subdivision, paragraph, or provision thereof, by performing an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished for a misdemeanor.
 
SECTION 10.28.	SMOKING AND USE OF ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICES

Subd. 1.	Definition.  As used in this section, the terms used shall have the following meanings:

1.	"Electronic delivery device" - any product containing or delivering nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking in the delivery of nicotine or any other substance through inhalation of vapor from the product, including any component part of a product.

2.	"Use" - the inhaling or exhaling of vapor from any electronic delivery device, and the carrying of an electronic delivery device that is turned on or otherwise activated.

3.	"Smoking" - inhaling or exhaling smoke from any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted tobacco or plant product and the carrying of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other lighted tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation.

Subd. 2.	Indoor Use.  The use of electronic delivery devices is prohibited in any location in which smoking is prohibited pursuant to the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act, as it may be amended from time to time.

Subd. 3.	Outdoor Smoking and Use.  Smoking and the use of electronic delivery devices is prohibited in the following locations:

A   Outdoor seating areas at restaurants, sidewalk cafes licensed under Chapter 6 of the City Code, and liquor establishments, except that such businesses may designate outdoor seating area where smoking and the use of electronic delivery devices is allowed by prominently displaying signs in the area alerting patrons of that designation;

B.  Within 15 feet of ventilation intakes of public places and places of work, as defined by the Minnesota Clean Air Act;

C.  Within 25 feet of any posted public transportation stop; and

D.  Outdoor public events held on property owned or controlled by the City, except in designated smoking areas as identified by the City or by an individual or entity who applies for the private use of public property ("PUPP").  In the case of a PUPP application, the applicant will be responsible for signage at the event designating smoking and non­ smoking areas and for ensuring that smoking and use of electronic delivery devices is confined to designated smoking areas.
 

Subd. 4.	Enforcement.

A A proprietor, person, or entity who owns, leases, manages, operates, or otherwise controls an area in which smoking or the use of electronic delivery devices is prohibited under this section shall make reasonable efforts to prevent such smoking or use by:

1.	Posting appropriate signs;

2.	Not providing smoking or electronic delivery device equipment, including ashtrays;

3.	Refusing to serve, assist, or transact with an individual in violation of this section; and,

4.	Asking any person who violates this section to refrain from smoking or using an electronic delivery device and, if the person does not comply, asking the person to leave.

B.  Any affected party may institute an action in any court with jurisdiction to enjoin repeated violations of this section.

Subd. 5.	Violations.

A  Any person who violates this section is guilty of a petty misdemeanor.

B.  Any proprietor, person, or entity who owns, leases, manages, operates, or otherwise controls an area in which smoking or the use of electronic delivery devices is prohibited under this section who knowingly fails to comply with the provisions of this section is guilty of a petty misdemeanor.

Subd. 6.	Licensed Establishments.  Two or more violations of this section by the holder of a tobacco license issued by the City under Chapter 6 of the City Code shall be adequate grounds for the denial, refusal to renew, revocation, or suspension of such license.

SECTION 10.29. ALTERNATIVE CIVIL REMEDY. Without affecting any other provision in this Chapter, the City, with respect to any violation of Sections 10.01, 10.02,  10.11,  10.12,  10.13, and 10.25 may pursue a criminal prosecution and penalty or, either in the alternative or in conjunction with  a  criminal prosecution, declare through the City Council that there exists upon publicly or privately owned lands or premises a public nuisance. Upon seven days written notice to the owner of  such premises or lands as shown by the records in the office of the County Auditor, or upon oral notice delivered to the owner or his agent
 
or attorney in open court, the City may remove the nuisance and certify the cost of such removal as any other special assessment.

SECTION 10.30.	VIOLATION  A  MISDEMEANOR.	Upon  conviction  of
violating this Chapter,  a person shall be punished for a misdemeanor  except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
 
Title

CHAPTER 12	SUBDIVISION  REGULATIONS (PLATTING)
 
Page
 

 
Section 12.01
12.02
12.03
12.04
12.05
12.06
12.07
12.08
12.09
12.10
12.11
12.12
12.13
12.14
 
Purpose Scope Definitions
Platting Procedure
Preliminary Plat and Final Plat Requirements Minimum Plat Design Standards
Engineering and Construction Standards
Required Improvements and Financial Arrangements Public Parks, Trails and Open Space Dedication Other Subdivision Methods
Modifications, Exceptions and Variances Findings of Fact
Compliance
Violation a Misdemeanor
 
12-1
12-1
12-1
12-7
12-11
12-16
12-22
12-27
12-31
12-36
12-37
12-37
12-38
12-38
 
CHAPTER12

SUBDIVISION  REGULATIONS (PLATTING)



SECTION 12.01. PURPOSE.  The  process  of  dividing  raw  land  into home sites, or separate parcels for other uses, is one of the most important factors in the growth of any community. Few activities have a more lasting effect upon its appearance and environment. Once the land has been subdivided into urban lots, and the streets, homes, and other structures have been constructed, the basic character of this permanent addition to the City has become firmly established.  It is then virtually impossible to alter its basic character without substantial expense. In most subdivisions, roads and streets must be maintained and various public services must be provided. The welfare of the entire City is seriously affected. Consequently, it is in the interest of the general public, the developer, and the future owners that subdivisions be conceived, designed, and developed in accordance with sound rules and proper standards. All subdivisions of land hereafter submitted for approval shall fully comply, in all respects, with the regulations   set   forth   herein.      It   is   the   purpose   of   these   regulations   to:
(1)	encourage  well  planned, efficient,  and  attractive  subdivisions  by establishing
adequate standards for design and construction; (2) provide for the health and safety of residents by requiring properly designed streets, storm sewer facilities, sanitary sewer facilities and water distribution facilities (3) place the cost of improvements against those benefiting from their construction; (4)  secure  the rights of the public with respect to public lands and waters; and (5) set  the minimum requirements necessary to protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare.

SECTION 12.02.  SCOPE.  The  rules  and  regulations  governing  plats and the subdivision of land contained herein shall apply within the City and other land as permitted by State Statutes. In the event of overlapping jurisdiction within the prescribed area, the extent of jurisdiction shall be determined and agreed upon between the City and other communities concerned. Except in the case of resubdivision, this Chapter shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Goodhue County Recorder prior to the effective date of this Chapter, nor is it intended by this Chapter to repeal, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances except those specifically repealed by, or in  conflict with this Chapter;  or  with private restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant, or other private agreement, or with restrictive covenants governing the land. Where this Chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the land than is imposed or required  by such existing provisions of law, City Code provisions, contract or deed, the provisions of this Chapter shall control.

SECTION 12.03. DEFINITIONS. The following terms, as used  in this Chapter, shall have the meanings stated:
 

1.	"Alley" - a public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a street and not intended for general traffic circulation.

2.	"Arterial Street" - see Major Thoroughfare in the Zoning Chapter.

3.	"Block" - the enclosed area within the perimeter of roads, property lines or boundaries of the subdivision or a combination of the above and a lake, stream, or river.

4.	"Boulevard" - the portion of the street right-of-way  between the curb line and the property line.

5.	"Cluster Development" - a pattern of subdivision development which places detached housing, duplexes, or townhouse units into compact groupings	while providing a network of commonly owned or dedicated open space.

6.	"Collector Street" - a street which carries traffic from minor streets to thoroughfares or from thoroughfare to thoroughfare. It includes the principal entrance streets of a residential development and for circulation within such a development.

7.	"Comprehensive Plan" - the policies, statements, goals, and interrelated	plans for private and public land and water use, transportation and City facilities, including recommendations for planned execution, documented in texts, City Code provision and maps, which constitute the guide for the future development of the City or any portion of the City.

8.	"Contour map" - a map on which irregularities of land surface are shown by lines connecting points of equal elevations.  Contour interval is the vertical height between contour lines.

9.	"Construction Season" - the period of time from spring through fall of one calendar year after State road weight limits have been removed, when exterior construction with heavy machinery may logically occur.

10.	"Copy" - a print or reproduction made from a tracing.

11.	"Cul-de-sac"  -  a  minor  street  with  only  one  outlet  and  having  a permanent traffic turnaround.
 
12.	"Development" - the construction of a new building or other structure on a zoning lot,  the relocation of an existing building on  another zoning lot, or the use of open land for a new one.

13.	"Disposal Area -  On-Site Sewage Treatment"  - that  ground  within the confines of the lot that does not contain buildings and has an elevation of at least 80 inches above the highest known or calculated water table or bedrock formation; does not slope in excess of 13 percent; and meets the requirements of permeability as determined by the rate of water percolation in the soil.

14.	"Double Frontage Lots" - tots which have a front line abutting on one street and a back or rear line abutting on another street.

15.	"Drainage Course" - a water course, swale, or other indenture for the drainage of surface water.

16.	"Dwelling Unit" - a building, or portion thereof,  designed  for occupancy by one family for residential purposes and having private cooking facilities.

17.	"Easement" - a grant  by  an  owner  of  land for  a  specific  use  by persons or governmental agencies, other than the owner.

18.	"Floodplain" - see definition and  standards  in  the  Zoning   and Floodplain Chapters.

19.	"Key Map" - a map drawn to comparatively  small scale which definitely shows the area proposed to be platted in relation to known geographical features, i.e., town centers, lakes, roads.

20.	"Lot" - a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a principal building or a group of such buildings and  accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this Chapter or other related City Code provisions.

21.	"Lot, Buildable" - a single tract of land, under separate ownership, which at time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon. Said buildable lot shall meet or exceed all of the requirements of this Chapter as it relates to area, size, dimensions, and access frontage as required for a new lot located in the same zoning district.

22.	"Lot Butt" - a lot at the end of a block and located  between  two corner lots.
 

23.	"Lot, Corner" - a lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees.  A  lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purpose of this Chapter if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meets the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.

24.	"Lot, Interior" - any lot other than a corner lot.

25.	"Lot, Through" - any interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all yards of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yard setbacks shall be provided as required.

26.	"Lot Area" - the total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot.

27.	"Lot Coverage" - the part or percent of the lot occupied by a building including accessory buildings, and other non-porous surfaces.

28.	"Lot Depth" - the  horizontal distance  between the front and  rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines.

29.	"Lot Lines" - the lines bounding a lot as defined herein:

(a)	"Front Lot Line" - in the case of an interior lot, is that line separating said lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, or double frontage lot, is that line separating said lot from either street.

(b)	"Lot Corner" - angle or curve point of any lot.

(c)	"Rear Lot Line" - that lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel the front lot line, not less than ten feet long lying farthest from the front line and wholly within the lot.

(d)	"Side Lot Line" - any lot line or other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side  lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line.

30.	"Lot of Record" - a lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Goodhue
 
County; or a parcel of land, the deed to which was  recorded in the office of said County Recorder prior to the adoption of this Chapter.

31.	"Lot Width" - the horizontal distance between  the  side  lot  lines, measured at the two points where the building line, or setback line intersects the side lot line.

32.	"Metes and Bounds Description" - a description of real  property which is not described by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but which is described in writing by starting at a known point and describing the bearings and distances of the lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineates a  fractional portion of a section, lot or area by described lines or portions thereof.

33.	"Minimum Subdivision Design Standards" - the  guides,  principles and specifications for the preparation of subdivision plans indicating among other things, the minimum and maximum dimensions of the various elements set forth in the plan.

34.	"Minor Street" - a street of limited continuity used primarily for access to the abutting properties and the local needs of a neighborhood.

35.	"Natural Water Way" - a natural passageway in the surface of the earth so situated and having such a topographical nature that surface water flows through it from other areas  before  reaching  a final ponding area. The term also includes  all drainage  structures that have been constructed or placed for the purpose of conducting water from one place to another.

36.	"Service Road" - a minor street parallel to and adjacent to  high volume arterial  streets and highways, which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.

37.	"Outlot" - a non-buildable lot included within the boundary of a recorded plot which has been set aside as a park or other land dedicated to public use or reserved for private sale.

38.	"Owner" - an individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation,	trust, or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under these regulations.

39.	"Pedestrian Way" - a public right-of-way across or within a block, to be used by pedestrians and which may be used for the installation of underground utility lines.
 

40.	"Preliminary Plat" - the map or drawing indicating the  proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission and	Council for their consideration, in compliance with the Comprehensive Development Plan and these regulations along with required supporting data.

41.	"Plat, Final" - a map or drawing which graphically delineates the boundary of land parcels for the purpose of identification and record of title. The plat is a recorded legal document and must conform to all Minnesota State laws.

42.	"Private Street" - a street serving as vehicular access to two or more parcels of land which is not dedicated to the public but is owned by one or more private parties.

43.	"Protective or Restrictive Covenants" - contracts  entered  into between private parties and constituting  a restriction on the use of private property within a subdivision for the benefit of the property owners, and providing mutual protection against undesirable aspects of developments which would tend to impair physical, social, and/or economic integrity of any given area.

44.	"Reserve Strips" - a narrow strip of land placed between lot lines and streets to control access.

45.	"Right-of-Way" - the land covered by a public road or land dedicated for public use or for certain private use such as land over which a power line passes.

46.	"Setback" - (Defined in the Zoning Chapter).

47.	"Sketch Plan" - a drawing showing the proposed subdivision of property.	This plan is not necessarily drawn to scale and exact accuracy is not a requirement.

48.	"Street" - a publicly dedicated right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether	designed as street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court, or otherwise designated which provides the principal means of access to abutting property.

49.	"Street Width" - the shortest distance between the  line delineating the right-of-way of a street.
 
50.	"Subdivider" - the owner,  agent,  or  person  having  control  of  such land as the term is used in this Chapter.

51.	"Subdivision" - the division of a parcel of land after the effective date of this Chapter into two or more lots or parcels, for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development. The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.

52.	"Surveyor" - a land surveyor registered under Minnesota State laws.

53.	"Thoroughfare, Major" - an arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate municipal area and the region beyond, and is designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway, or equivalent term on the major thoroughfare plan used to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the major thoroughfare plan.

54.	"Tracing" - a plat or map drawn on transparent paper or cloth which can be reproduced by using regular reproduction procedures.

SECTION 12.04.	PLATTING PROCEDURE.

Subd. 1.	Preparing and Filing the Preliminary Plat.

A. When the subdivider is ready to prepare the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall have a surveyor and/or planner draw one which is in conformity with the requirements of this Chapter.

B.	The subdivider shall fill out a general zoning application form or other application blanks as may be required, and submit them to the Zoning Administrator.

C.	No grading, tree cutting, structures, utilities or other improvements shall be installed, constructed, or moved onto or off the proposed platted area from the date on which the original general zoning application form is submitted to the Zoning Administrator until such time as the final plat is approved,	denied or voided by the Council, unless specifically authorized by the Council.

D.	The subdivider shall furnish the Zoning Administrator with six copies of the preliminary plat and with proof of ownership or control over the land contained within the preliminary plat.

E.	Prior to consideration of the proposed preliminary plat by the City authorities, the subdivider shall pay the appropriate fee.   Such fee shall
 
be set, by ordinance,  under such terms  and conditions as the  Council may, from time to time, deem appropriate.

F.	The fee will be used to cover public expenses incurred in connection with the review of the preliminary plat and notification for the required public hearing.

Subd. 2.	Review of the Preliminary Plat.

A. When the subdivider is ready to submit a preliminary plat they shall contact the Zoning Administrator to set up a staff review meeting. The purpose of the staff review meeting is to provide an opportunity for city staff to make comments and suggestions about the preliminary plat.

B.	After the staff review meeting, the subdivider may submit the preliminary plat and application to the Zoning Administrator who will refer copies to the  Engineering Department, Public Works Department, and the  Fire Department	for  review  and  comment.  The  Planning   Commission Chairman	shall place the  preliminary  plat  on  the  next  regularly scheduled Planning  Commission  agenda  provided  such  meeting  is at least 15 days hence.

C.	If the proposed subdivision abuts any State or Federal highway, the Zoning Administrator shall also refer one copy to the Minnesota Department of Transportation District 6 Office for review as required by State law; if it adjoins a public body of water one copy shall be referred to the State Commissioner of Natural Resources for review; if it abuts a County highway, one copy shall be referred to the  Goodhue  County Public Works Department.

D.	The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a staff report representing all affected departments and regulatory authority and submit this report to the Planning Commission expressing recommendations for approval, disapproval or revisions.

E.	The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat with notice given as follows:

1.	Newspaper of General Circulation.  The Zoning Administrator shall publish notice of the time and purpose of the public hearing at least once, not less than ten calendar days prior to the hearing in the City's Official Newspaper.

2.	Affected Property Owners.  The Zoning Administrator shall mail notice, not less than calendar days prior to the hearing, to all owners of record of property located in whole or in part within 500 feet of the
 
boundaries of the subject property, as identified by the appropriate records.  The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners, or defects in the notice, shall not invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with this Section has been made.

F.	The subdivider or their representative shall appear before the Planning Commission in order to answer questions concerning  the  preliminary plat.	The subdivider may be required to accompany the Planning Commission for an  on-site review of the site conditions and may be required by the Zoning Administrator to stake and/or flag the center lines and proposed elevations of all streets at intervals of not more than 200 feet.

G.	The report of the Planning Commission should be submitted to the Council after the public hearing on the preliminary plat. If the Planning Commission fails  to make a report, the Council shall  proceed without said report. Failure to receive a report from the Planning Commission as herein provided shall not invalidate the proceedings or actions of the Council.
H.	Approval of the preliminary plat is an acceptance of the concept  and general layout and indicates to the subdivider that the subdivider may proceed toward fulfilling the necessary steps for approval of the plat in accordance with the terms of  approval.  Such  approval  shall  not constitute final acceptance of the subdivision.

I.	The Council may require modifications, changes and revisions of the preliminary plat, as it deems necessary to protect the  health,  safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the City.

J.	If the preliminary plat is not approved by the Council the reasons for such action shall be recorded in the proceedings and transmitted to the applicant.	The subdivider may reapply 180 days after denial of said preliminary plat by the Council.

K.	Should the subdivider desire to amend the preliminary plat as previously approved the subdivider may submit an amended preliminary plat which shall follow the same procedure as a new preliminary plat.

L.	A preliminary plat shall be valid for a period of two years from the date on which it was approved by Council. After two years, unless extensions are granted by the Council, the preliminary plat shall be considered  null and  void and the subdivider shall be required to refile the plat request and begin the subdivision process over in its entirety.
 
Subd. 3.	Preparing and Filing the Final Plat.

A. After approval of the preliminary plat, the final plat may be prepared. It shall incorporate all changes, modifications, and revisions required, otherwise, it shall conform to the approved preliminary plat.

B.	In the case of large subdivisions to be platted in phases, the subdivider will be required to prepare a final plat encompassing the  entire preliminary plat boundary with future phases being platted as outlots.

C.	All  plats shall  comply  with  the  provisions  of  Minnesota  State Statutes and the requirements of these regulations.

D.	The subdivider shall file six copies of the final plat with the Zoning Administrator not later than two years from the date of approval of the preliminary plat by the Council. If this is not done, the approval of the preliminary plat will be considered null and void unless an extension is requested in writing by the subdivider and granted by the Council.

E.	The subdivider shall submit, for review by the City Attorney, proof of ownership including a current Abstract of Title or a Registered Property Certificate along with any unrecorded documents and an Opinion of Title by the subdivider's attorney or, at the City's option, a Title Insurance Policy, the amount to be determined by the City, with the City named as an additional insured. All costs incurred in providing any Abstract, Certificate, Opinion, Title Insurance Policy, or other documents required herein, shall be paid by the subdivider.

Subd. 4.	Review of the Plat.

A. The Zoning Administrator shall, upon receipt of the final plat and final plat application, provide copies to the Engineering Department; the Public Works Department; and the Fire Department. The Planning Commission Chairman shall place the final plat on the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission agenda provided such meeting is at least 15 days hence.
B.	The Zoning Administrator shall present a report on the final plat to the Planning Commission. Upon  action  by  the  Planning  Commission,  a report shall be prepared to City Council expressing the Commission recommendation for approval, disapproval or revisions.

C.	The Council shall take action on the final plat. This shall be done no more than 120 days after the final plat is filed with the Zoning Administrator unless an extension has been granted. If said plat is not approved, the reasons for such action shall be recorded in the official proceedings and transmitted to the subdivider.
 

D.	After final approval by the Council, the county surveyor shall review the plat for approval.

E.	Upon receiving the final plat as approved by the county surveyor, the Council may direct the Mayor, City Clerk and  Planning  Commission Chair to sign the plat and the subdivider shall then record it with the Goodhue County Recorder within 120 days of Council approval or the approved plat shall be considered null and void, unless extended by the City Council.

F.	The subdivider shall immediately upon recording, furnish the City Engineering Department with a reproducible copy, either a mylar or its equivalent, of the recorded final plat. Failure to furnish such copies shall be grounds for refusal to issue building permits for the lots within this plat.

G.	A subdivider may file a final plat in stages or phases.  When  each successive stage is presented for final approval the City shall recognize the original preliminary plat and shall  not  require  the  subdivider  to reapply for preliminary plat approval except where:

1.	More than two years has passed since preliminary plat approval.

2.	There are substantial changes on the final plat in comparison to the original, approved preliminary plat.

3.	A zoning amendment  has been adopted which requires a change in use or lot size for land not yet platted or recorded.

 
SECTION 12.05.	PRELIMINARY REQUIREMENTS.
 
PLAT	AND	FINAL	PLAT
 

Subd. 1. Data Required for the Preliminary Plat. Information shall be provided in the most current digital High Accuracy Reference Network (HARN) coordinate system as follows:

A.	Identification and Description:

1.	Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or be alike in pronunciation of the name of any plat theretofore recorded in the county.

2.	Legal description of property.
 
3.	Name and address of the record owner, and any agent having control of the land, subdivider, land surveyor, engineer and designer of the plan.

4.	Graphic scale not less than one inch to 200 feet.

5.	North point and key map of area showing well known geographical points for orientation within one-half  mile radius.

6.	Date of preparation.

7.	A completed City planning request form.

B.	Existing   conditions   to   be   presented   on   preliminary	plat   or   other document:

1.	Boundary lines shall be shown clearly and to such a degree of accuracy that it conforms to the plat so that no major changes are necessary in preparing said plat.

2.	Existing zoning classifications for  land in and abutting the subdivision.

3.	Approximate total acreage of the plat and total square feet of each lot and outlot shall be shown. Also, the approximate lot dimensions shall be shown for all lot lines.

4.	Location, right-of-way widths, and names of existing or platted streets	or other publicways, parks, and other public lands, permanent, private and public buildings  and structures,  easements and sections, municipal and school district lines within the plat and to a distance one hundred (100) feet beyond shall also be indicated.

5.	Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities within the preliminary plat area and to a distance of 100 feet beyond. Grades and locations of catch basins, manholes, hydrants, and street pavement width and type, shall also be shown.

6.	Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land, within 100 feet, identified by name and ownership, and also including all contiguous land owned or controlled by the subdivider.

7.	Topographic data including contours at vertical intervals of not more than one foot , except when approved by the Engineering Director shall  be  shown.     Water  courses,  marshes,  wooded  areas,  rock
 
outcrops,  power transmission  poles and  lines, and  other  significant features shall also be shown.

8.	A copy of all proposed private restrictions shall be submitted.

9.	Percolation test and soil boring  reports shall be  required  and prepared by a properly licensed professional for all on-site sewage disposal systems proposed.

10.	If severe soil limitations for the intended use are noted in the percolation test and soil boring reports plan or statement indicating the soil conservation practice or practices to be used to overcome said limitation shall be made part of the permit application.

11.	The 100 and 500 year Flood Plain lines if applicable and the height above the 100 year Flood Plain which is considered buildable by the Flood Plain provisions of the City Code shall be shown and labeled on the preliminary plat. The flood way and flood fringe within  the regulatory flood plain shall also be shown. A readily identifiable elevation benchmark shall be noted on the preliminary plat.

12.	Slopes of 25 percent or more as measured over any segment of 50 horizontal feet shall be designated on the preliminary plat.

13.	All vegetation types shall be labeled and located on the preliminary plat using categories of vegetation such as forest, cultivated, prairie, grass, or other specific vegetative types.

C.	Preliminary Plat Design Features shall include:

1.	Locations  and  widths   of  proposed   right-of-ways,   streets,  alleys, pedestrian ways, utility easements, curb lines and curb cuts.

2.	Proposed street names shall be shown.

3.	Layout numbers and preliminary dimensions of lots and blocks.

4.	Proposed front and side street building setback lines.

5.	Location  and  size  of  proposed  sanitary  sewer  lines,  stormwater management systems, and water main.

6.	Profiles of proposed streets, sewer lines and water mains.
 
7.	Areas, other than streets, alleys,  pedestrian  ways  and  utility easements, intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use shall include the size of such area or areas in acres or square feet.

8.	Location, elevation, and orientation of a typical housing unit on each lot in residential areas and where a driveway should be located.

D.	Other Information:

1.	Statement of the proposed use of lots  including  the  type  of residential buildings with number of proposed dwelling units; type of business or industry so as to reveal the effect of the development on traffic, fire hazards, and congestion of population.

2.	Source of water supply.

3.	Provisions for sewage disposal, surface water or storm sewer drainage and flood control.

4.	If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning  plan for the areas, including dimensions.

5.	Such other information as may be requested by the City Engineering Director, Zoning Administrator,  Planning Commission or City Council.

6.	Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that which is being proposed for the subdivision, the Planning Commission may require that the subdivider submit a sketch plan of the remainder of the property so as to show the possible relationships between the proposed subdivision and future subdivision. In any event, all subdivisions must be shown to relate well with existing or potential adjacent subdivisions and land use.

Subd. 2.	Data Required for the Final Plat.

A. The final plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor who is registered in the State of Minnesota and shall  comply  with  the  provisions  of Minnesota State Statutes and of these regulations.

B.	Form for approval by signature of County officials concerned with the recording of the plat:
 
1.	I hereby certify that  I have reviewed this plat and found  it to be in compliance with Chapter 505 Minnesota Statutes.

 
By  	 Goodhue County, MN
 
Date  	
 
County Surveyor
 

2.	I hereby certify that all delinquent taxes or tax certificates are paid or assigned  and  transferred,  entered  this	day  of	_ 20

 
By  	 Goodhue County, MN
 
Date  	
 
County Auditor
 

3.	I  hereby  certify  that  this  instrument  was  filed  in the  office  of  the
 
County  Recorder  for  record  this   	
 
day of	,  20_, at
 
 	 o'clock	.m. and was  duly  recorded  in Book	of plats on page  		

 
By  	 Goodhue County, MN
 
County Recorder
 

C.	Form for approval by signature of City officials concerned with the recording of the plat:

Approved  by the City Council of the City of Red Wing,  Minnesota this
 	day of	, 20	.

Signed:	_ Mayor
Attest:   	
City Clerk

D.	Form for identification of highwater mark: as determined by  the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources the highest known surface water elevation on this site is            feet above mean sea level, and the 100 year flood elevation on this site is	feet above mean sea level.

An elevation benchmark has been established on --------'
located at	with an elevation of	feet above
mean sea level.
 
SECTION 12.06.	MINIMUM PLAT DESIGN STANDARDS.

Subd. 1. Conformity With the Comprehensive  Plan  and  Zoning Regulations. The proposed subdivision shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Regulations as adopted by the City.

Subd. 2.	Land Requirements.   (Reserved)

Subd. 3.	Street Plan.

A. Proposed streets shall conform to transportation plans adopted by the State, County and City.

B.	Streets shall be logically related to the  topography  so  as to  produce usable lots and reasonable grades.

C.	Access shall be given to all lots and portions of the tract in  the subdivision,		and  to  adjacent  unsubdivided  parcels  unless   the topography	clearly indicates that such connection  is  not  feasible. Reserved strips and land-locked areas shall not be created.

D.	The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall  make provisions for the appropriate continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas.

E.	Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, but may be subdivided, the arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make provisions for the proper projection of streets into adjoining areas by carrying the new streets to the boundaries of the new subdivision at appropriate locations.

F.	Minor streets shall be laid out to discourage their use by through traffic.
Thoroughfares shall be reserved for through traffic by providing marginal access streets, interior streets for serving lots, or other means.

G.	Half or partial streets shall be permitted where essential to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other requirements and standards of these regulations provided satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street can be secured. No improvements shall be placed in said half street until the entire right-of­ way has been dedicated to the City.

H.	Wherever a tract to be subdivided  adjoins  an existing  half, or  partial street, the part of the street within such tract shall be platted.

I.	Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts.  The City may require that barriers
 
be placed at the end of the pavement or temporary  paved cul-de-sacs be constructed on such streets.

J.	Private roads without public utility easements shall  be  prohibited. (Private roads with public utilities may be approved by the City as part of a Planned Unit Development meeting the requirements of Chapter 11, Division 55-080).

K.	Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or planned major thoroughfare or a railroad right-of-way, a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such thoroughfare and right-of-way may be required for adequate protection of residential properties and separation of through and local traffic. Such service streets shall be located at  a distance from the major thoroughfare or railroad right-of-way suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial use and industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.

L.	The street arrangements shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of adjoining property in platting their own land and providing convenient access to it.

Subd. 4.   Cul-De-Sac   Streets.   Cul-de-sac   streets,   permanently designed as such, shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length, unless an exception is approved by City Council. Such an exception may be granted if it can be clearly shown that by reason of unfavorable land form, or the irregular shape of the land from which the subdivision is being made, a normal street pattern cannot be established, or that land would be wasted by not granting  such  an  exception. Such an exception may be approved as part of the plat approval process.

Subd. 5.	Street Design.

A. Minimum right-of-way widths and pavement widths (face-to-face of curb) for each type of public street or road shall be as follows:

Type of Street	Right-of-Way Width	Roadway Width

 
Thoroughfare
(Arterial)	100 feet
 
As determined by traffic needs
 

 
Collector Street Commercial or Industrial Service Street (Collector)
 
60 feet	32 feet



60 feet	36 feet
 

Minor Street (local)	60 feet	30 feet

 
Cul-de-sac	60 feet
turnaround  radius
 
40 feet
turnaround  radius
 

B.	Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate width, sufficient additional width shall be provided to meet the above standards.

C.	Additional right-of-way and roadway widths may be required to promote public safety and convenience when special conditions require it or to provide parking space in areas of intensive use.

D.	Extensions of existing streets with less right-of-way than prescribed above may be permitted by exception in special cases.

E.	Street Jog. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall be discouraged.

F.	Geometrics. All horizontal and vertical geometric street alignments shall be subject to approval by the City Engineering Director.

G.	Grades. Centerline gradients of less than 0.4 percent and greater than 10 percent shall be discouraged.

H.	Size of Intersection. Intersections of more than four corners shall be prohibited unless developed as a round-about.

I.	Corner Radii. Roadways of street intersection shall be rounded by a radius of not less than 15 feet. Roadways of alley-street intersections shall be rounded by a  radius of not less than 6 feet. Corners at the entrances to the turnaround portions of cul-de-sacs shall be rounded by a radius of not less than 15 feet.

J.	Curb and Gutter. Curb and gutter shall be included as part  of  the required street surface improvements and shall thus be designed for installation along both sides of all roadways except on permanently non­ buildable lots which may require extensive earth moving as determined by the Engineering Director.

Subd. 6.	Alley Design.

A. Except in the case of a planned unit development, either a public or private alley may be provided in a block where commercially zoned
 
property abuts a major thoroughfare or a major street.  An alley shall not be considered a public street frontage for any new lot.

B.	An alley right-of-way and pavement widths shall conform to the following minimum standards:

Right-of-Way
Classification	Width	Pavement

Industrial or Commercial	24 feet	22 feet

Residential (two-way)	
20 feet	
18 feet

Residential (one-way)	
16 feet	
14 feet

C.	Geometrics. All horizontal and vertical geometric alley alignments shall be subject to approval by the City Engineering Director.

D.	Grades. Centerline gradients of less than 0.4 percent and greater than 10 percent shall be discouraged.

Subd. 7.  Sidewalk  Widths.  All  sidewalks  shall  be  installed   at  a minimum width of five feet, or as determined by the City Engineering Director.

Subd. 8.	Public Utilities.

A. Water Supply. Extensions of the public water supply system shall, when available, be designed so as to provide public water service to each lot.

B.	Sewage Disposal. Extensions of the public sanitary sewer system shall, when available, be designed so as to  provide  public sewer service  to each lot.

C.	New public utilities shall not be shared facilities on private property without written easement agreements.

Subd. 9.  Drainage.  A complete and adequate drainage system design shall be required for the subdivision and may include a storm sewer system or a system of open ditches, culverts, pipes and catch basins, and ponding areas, or both systems. Safety covers  and/or grates shall be installed on all open storm sewer pipe inlets.

Subd. 10.	Easements.

A. Provided for Drainage and Utilities. Five-foot-wide drainage and utility easements shall be provided along all rear and side lot lines.  A ten-foot
 
wide drainage and utility easement shall be provided along all street frontages.	The City Engineering Director may require larger and/or additional drainage and utility easements.

B.	Dedication. Utility and  drainage easements shall be dedicated  to the City for the required use.

C.	Conservation Easements. Conservation  easements  dedicated  to  the City may be required within a plat to protect soil, drainage patterns, vegetation, or natural aesthetics, from disruption or damage due to new structures,	utilities, roads, grading, or tree cutting. A conservation easement shall not be utilized for public access or occupation.

D.	Controlled Access Easements. Controlled access easements dedicated to the State, County, or City may be required within a plat on  lots adjacent to a major thoroughfare, limited access highway, or collector street. The purpose of said easement is to eliminate lot owner driveway access to a public street where driveway access from a lot would be a second access on to the lot and where such driveway access is considered a safety, aesthetic, or drainage problem by the City or other units of government.

Subd. 11. Street Trees. Street trees shall be required and shall not be more than 80 feet apart nor closer than 40 feet apart with a minimum of 1 per lot. Trees shall be placed not closer than 10 feet to any driveway curb cut, nor closer than 40 feet to any corner. All trees and tree location plans shall be approved by the City Forester (See Subdivision 9 of Section 12.07). The City Forester shall have the authority to vary the standards described herein when, in their opinion, circumstances  prohibit compliance with said standards.

Subd. 12. Street Names. Names of  new  streets  shall  not  duplicate existing or platted street names unless a new street is a  continuation of or in alignment with the existing or platted street. In that event it shall bear the same name of the existing or platted street so in alignment. Street names shall conform to the City of Red Wing Street Naming and Property Numbering System as applicable.

Subd. 13.	Block Design.

A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding streets shall be such as to accommodate the size of residential lots required in the area by the Zoning Chapter and to provide for convenient access, circulation control, and safety of street traffic.

B.	In residential areas, other than water frontage,  blocks shall not be less than  300 feet  nor more than  1200 feet  in length  measured  along the
 
greatest dimension  of the enclosed  block area, unless minor variances are necessitated by topography or conformance with an adjoining plat.

C.	In blocks over 900 feet long, or in areas of multiple cul-de-sacs, 10 foot wide pedestrian  parkways with sidewalks may be required through the blocks in locations deemed necessary to public health, convenience and necessity.	Suitable paving and fencing shall be provided  by the developer.

D.	Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from the elements of design contained in this Subdivision if the nature of the use requires other treatment. In such cases, off-street parking for employees and customers shall be provided along with safe and convenient limited access to the street system. Space for off-street loading shall also be provided with a similar access. Extension of roads, railroad access right-of-way, and utilities shall be provided as necessary.

E.	Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots with a minimum depth as required by the Zoning Chapter except adjoining a lake, stream, railroad or thoroughfare or where one tier of lots is necessary because of topographic conditions.

Subd. 14.	Lot Requirements.

A. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines or radial to lake or stream shores unless topographic conditions necessitate a different arrangement.

B.	Each lot shall front upon a public street.

C.	No lot shall have less area or width than is required by zoning regulations applying to the area in which it is located, except as herein provided.

D.	Lots designed for commercial or  industrial purposes shall provide adequate off-the-street service, loading, and parking facilities.

E.	Building Sites. Each lot shall provide an adequate building site at least one	foot above the street grade or have a complete grading plan illustrated storm/surface drainage.

F.	Through or Double Frontage Lots. Such lots shall  not  be  permitted except where such lots abut a thoroughfare or major highway.

G.	Water Courses. Lots  abutting  upon  a  water  course,  drainageway, channel or stream shall have an additional depth or width, as required to
 
assure building sites that meet the Zoning Chapter lot size requirements exclusive of areas which may be inundated by a 100 year flood.

H.	Natural Features. In the subdividing of any land, regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, water  courses,  historic spots, or similar conditions, which if preserved  will  add  attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.

I.	Lot Remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of larger tract must be added to adjacent lots, or a  plan shown as to future use and platted as an outlot.

J.	Access to Thoroughfares.   In the case where a proposed plat is adjacent to a limited access highway, other major highway, or thoroughfare, there shall  be no direct vehicular access from  individual  lots to such streets and  roads. In the platting  of small  tracts of land fronting on  limited access  highways or thoroughfares where there is no other alternative a temporary   entrance  may  be  granted;  as  neighboring  land  becomes subdivided   and  better  access  arrangements  become  possible,  such temporary  access  permits  shall  become  void.   Other jurisdictions  may control access on limited access highways or major roadways.

K.	Political Subdivision Lines. No lot shall extend  over  a  political subdivision boundary or school district line.

L.	Large Lot Planning. In any area where lots are platted in excess of 24,000 square feet or 160 feet in width at the building setback line, a preliminary re-subdivision plan may be required showing a potential and feasible way in which the lot or lots may be resubdivided in future years for more intensive use of the land. The placement of buildings or structures upon such lots shall allow for potential resubdivision.

M.	Safety Fencing For Steep Slopes. On slopes of greater than 25%, the City may require the developer to place a construction-limit safety fence and/or a permanent four foot high safety cyclone or other suitable safety fence	after construction is completed but before occupancy has occurred.

 
SECTION 12.07.	ENGINEERING STANDARDS.
 
AND	CONSTRUCTION
 

Subd. 1.	Monuments.

A.  All lot corner pipes or iron rods shall be a minimum of one-half inch in diameter,  18 inches  in length, and  shall  be inscribed  with  the  license
 
number  of  the   land  surveyor   making  the  survey   as  prescribed   in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 389.

B.	Perimeter monuments shall be placed at all quarter-quarter section points within the subdivision or on its perimeter. At all section, quarter section, meander, or witness corners of the government  survey within the subdivision, on its perimeter or otherwise shown on the face of the plat, a Goodhue County cast iron monument shall be placed.  The notation "Goodhue County Monument" shall be placed on the face of the subdivision or plat by each monument so shown. In addition, a Goodhue County Monument shall be placed and shown on the plat or a certificate of survey filed for each government survey corner necessary to survey the boundaries of the plat if such monument has not been set and a certificate of survey filed.

C.	All U.S., State, County and other official benchmarks, monuments or triangular stations in or adjacent to the property  shall be preserved in position unless a relocation is approved by the controlling agency.

D.	The Zoning Administrator and the County Surveyor may, when the subdivision is essentially complete, require the developer to  have the plat restaked to replace those original monuments destroyed  or obliterated during the construction process.

Subd. 2.	Streets.

A. Street Grading. Streets shall be graded in accordance with  a plan or stages as approved by the City Engineering Director. The grading shall include the entire width of the right-of-way and shall provide a boulevard section, in addition to the minimum pavement width.

B.	Street Pavement. The design of street pavement for all streets covered by this regulation shall be in accordance with the State of MnDOT Road Design Manual for flexible pavements. The designed thickness of the surfacing elements shall be in accordance  with the flexible pavement design standard for road classifications as follows:
Classification	Pavement Design; Axle Load Thoroughfare, Collector Street
And Commercial or Industrial
Service Streets	As determined by traffic needs

Minor Streets and Marginal
Access Streets	7 ton minimum
 
C.	Rural Street Improvements.

1.	Streets in an agricultural  (A, AC, AR) district shall be surfaced with 8 inches of stabilized gravel to a surface width of 24 feet with a 4 foot shoulder on each side if the Council determines it would cause an undue hardship because of the lot sizes to require a concrete or bituminous surface.

2.	The requirements as set forth in item 1 above may be waived in lieu of a private road by the Council provided the subdivider enters into a binding agreement with the City regarding:

(a)	Granting the City an option to acquire the full right-of-way otherwise required by this Chapter for public street purposes along the entire length of such private road, at such time as the Council in its sole discretion determines that it is in the public interest to acquire title to the same, and without  any cost to the City;

(b)	Granting the City the right to use such private road for any reasonable public purpose including, but not limited to, travel by emergency	vehicle; and installation of public utilities and conveniences; and,

(c)	Containing a covenant enforceable  by the City and running with the land whereby subdivider and subsequent owners of land abutting said private road are bound to maintain such road, at all times, in a condition suitable for a use by emergency vehicles.

(d)	The City and the subdivider shall establish in writing an assessment procedure for all abutting, benefiting land in case public dedication and/or upgrading of the previously existing private road is officially petitioned for by abutting property owners or ordered in by the Council for public health, safety, welfare, or convenience  purposes.

D.	Gravel Surface. Streets that at the present time will only have a gravel surface shall be designed so the base and sub-base requirements  as set forth in MnDOT Road Design Manual for flexible pavement are met. In all cases at least the top eight inches of the street surface shall be of class 5 gravel or a material as approved by the City Engineering Director.

E.	Soils Test. To determine subgrade  soil  classifications,  soil  samples shall be collected and analyzed by a reputable testing laboratory. Reports of the soils analysis shall be submitted to the City Engineering
 
Director with the pavement plans.	Soil samples  shall  be taken along the center line of the proposed road at intervals not exceeding 300 feet.

F.	Curb and Gutter. Concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed on both sides of streets. The construction shall be in accordance with Standard Specification for Highway Construction, MnDOT Spec. No. 2531.

G.	Boulevards. All boulevards shall have six inches of top soil (black dirt) placed on them and then be seeded or sodded by the subdivider.

H.	Sidewalks. All required walks shall be concrete four inches thick (except on driveway crossings,  it shall be at least six inches thick) placed on a four inch gravel or sand base. Grades shall be as approved by the City Engineering Director. Sidewalks shall be placed in the public right-of­ way.

Subd. 3.	Public Utilities.

A. Water Main. A minimum water main of six inch ductile iron pipe or other pipe as approved by the City Engineering Director shall be required. Mains over eight inches in size may be required by the City Engineering Director and the additional cost may be borne by the City.

B.	Sanitary Sewer. Unless otherwise required by the City Engineering Director, a sanitary sewer of eight inch poly vinyl chloride (PVC) pipe shall be installed as the minimum size placed at grades approved by the Engineer. Mains over eight inches in size may be required by the City Engineering Director and the additional cost may be borne by the City. Service ways shall be six inches.

C.	House Services. Each house  service shall run from the main to the property line where a cap or plug shall be placed until the service is extended to the structure. The  City  Engineering  Director shall  specify the size and type of water and sewer service.

Subd. 4.	Sanitation.

A. Where lots cannot be connected with  a  public  sewage  system, provisions shall be made for sanitary sewage facilities, consisting of a central treatment plant or individual disposal devices for each lot as required by pertinent rules of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.

B.	Any subdivision or lot not provided with off-site sewer facilities  may be subject to soil and percolation tests  being done to determine  whether the   lot size proposed  will  meet  minimum  standards  of  health  and sanitation  if required  by the  Community  Development  Director or  City
 
Engineering Director due to limitations of soils  as  shown  on  existing soils maps. The lot area and topography shall be such that it will accommodate an adequate disposal system or systems to serve the residence for the estimated unsewered years as determined by the Council. Such tests shall be made at the expense of the subdivider, and a sketch map shall be submitted to identify the specific locations where tests were made.

C.	All proposed sewage disposal systems shall comply with the regulations and	recommended standards of the City, Goodhue County, the Minnesota Department of Health, and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.

Subd. 5. Water Supply. An  individual well  shall  produce at least ten gallons per minute, have a well casing at least four inches in diameter and be grouted to provide a safe, portable water supply. Such wells shall meet or exceed all Goodhue County and Minnesota Department of Health requirements concerning wells and well installers. Wells within the urban services district may be required to have a City water meter installed.

Subd. 6.   House Plumbing.  When an individual sewage system is used and the septic tank is placed on a side other than that from which the public sewer line would connect, the City Engineering Director may require a capped sewage disposal line be extended from the point of ground entrance of basement or house to a point five feet beyond and to the side from which the future sewer connection will be made. Inside the basement the elbow shall be set up to be easily reversed for connection to the capped line.

Subd. 7.  Stormwater  Management.  All  surface  and   underground drainage systems shall be installed in accordance with an approved stormwater management plan as required by Division 57 of the Zoning Chapter.

Subd. 8. Street Signs. All public street  signs  shall  be  provided  and installed by the City at the expense of the subdivider. Private street signs shall be installed by the subdivider at their expense. All street signage shall  require approval by the City Engineering Director.

Subd. 9. Street Trees. The type or species of trees planted shall be approved by the City Forester. Trees with root structures that are less likely to interfere with utility lines, break up sidewalks, and cause other nuisance damage are desirable. Trees shall have a trunk diameter (measured 12 inches  above ground level) of not less than two inches and shall be placed, staked and wrapped, unless otherwise determined by the City Forester. Said trees shall not be planted in less than one cubic yard of good growing soil with a suitable amount of fertilizer. Approved multiple varieties shall be used alternately as per the City Forester's recommendation.
 

Subd. 10. Utilities Location. All utilities shall be placed underground. All underground work shall be completed prior to street surfacing. All utility lines for telephone, electrical service and fiber optic shall be placed in underground easements, unless located within the right-of-way (ROW) as approved by the City Engineering  Director.

Subd. 11.  Street Lighting.  Street lighting shall be installed by either the City or the subdivider at the expense of the subdivider.

Subd. 12.  Inspection.   All  required improvements shall be inspected by the City Engineering Department during construction at the expense  of the subdivider.

SECTION 12.08. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS.

Subd. 1. Improvements Required. Prior to the approval of a plat by the Council, the subdivider shall have agreed, in the manner set forth below, to install, in conformity with approved construction plans and in conformity with all applicable standards and City Code provisions, the following improvements on the site prior to occupancy or final building inspection:

A. Survey Monuments. All subdivision boundary corners, block and lot corners, road intersection corners and points of tangency and curvature shall	be marked with survey  monument meeting the minimum requirements of State law. All U.S., State, County and  other  official bench marks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise position unless a relocation is approved by the controlling agency.

B.	Grading. The full width of the right-of  way of each street and alley dedicated in the plat shall be graded. Erosion control recommendations for such grading shall be implemented.

C.	Pavement. All streets and alleys shall be improved with concrete or bituminous surface except as may be approved by action of the Council.

D.	Curb and Gutter. There shall be concrete curb and gutter with curb cuts installed along both sides of all streets that are of an urban design.

E. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of all streets in areas zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, RM-1, and RM-2. Planned unit development (PUD) shall have neighborhood walking systems  as  approved  by the City Council.
 
F.	Water Mains. In the case where mains from a public water system are available, the subdivider  shall be required to install water  mains in the plat and connect the same to such public water system.

G.	Public Sanitary Sewer. In all cases where trunk line sanitary sewer facilities are available, the subdivider shall be required to install sanitary sewers in the plat and connect the same to such trunk line sewers.

H.	Stormwater Management Facilities. Such facilities and easements shall be installed as will adequately provide for the drainage of surface waters; a stormwater management system may be required. Drainage way	easements or land dedication may be required when such easements or land is needed in the public interest for purposes of flood plain management, proper drainage, prevention of erosion, pedestrian access to water bodies, or other public purpose. The subdivider may be required by the Council to pay an appropriate share of any off-site drainage system or structure necessary to handle the additional run-off from the subdivider's property.

I.	Erosion Control.  The subdivider shall meet all of the erosion control requirements as provided for in the Division 57 of the Zoning Chapter.

J.	Street Trees. There shall be street trees installed within the boulevard along both sides of all streets that are of an urban design. Such trees shall be installed in the proper  planting season as determined by the City Forester.

Subd. 2. Payment For Installation of Improvements. The required improvements and the engineering drawings, specifications and bid  forms,  as listed elsewhere shall be furnished and installed at the sole expense of the subdivider. This may be done by the subdivider's own installation of the improvements with approved plans  meeting  site specifications;  or by  petitioning the City to draw up engineering plans and specifications, bidding and constructing said improvements. However, if the cost of an improvement  would  by general policy be assessed only in part to the improved property and the remaining cost paid out of general tax levy, provision may be made for the payment of a portion of the cost by the City. Further, if an improvement installed within the subdivision will be of substantial benefit to lands beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, provision may be made for causing a portion of the cost of the improvement, representing the benefit to such lands, to be assessed against the same. In such a situation the subdivider will be required only to pay for such portion of the whole cost of said improvement that will represent the benefit to the property within his subdivision.

 
Subd. 3.
Improvements.
 
Agreement  by the Subdivider Providing For the Installation of
 

A.	Prior to the installation of any required improvements and as a condition of the final approval of the plat by the Council,  the  subdivider  shall either:

1.	Enter into a petition for assessment or written contract with the City on each lot within the new development by which the Council may order in the necessary utility, street lighting, street signs, sidewalk, street	improvements, stormwater management and street tree planting  The City Engineering Director shall then prepare or cause to be prepared contract drawings and specifications for such improvements.	The City Engineering Director may also prepare such bidding documents as are necessary. The City Engineering Director shall also supervise the construction and surveying work of the successful bidder on the project. All City engineering costs involving design and preparation of documents,  specifications, bidding, construction, and supervision shall be included in the cost of the improvement and shall be assessed as part of the project cost.

2.	Enter into a contract in writing with the City requiring the subdivider to furnish plans and construct part or all of said improvements at his cost in accordance with plans and specifications as approved by the City Engineer. The City Engineering Director shall have the authority to inspect all construction and supervise specific details of said construction.	The City Engineering Director shall also have the authority to coordinate the work to be done under said contract or any duly authorized subcontract with any other work being done or contracted by the City in the vicinity. This written  contract  may require the subdivider to make an escrow deposit with the City Clerk. The amount of the deposit being set equal to the City  Engineering Director's	estimate of the total cost of the project including engineering drawings and specifications if necessary. The City Engineering Director's estimate shall equal at least  100 percent but no more than 125 percent of the cost of the project depending upon the	expected initiation and completion of construction.  The subdivider may also deliver to the City a letter of credit. Such letter of credit shall be from a national or state bank approved by the Council, shall be unconditional and irrevocable, shall be for the full amount of the unpaid improvement costs, and shall  provide  that funds will be paid to the City upon written demand from time to time of the City to the extent of any default by the developer in the payment of the special assessments pursuant to the agreement.

3.	In case the subdivider does not pay invoices for work completed by the City, the contract with the subdivider shall provide that the City may  assess  those  costs to  property  located within  the  subdivision
 
together with interest on the outstanding balance as determined by the Red Wing Assessment Policy and Practices for Public Improvements; the subdivider shall waive any right to contest the assessment.

B.	No subdivider shall be permitted to start work on any other subdivision without approval of the Council if the subdivider has previously defaulted on City work or commitments concerning other projects within the City.

C.	In cases where the subdivider has petitioned for assessments, no construction shall occur on a proposed subdivision prior to approval  of the final plat by the Council; the recording of the plat with the County Recorder; and the ordering in of the improvements.

D.	In all cases, no building permits shall be issued within a subdivision prior to installation and approval of the functioning sanitary sewer and water systems by the City Engineering Director. The City may approve  a building permit for model homes with the stipulation that no occupancy permit shall be issued until installation and approval of a functioning sanitary sewer and water system.

Subd. 4.  Construction  Plans  and  Inspection.  The  subdivider's construction plans for the required improvements, conforming in all respects with the standards of the City and City Code provisions, shall be prepared at the subdivider's expense by a professional engineer who is registered in the State of Minnesota, and said plans shall contain the Engineer's certificate. Such plans together with estimates of the quantities of construction items shall be submitted to the City Engineering Director for approval and for an estimate of the total costs of the required improvement. Upon approval, such plans together with estimates of the quantities of construction items shall become a part of the required contract. Once the final plans are approved by the City Engineering Director the subdivider shall submit two physical copies of the plans and specifications and a digital copy in Auto CAD format.

Subd. 5. Trunk  Facilities.  Where  a  larger  size  water  main,  sanitary sewer, storm management facility or similar facility is required to serve  areas outside the subdivision, the larger facility required must be constructed. Additional cost is to be borne by the benefiting properties  and the assessment rate to be determined accordingly by the Council after recommendations by the City Engineering  Director.

Subd. 6.	Alternate Installation and Incomplete Improvements.

A. The Council may elect to install any portion of the required improvements pursuant to the cash escrow agreement or other finance arrangements with the subdivider.
 

B.	Full and complete utility systems shall be installed in all needed areas as soon as is practicable and feasible. The City and subdivider shall proceed as soon as it is practicable after final approval of a subdivision with installation of required improvements within the subdivision.

1.	In the event of small subdivisions or in subdivisions on which development may proceed slowly, or where the construction of required improvements is clearly not feasible  immediately  following the approval of the plat, the Council may elect to commence assessment proceedings, utilize funds of a cash escrow agreement, or otherwise move to finance and install improvements where warranted.

2.	Such  improvements  shall  be   required   in   order   to   provide greater assurance of public health, assure reliability of water supply, provide for economy of installation, provide   more  effective  fire fighting through hydrants, and otherwise protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare.

 
SECTION12.09. DEDICATION.
 
PUBLIC	PARKS,	TRAILS	AND	OPEN	SPACE
 

Subd. 1.	Parks, Trails and Open Space.

A. Purpose. This Section is adopted for the purpose of providing for the recreation, health, safety and welfare of the public through the orderly development	of recreation areas and the conservation of natural resources and scenic beauty in the City. The City Council finds that the dedication requirements of this Section are necessary to meet the needs for parks, trails, wetlands and open space resulting from development of the uses subject to this Section.

B.	Waiver of Requirements. Upon a  request  by  a  subdivider,  the  City Council, in its discretion, may waive or reduce the requirements of this Section for City assisted development or redevelopment projects  that achieve public objectives or for reasons based upon other development priorities or policies of the City.

C.	Initial Dedication Consideration. The subdivider shall consult with the Community Development Director at the time the preliminary plan  is under consideration, to secure a recommendation as to the location of any property that should be dedicated to the public, such  as  parks, scenic easements, trails, playgrounds or other public property. The plan shall show the location, dimensions, and total square feet of all areas to be dedicated in this manner.
 

D.	Conformance with the Comprehensive Plan. Land dedicated under this Section shall reasonably conform to the  City's  Comprehensive  Plan. The Planning Commission shall recommend to the City Council to adopt as part of the Comprehensive Plan the location of land for future parks, trails and open spaces in the City. If the Comprehensive Plan for the parcel of land to be subdivided calls for public property in excess of that required by Section 12.09, Subdivision 2, the Planning Commission and City Council shall, before approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat, consider the Comprehensive Plan and determine whether to  take the necessary steps to acquire all or part of the additional public property as called for by the Comprehensive Plan. If the City's trail plan shows a trail within a development, it must be dedicated by the owner.

E.	Cash in Lieu of Land. The City shall have the option to require cash contributions in lieu of accepting dedication of land under this Section, or the City may require a combination of land dedication and cash payment.	Contributions of cash in lieu of land shall be placed in a special reserve park fund which shall be held and used by the City to acquire land for or to improve parks, playgrounds, trails, or open space. The City shall require a cash payment in lieu of park, trail and  open space dedication whenever the proposed  dedication  of land for  public use is not suitable for the intended use, is too small for practical maintenance, or whenever cash payment would  be more beneficial  to the development of the overall park system that dedication of the land within the property to be developed.

F.	Timing. The requirements  of this Section for dedication of land or for contribution of cash in lieu of land shall apply at the time of final plat approval, replat, minor subdivision, or waiver of platting and shall apply to any plat, replat, subdivision, waiver of platting, or development which receives final approval after January 1, 2011.

G.	Determination of Cash Payment. The cash payment in lieu of land dedication shall be set by ordinance under such terms and conditions as the Council may from time-to-time be appropriate.

H.	Dedication Process. Prior to the dedication of  the required property pursuant to this division, the subdivider shall provide the City with evidence of title in a form acceptable to the City Attorney or a title insurance policy insuring the City's interest in the property. In any dedication of required land, the subdivider must have good and marketable title to the land, free and clear of any mortgages, liens, encumbrances	or assessments, except  easements or minor imperfections of title acceptable to the City.
 
I.	Trail Construction. When  the  City's  Comprehensive  Plan identifies  a trail to be constructed in the land to be subdivided, the subdivider shall be required to pay for the construction of the trail improvements.

J.	Other Conditions:

1.	Grading in the park shall conform to the grading plan as approved by the Engineering Director.

2.	Rocks that are two inches or greater in diameter shall be removed from the land by the subdivider.

3.	A minimum of six inches of top soil shall be provided by  the subdivider.

4.	Grass shall have been seeded, mulched and established in accordance with specifications approved by the City Engineering Director.

Subd. 2.	Land Dedication.

A. General Requirements. In every plat, replat, or subdivision of land allowing development for residential, commercial, industrial or  other uses	or any combination thereof, but excluding single lot line adjustments, which do not create additional lots, a reasonable portion of such land shall be set aside and dedicated by the subdivider to the general public for parks, trails or public open space. In accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Section 462,  it is reasonable to require dedication of an amount of land equal in value to that percentage of the undeveloped land as set forth in Subdivision 3 of this Section. The land to be dedicated shall be suitable for public use as parks, trails and open space as shall be determined  in the sole discretion of the City, and the City shall not be required to accept land which will not be usable for parks, trails or open space or which would require extensive expenditure on the part of the City to make them usable. All land dedicated for park, trails and/or open space shall be designed to incorporate natural features such as, rivers, streams, wild life habitat, woodlands, natural communities, wetlands and ponding areas. Said lands shall also incorporate cultural features such as landmarks and archeological sites. This dedication shall be in addition to the land dedicated for streets, alleys, stormwater management systems or other public purposes.

Subd. 3.	Dedication Formula.

The amount of land to be dedicated by the subdivider for park, trail or open space shall be based upon the net area (gross area minus area required for
 
public streets and stormwater management systems) of the land to be subdivided, which could be developed for residential, commercial, industrial or other non-residential purposes. Said dedication  shall be determined  at the time of preliminary plat approval and shall be calculated as follows:

A.  Residential  and  Mobile  Home  Park  Development.  The  calculation  for residential development shall be as follows:

 
Dwelling Units/Net Acre 0-2.5
2.6-4.0
4.1-8.0
8.1-12.0
12.1-16.0
 
Percentage of net land to be dedicated 10
12
13
14
15
 

For each additional 2.5 units over 16 per acre, add 0.25 percent.

If a lot which was a platted lot before January  1, 2011, is split into two lots, the land to be dedicated shall be five percent of the original lot.

B.	Industrial Development. In industrial developments, two percent of the gross area included in the land to be subdivided shall be dedicated for trails.  No park and open space land dedication shall be required.

C.	Commercial Development. The park, trail and open space dedication requirement of the land to be subdivided for a commercial,  light industrial and/or nonresidential subdivision or development shall be five percent of the gross area included in the land to be subdivided.

Subd. 4.	Credit for Private Open Space and Conservation Easements.

A.	Where a private open space for park, recreation  or trail  purposes  is provided in a proposed  subdivision and such  space  is to  be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, a credit of  up to 25 percent of the requirements of Subdivision 3 of this Section may be given, provided that the following conditions are met:

1.	Such land area is not occupied by non recreational buildings and is available for the use of all residents of the proposed subdivision.

2.	Required setbacks shall not be included in the computation of such private open space.

3.	The use of the private open space is restricted for park, recreational and trail purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the future owners of the property within the subdivision and
 
which  cannot  be defeated  or eliminated  without  the consent of the City Council.

4.	The proposed private open space is of an appropriate size, shape, location, topography and usability for park, recreational and  trail purposes or contains unique natural features that are important to be preserved.

5.	The proposed private open space reduces the demand for public recreational facilities to serve the development.

B.	Where subdividers dedicate conservation easements to preserve open space, natural resources and/or aesthetics, the  City  may  reduce  the amount of land to be dedicated (or cash  contributions in lieu of such dedication ) by an amount not to exceed 50 percent of the  normal dedication.

C.	In no case shall the combined total of amenities (from item A above) and conservation easements (from item B above) reduce the normally required dedication of land or cash contributions by more than 75 percent.

Subd. 5.      Protection of Natural Features.  The Council reserves the right to decline approval of a subdivision if due regard is not shown for the preservation of all natural features such as large trees, water courses, scenic points, historic spots, archeological sites and similar City assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development of the property.

Subd. 6.	Planned Unit Developments (PUD).

A. Upon receiving a report from the Planning  Commission,  the  Council may grant exemptions from the provisions of these regulations in the case	of a subdivision large enough to constitute a more or less self­ contained residential neighborhood or PUD, provided that the City receives adequate safeguards to insure development  according  to  a plan submitted by the subdivider. Said plan shall not be in conflict with the Comprehensive Plan and  shall in the opinion of the Council be a desirable planned development and shall provide adequate public open space and any improvements necessary for the circulation, recreation, light, air, and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated.

B. Upon receiving a report from the Planning Commission, the Council may grant exemptions from the provisions of these regulations in the case of a planned development which mixes uses in an innovated manner as defined in the Zoning Chapter, provided that the Council shall find that
 
the proposed development is fully consistent with the purpose and intent of these regulations. This provision is intended to provide the necessary flexibility for new land planning and land development trends and techniques.

SECTION 12.10.	OTHER SUBDIVISION  METHODS.

Subd. 1.       Minor Subdivisions and Consolidations.   If a request is made to subdivide unplatted land or to subdivide a lot which is part of a recorded plat, or to consolidate parcels of land, or any combination of such actions, and the proposed action will not create  more than three new lots, does not create new public infrastructure with the exception of sidewalks, bike paths and trails, does not include conveyance of an interest in real property to the city,  and  the  newly created property lines will not cause any resulting lot to be in violation of the Zoning Chapter, the Planning Commission shall review the subdivision upon submission of a final plat prepared by a registered  land surveyor, and prepare a report to the City Council for their consideration. Such subdivision shall be considered a minor subdivision.

Subd. 2.   Administrative    Subdivision    and    Consolidation. Notwithstanding any provisions of Subdivision 1 above, the Zoning Administrator may, in his/her discretion, without formal plat or minor subdivision approval, administratively approve for recording a conveyance which divides or consolidates parcels of land for limited purposes such as minor boundary  line  adjustments, where compliance with requirements of formal plat or minor subdivision approval would create an unnecessary hardship, where failure to comply does not interfere with the purpose of this Chapter, and where the newly created property lines will not cause any resulting lot to be in violation of the Zoning Chapter. In cases of subdivision, the applicant shall submit a certificate of survey from a licensed surveyor. In cases of consolidation, the applicant shall submit a sketch showing the parcels to be consolidated and provide a letter of review from the  Goodhue County Surveyor. No consolidation shall be recorded by Goodhue County until the Zoning Administrator  has approved the application.

Subd. 3.	Unapproved  Subdivisions.

A. No sale, trade, or other conveyance of land to which this regulation is applicable shall be filed or recorded, if the land described in the conveyance is referenced to an unapproved Registered Land Survey, or to an unapproved plat.

B.	The City may refuse to accept or take over metes and bounds parcels for roads, parks, or other public uses without a Certificate of Survey or a plat of said parcels.
 
C.	Any owner or agent of the owner of land who conveys a lot or a parcel in violation of the provisions of this Subdivision shall forfeit and pay to the City a penalty as provided  in the fee ordinance.   The City may enjoin such conveyance or may recover such penalty by a civil action  in any court of competent jurisdiction.
D.	If in a pre-existing group of two or more contiguous  lots or parcels of
land owned or controlled by the same person, no lot or parcel meets 60 percent of the width or area requirements of the Zoning  Chapter, such individual lot or parcel cannot be considered as a separate  parcel  of land for purposes of sale or development, but must be combined with adjacent lots or parcels under  the same ownership so that the combination of lots or parcels will equal one or more  parcels  of  land each meeting the new lot width and area requirements of the Zoning Chapter.

SECTION 12.11.	MODIFICATIONS,  EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES.

Subd. 1.  Subdivision Variance.   The City Council may grant a variance from this Chapter upon receiving a report from the Planning Commission in any particular case where the subdivider can show because of exceptional topography or any other physical conditions that strict compliance with  this  Chapter  would cause exceptional and undue hardship, provided such relief may be granted without detriment to the public welfare and without impairing the intent of this Chapter. The Planning Commission may recommend variations from the requirements of this Chapter when, in its opinion, they  do not affect the Comprehensive  Plan or the intent of this Chapter.

Subd. 2.  Variance  Procedures.  The  applicant   for   a   subdivision variance shall follow the procedures as set forth in Division 90-110 of the Zoning Chapter.

SECTION 12.12. FINDINGS  OF  FACT.  For  all  subdivisions,  the Planning Commission shall recommend and the City Council shall consider for approval or denial the following findings:

1.	The proposed subdivisions, including the design, are consistent with any adopted component of the Comprehensive Plan.

2.	The physical characteristics of the site, including  but not limited to topography,	vegetation, susceptibility to erosion and siltation, susceptibility to flooding, water storage, stormwater management are such that the site is suitable for the type of development or use contemplated.

3.	The site is physically suitable for the proposed density of development.
 

4.	The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements will not cause significant environmental  damage

5.	The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not cause serious public health and safety problems.

6.	The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not conflict with easements of record.

7.	Existing City infrastructure, including but not limited to, roads or highways, water supply systems, and sanitary sewer systems, are adequate to serve the proposed subdivision.

SECTION 12.13.	COMPLIANCE.

Subd. 1. Building Permits. No building permit shall be issued for any construction, enlargement, alteration, or repair, demolition or moving of  any building or structure on any lot or parcel until all the requirements of this Chapter have been fully met.

Subd. 2. Public Nuisance Per Se. Any building or structure which  is erected, altered or converted, or any use of premises of land which is begun or changed subsequent to January 1, 2011, and in violation of any of the provisions thereof is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction.

Subd. 3. Each Day a Separate Offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues.

Subd. 4.  Rights  and  Remedies  are  Cumulative.  The  rights   and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law.

SECTION 12.14.	VIOLATION  A  MISDEMEANOR.	Every  person  who
violates a provision of this Chapter by performing an  act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or failing to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
 
Title	Page

CHAPTER13	AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS

Section	13.01	Definitions	13-1
	13.02	Zones	13-1
	13.03	Height Limitation Zones	13-1
	13.04	Use Restrictions	13-2
	13.05	Non-Conforming  Uses	13-2
	13.06	Administration	13-2
	13.07	Permits	13-2
	13.08	Hazard Marking and Lighting	13-3
	13.09	Board of Appeals	13-3
	13.10	Appeals and Reviews	13-3
	13.11	Violation a Misdemeanor	13-3
 
CHAPTER13

AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS



SECTION 13.01. DEFINITIONS. The following terms, as used  in this Chapter, shall have the meanings stated:

1.	"Airport" - the Red Wing Airport located in Sections 1, 5, and 6, Township 24 N, Ranges 17W and 18W, Pierce County, Wisconsin.

2.	"Airport  Hazard" - any structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which obstructs the air space required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport or is otherwise determined  by the City to be hazardous to landing or taking off.

3.	"Chapter  Effective  Date"  -  the  effective  date  of  this  Chapter  is May 21, 1978.

4.	"Airport Manager" - Public Works Director or Designee.

5.	"Non-Conforming Use" - any structure, tree or  use  of  land which does not conform to a regulation prescribed in this Chapter, as of the Chapter Effective Date.

6.	"Runway" - a level portion of an airport having a surface specially developed and maintained for the landing and takeoff of aircraft.

7.	"Structure" - any object constructed or installed by humans.

8.	"Tree" - any object of natural growth, except farm crops, which are cut at least once per year and except shrubs, bushes or plants which do not grow to a height of more than five feet.

SECTION 13.02. ZONES. Pursuant to Wisconsin  and Minnesota State Law, the City has the authority to prescribe zoning regulations governing lands adjacent to the airport. All such zoning districts are as shown on the map entitled "Height Limitation Zoning Map, Red Wing Airport, Isabelle Township, Pierce County, Wisconsin." This map is on file and available for  public  review at the office of the City Clerk.

SECTION 13.03. HEIGHT LIMITATION ZONES. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no structure shall be constructed, altered, located or permitted to remain after such construction, alteration or location,  and  no trees shall be allowed to grow, to a height in excess of the height limit indicated on the map referred to in Section 13.02.
 

SECTION 13.04.	USE RESTRICTIONS.

Notwithstanding the remaining provisions of this Chapter, no use may be made of land in such a manner as to: (1) create electrical interference with radio communication between the Red Wing Airport and aircraft; (2) make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others; (3) result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the  airport; or (4) impair visibility, in the vicinity of the  airport or otherwise endanger the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft.

SECTION 13.05.	NON-CONFORMING  USES.

Subd. 1.   Not Retroactive.  The regulations prescribed in Sections 13.02 and 13.03 shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any non-conforming use, or otherwise interfere  with  the continuance of any  non-conforming  use,  except  as  otherwise  provided  by Section 13.07, Subdivision 2.

Subd. 2. Removal. This Section shall not interfere with the removal of non-conforming uses by purchase or the use of eminent domain.

SECTION 13.06. ADMINISTRATION. It shall be the duty of the Airport Manager to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the Airport Manager upon a form furnished by the City. Applications which are by this Chapter to be decided by the Council shall be granted or denied within 60 days of the date of filing of the application, unless Federal Aviation Administration approval is requested. Applications for action by the Board of Appeals, as designated  in Section 13.09, shall be transmitted by the Planning Commission to the Board of Appeals  for hearing and decision.  There shall be no charge for applications or permits.

SECTION 13.07.	PERMITS.

Subd. 1. Future  Uses. No structure shall  be constructed, erected  or installed, or be permitted to remain in any zone created by Section 13.02 until the owner or the owner's agent has applied in writing and obtained a permit from the Airport Manager, except for structures less than 50 feet in height  above  the ground. The permit shall be posted in a prominent place on the premises prior to and during the period of construction, erection, installation or establishment. The City shall have the right to trim, prune, or remove at the owner's expense any tree which was planted after the Chapter Effective Date and later found to be  in violation of the height restriction for the zone in which it is located.  Application for a permit shall indicate the use for which the permit is desired, and shall describe and locate the use with sufficient particularity to permit the Airport Manager to determine whether the use would conform to the regulations herein prescribed.   If
 
the use conforms with these regulations the Airport Manager shall issue a permit to the applicant.

Subd. 2. Existing Uses. Before any non-conforming structure may be replaced, altered, or rebuilt, the owner shall apply for and secure a permit in the manner prescribed by Subdivision 1 of this Section authorizing the change, replacement or repair. No such permit shall be denied if the structure will not become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this Chapter, or than it was when the application for permit was made.

SECTION 13.08.	HAZARD  MARKING AND  LIGHTING.	Any  permit or
variance granted under Sections 13.07 or 13.10 may, if such action is deemed advisable by the Council to effectuate the purpose of this Chapter and if such is reasonable in the circumstances, be conditioned to require the owner of the structure or trees in question to permit the owner of the airport, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be determined by the City to be necessary to indicate to aircraft the presence of an airport hazard.

SECTION 13.09.  BOARD OF APPEALS.  The  Red Wing  City  Council shall constitute a Board of Appeals and Adjustments.

SECTION 13.10.	APPEALS AND REVIEWS.

Subd. 1. Variances. Upon appeal  in  special   cases  the   Board  of Appeals may, after investigation and public hearing, grant  a variance  from  the terms of this Chapter that will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this Chapter would result  in unnecessary hardship, if the relief will do substantial justice and be in accord with the spirit of this Chapter, and does not create a hazard to the safe,  normal operation of aircraft.

Subd. 2. Aggrieved Person. Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision or action of the Airport Manager in  administrating  this  Chapter  may appeal such decision or action to the Board of Appeals.

Subd. 3.     Procedure.   Any  appeal taken pursuant to this Section shall be in conformity with the procedure established by Wisconsin Statutes, Section 62.23(7)(e), as it may be amended from time to time.

SECTION 13.11.	VIOLATION	A	MISDEMEANOR.	Every	person
violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision  of  this  Chapter  by performing an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or failing to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon  conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
 



CHAPTER14

14.01
14.02
14.03
14.04
14.05
14.06
14.07
14.08
14.09
14.10
14.11
14.12
14.13
14.14
14.15
14.16
14.17
14.18
14.19
14.20
14.21
14.22
14.23
14.24
14.25
14.26
14.27
14.28
14.29
14.30
14.31
 

Title

-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT

Findi  gs, Purpose, and Intent
Electi n to Manage the Public Rights-Of-Way Defini ions
Admi  istration
Blank
Regis ration and Right-Of-Way Occupancy Regis ration Information
Repo ing Obligations
Permi  Requirement Permi  Applications
lssua ce of Permit; Special Provisions and Conditions
Permi  Fees
Right Of-Way Restoration Blank
Suppl  mentary Applications
Other Obligations Deni I
lnstal ation Requirements
lnspe tion
Work done Without a Permit Supp ementary Notification Revo  ation of Permits
Map ing Data
Location and relocation of Facilities Pre-e  cavation Facilities Location Dam  ge to Other Facilities
Right Of-Way Vacation
lnde	nification and Liability
Aban oned and Unusable Facilities Appe  I
Seve ability
 
Page




14-1
14-1
14-2
14-6
14-7
14-7
14-7
14-9
14-9
14-10
14-11
14-12
14-12
14-13
14-13
14-14
14-14
14-14
14-15
14-15
14-16
14-16
14-18
14-18
14-20
14-20
14-21
14-21
14-21
14-21
14-22
 
CHAPTER14


RIGHT-OF-WAY  MANAGEMENT SECTION 14.01.	FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT.
To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the  rights-of-way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary  encumbrances.

Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this new chapter of this code relating to right-of-way permits  and administration. This chapter  imposes  reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance  of   facilities  and  equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state  and  federal  agencies. Under this chapter, persons excavating and  obstructing  the  rights-of-way  will bear financial responsibility for their work. Finally, this chapter provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the public rights-of-way.


This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws, Chapter 123, substantially codified in Minnesota Statutes  Sections  237.16, 237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and  238.086 (the "Act") and the other laws governing applicable rights of the city and users of the right-of-way. This chapter shall also be interpreted consistent with Minnesota  Rules  7819.0050  - 7819.9950 where possible. To the extent any provision of this chapter cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, that interpretation  most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory and case law is intended. This chapter shall not be interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.


SECTION 14.02.	ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS­
OF-WAY. Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant to Minn. Stat. 237.163 subd. 2(b), to manage rights-of-way within itsjurisdiction.
 
SECTION 14.03.	DEFINITIONS.


The following definitions apply in this chapter of this  code. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise  specified, references to sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms, whether or not capitalized.

1.	"Abandoned Facility" means a facility no longer in service or physically disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not abandoned unless declared so by the right-of-way user.


2.	"Applicant" means any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way.


3.	"City" means the city of Red Wing, Minnesota. For purposes of section	14.28, "city" means its elected officials, officers, employees and agents.

4.	"Commission"  means the State Public Utilities Commission.

5.	"Construction Performance Bond" means any of the following forms of security provided at permittee's option:

A.	Individual project bond;
B.	Cash deposit;
C.	Security  of a form  listed or approved  under  Minn. Stat.
Sec. 15.73, subd. 3;
D.	Letter of Credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
E.	Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city;
F.	A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of  construction  bond, for a time specified  and  in a form acceptable to the city.

6.	"Delay Penalty"  is  the  penalty  imposed  as  a  result  of unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, or restoration as established  by permit.

7.	"Director'' means the Engineering Director of the city, or her or his designee.
 
8.	"Emergency" means a condition that (1) poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant loss  of property; or (2) requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to restore service to a customer.

9.	"Equipment" means any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain facilities in any right-of-way.

10.	"Excavate"  means  to  dig  into  or  in  any  way  remove   or physically disturb or penetrate any part of a right-of-way.

11.	"Facility" or "Facilities" means any tangible asset in the right-of­ way required to provide Utility Service.

12.	"Local Representative" means a local person or persons, or designee of such person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this chapter.

13.	"Management Costs" means the actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those	associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing,		and verifying right-of-way permit applications; inspecting		job sites and restoration projects; maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of­ way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately performed after  providing  notice and the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right-of­ way permits. Management costs do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of­ way, the fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123; Minnesota Statutes		Sections 237.162 or 237.163; or any  ordinance enacted under those sections, or the city fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to Section 14.30 of this chapter.

14.	"Obstruct" means to place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
 
15.	"Pavement" means any type of improved surface that is within the	public right-of-way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete, aggregate, or gravel.

16.	"Permit"  has  the  meaning  given  "right-of-way   permit"   in Minnesota Statutes, section 237.162.

17.	"Permittee" means any person to whom a right-of-way permit has been granted by the city under this chapter.

18.	"Person" means an individual or entity subject to the laws and rules   of this  state,  however  organized,  whether  public  or private,  whether domestic or foreign, whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or political.

19.	"Probation" means the status of a person that has not complied with the conditions of this chapter.

20.	"Probationary  Period"  means  one  year  from  the  date  that  a person has been notified in writing that they have been put on probation.

21.	"Registrant" means any person who, permitted under a utility permit, (1) has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located in any right-of-way, or (2) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way.

22.	"Restore" or "Restoration" means the process by which an excavated		right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation. Relating to pavements, this consists of the compaction of the subbase and aggregate base, and the replacement, in kind of the existing pavement for a minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation		in all directions (full panel replacement for concrete). Relating to grassed areas, this  consists  of backfilling,	compacting, spreading of topsoil, seeding and mulching to reestablish turf as existed prior to the excavation.
 
23.	"Restoration Cost" means the amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to achieve the restoration as defined above.

24.	"Public Right-of-Way" means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane or public sidewalk in which the city has an interest, including other dedicated	rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements of the city. A right-of-way does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire telecommunications  or broadcast service.

25.	"Right-of-Way Permit" means either the utility permit  or  the work in the right-of-way permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.

26.	"Right-of-Way User'' means (1) a telecommunications right-of­ way user as defined by Minnesota Statutes, section 237.162, subd. 4; or (2) a person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.

27.	"Service" or "Utility Service" includes (1) those  services provided by a public utility as defined in Minn. Stat. 2168.02, subds. 4 and 6; (2) services of a telecommunications right-of­ way  user,  including transporting  of voice  or data  information;
(3) services of a cable communications  systems as defined  in
Minn. Stat. Chapter. 238; (4) natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications services provided by the city; (5) services provided by a cooperative electric association organized under Minn. Stat., Chapter 308A; and (6) water, and sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling or heating services.

28.	"Service Lateral" means an underground facility that is used to transmit, distribute, or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a common source to an end-use customer. A service lateral is also an underground facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a customer's premises.
 
29.	"Supplementary Application" means an application made to excavate or obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already been issued.



30.	"Telecommunication right-of-way user'' means a person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a Facility in the right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for transporting telecommunication or other voice or data	information. For purposes of this chapter, a cable communication system defined and regulated under Minn. Stat. Chap.		238, and telecommunication activities related to providing	natural gas or electric energy services whether provided by a public utility as defined in Minn. Stat. Sec. 2168.02, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized		under Minn. Stat. Chaps. 453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric association organized under Minn. Stat. Chap. 308A, are not telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of this chapter.


31.	"Utility Permit" means  the permit which, pursuant to  this chapter, must be obtained before a person may excavate and/or place facilities and/or equipment  in a right-of-way.


32.	"Utility Permit Fee" means money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the costs as provided in Section 14.12.

33.	"Work in the Right-of-Way Permit" means the permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained before a person may perform work (activities listed in Section 14.09) in the right-of­ way.

34.	"Work in the Right-of-Way Permit Fee" means  money  paid to the city by an applicant to cover the costs as provided in Section 14.12.

SECTION 14.04. ADMINISTRATION. The director  is the principal city official responsible for the administration of the rights-of-way, right-of­ way permits, and the ordinances related thereto. The director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.
 
SECTION 14.05.	BLANK.

 
SECTION 14.06.	REGISTRATION OCCUPANCY.
 
AND	RIGHT-OF-WAY
 

Subd. 1. Registration. Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the city. Registration will consist of providing application information on an annual basis. There is no fee for registration.

Subd. 2. Registration Prior to Work. No person may construct, install, repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any part thereof, in any right-of-way without first being registered with the city.

Subd. 3. Exceptions.  Registration is not required for the following activities within the right-of-way:
•	Construction contracted by the city.
•	Constructing and maintaining sewer and water services.
•	Constructing and maintaining storm sewer systems.
•	Constructing and maintaining sidewalks, drive aprons and other hard surface improvements.
•	Planting trees, shrubs, gardens and other landscape amenities in boulevard areas.
•	Removal of boulevard trees.
•	Installation  of  lawn  irrigation  systems  and  pet  containment systems in boulevard areas.
•	Installation of mailboxes.

However, these activities may require a "Work in the Right-of-Way" Permit as outlined in the appropriate sections of this chapter. Nothing  herein relieves a person from complying with the provisions of  the  Minn.  Stat. Chap. 2160, Gopher One Call Law.


SECTION 14.07.	REGISTRATION  INFORMATION.

Subd. 1. Information Required. The information provided to the city at the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
 
(a). Each registrant's name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate number,	address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers.

(b). The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current	information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of registration.

(c).	A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:


(1). Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the registrant	by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota, or a form of self­ insurance acceptable to the city;

(2). Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of the (i) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, and (ii) placement and use of facilities		and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising	from completed operations, damage of underground facilities and collapse of property;

(3). Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in force and  applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages;


(4). Requiring that the city be notified thirty (30) days in advance	of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and


(5). Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.



14-8
 
(d).	The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.


(e).		If  the  person  is  a  corporation,  a  copy  of  the  certificate  of incorporation issued by the Secretary of State.

(f). A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from	the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate from said commission or other state or federal agency.

Subd. 2. Notice of  Changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current at all times by providing to the city information as to changes within fifteen (15) days following the  date  on which the registrant has knowledge of any change.

SECTION 14.08.	REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.


Subd. 1. Operations. Each registrant shall notify the City by December 31 of any major projects planned for the upcoming calendar year. Each registrant shall also notify the City of any major projects contemplated within a five-year planning horizon. Such notification shall contain information determined by the City to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations and obstructions  of rights-of-way. The notice shall include, at a minimum, the following information:

(a).	The  locations and the estimated  beginning and ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year; and

(b).	To  the  extent  known,  the  tentative  locations  and  beginning  and ending dates for all projects to be completed in the next five years.

Subd. 2. Additional Projects.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a project in the notification process if the registrant has used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.

SECTION 14.09.	PERMIT REQUIREMENT.


Subd. 1. Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person may perform work within the right-of-way without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit from the city to do so. There are two types of right-of-way permits as follows:


14-9
 
(a). Utility Permit.  A utility permit is required by a registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities and equipment described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.

(b). Work in the Right-of-Way Permit. A work in the right-of-way permit is required for the following activities within the right-of­ way:


•	Constructing and maintaining sewer and water services.
•	Constructing and maintaining storm sewer systems.
•	Constructing   and  maintaining   sidewalks,   drive  aprons and other hard surface improvements.
•	Planting  trees,   shrubs,   gardens   and  other   landscape amenities in boulevard areas.
•	Removal of boulevard trees.
•	Installation	of	lawn	irrigation	systems	and	pet containment systems in boulevard areas.
•	Installation of mailboxes


Subd. 2. Permit Extensions. No person may work in the right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless (i) such person makes a supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit, and (ii) a new permit or permit extension is granted.

Subd. 3. Delay Penalty. In accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1000, subp. 3, and notwithstanding subd. 2 of this Section, the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by city council resolution. A delay penalty will not be imposed if the delay in project completion is due to circumstances beyond the control of the permittee, including without limitation inclement weather, acts of God, or civil strife.

Subd. 4. Permit Display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.

SECTION 14.10.	PERMIT APPLICATIONS.


Application for a permit is made to the  city.  Right-of-way  permit applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with, the requirements of the following provisions:

14-10
 
(a).	Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter, if applicable;


(b). Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed facilities. When applying for a work in the right-of-way permit, the director may waive the requirement of submitting a scaled drawing.


(c).		Payment of money due the city for: (1).	permit fees, if applicable;
(2).	prior permit fees, if applicable;

(3). any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city because of applicant's prior work in the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city;

(4).	franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.


(d). Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110% of the amount owing.

(e). Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for additional facilities when applicant requests a utility permit to install additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction performance bond inadequate under applicable standards.


SECTION 14.11. ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; SPECIAL PROVISIONS AND CONDITIONS.

Subd. 1. Permit Issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this chapter, the city shall issue a permit.

Subd. 2. Special Provisions. The city may impose reasonable special provisions upon the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.


Subd. 3. Permit Conditions. Work performed under the permit will be subject to specific conditions as outlined on the appropriate permit application.
 
SECTION 14.12.	PERMIT FEES.


Subd. 1. Utility Permit Fee. The city shall establish a utility permit fee, by ordinance, in an amount sufficient to recover the city management costs.

Subd. 2. Work in the Right-of-Way Permit Fee. There is no fee for a work in the right-of-way permit.

Subd. 3. Payment of Permit Fees. No permit shall be  issued without payment of the appropriate permit fees.

Subd. 4. Non Refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city has revoked for a breach as stated in Section 14.22 are not refundable.

Subd. 5. Application to Franchises. Unless otherwise  agreed to in a franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.

Subd. 6. Joint application.  Registrants  may jointly  apply for  permits to work in the right-of-way at the same place and time and thereby share the cost of the permit fee.

Subd. 7. With City Projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled work in the right-of-way performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by two or more registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the permit fee, but a permit is still required.

Subd. 8. Service Laterals. Registrants performing work  on  service laterals in the right-of-way to facilitate new service installations and existing service maintenance, including replacement, are not required to pay the permit fee, but a permit is still required.

SECTION 14.13.	RIGHT-OF-WAY  RESTORATION.


Subd. 1. Timing. The work to be done under the right-of-way permit, and the restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under Section 14.16.

Subd. 2. Restoration. The permittee shall restore its own work. The city may require the  permittee to post a construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.3000.
 
Subd. 3. Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling, and restoration according to the applicable standards and with the materials specified by the city.

Subd. 4. Duty to Correct Defects. The permittee shall correct defects in restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The permittee upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work shall be completed within  five  (5) calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city, not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable under Section 14.16.

Subd. 5. Failure to Restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of­ way in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the city, the city at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to the city, within thirty (30) days of billing, the restoration cost of restoring the right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under the construction performance bond.

SECTION 14.14.	BLANK.


SECTION 14.15.	SUPPLEMENTARY  APPLICATIONS.


Subd. 1. Limitation on Area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater area (i) make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required thereby, and (ii) be granted a new permit or permit extension.

Subd. 2. Limitation on Dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted before the permit end date.
 
SECTION 14.16.	OTHER OBLIGATIONS.


Subd. 1. Compliance With Other Laws.  Obtaining  a right-of-way  permit does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other applicable rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local, state and federal laws, including but not limited to Minnesota Statutes, Section 216D.01-.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.

Subd. 2. Prohibited Work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the city, no work in the right-of-way may be done when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.

Subd. 3. Interference with Right-of-Way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the permit.

Subd. 4. Trenchless Excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits, permittees employing trenchless  excavation methods, including but not limited to Horizontal Directional Drilling, shall follow all requirements set forth in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 216D and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560, and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing underground utilities before excavating, as determined by the director.

SECTION 14.17. DENIAL OF PERMIT. The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.


SECTION 14.18.	INSTALLATION   REQUIREMENTS.	The excavation,
backfilling, restoration, and all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minnesota Rules 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the Minnesota Statutes, Sections 237.162 and 237.163.
 
Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560 and these ordinances. Service lateral installation is further subject to those requirements and conditions set forth by the city in  the applicable permits and/or agreements referenced in Section 14.23 subd. 2 of this ordinance.


SECTION 14.19.	INSPECTION.

Subd. 1. Notice of Completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1300. The city shall respond within 30 days of receipt of the completion certificate. Failure to approve or disapprove the permittee's performance within 30 days is deemed to be approval by the city.

Subd. 2. Site Inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site  available to the city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.

Subd 3.  Authority of Director.


(a). At the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety or well-being of the public.

(b). The director may issue an order to the permittee for any work that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards, conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten (10) days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the director that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the director may revoke the permit pursuant to Section 14.22.


SECTION 14.20.	WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.


Subd. 1. Emergency Situations. Each registrant shall immediately notify the director of any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Excavators' notification to Gopher State One Call regarding an emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement.







14-15
 
Within two (2) business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for the actions it took in response to the emergency.

If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency.

Subd. 2. Non-Emergency Situations. Except in  an  emergency,  any person who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, works in the right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all the other fees required by the city code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of­ way, and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.

SECTION 14.21.	SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTIFICATION.	If the work in the
right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the city of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.

SECTION 14.22.	REVOCATION OF PERMITS.


Subd. 1. Substantial Breach. The city reserves its right,  as  provided herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

(a).	The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;


(b). An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of­ way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;


(c). Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right­ of-way permit;
 
(d). The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the permittee's control; or

(e). The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work  that  does  not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to Section 14.19.

Subd. 2. Written Notice of Breach. If the city  determines  that  the permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition  of  any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit, the city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy  such  violation.  The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the breach.

Subd. 3. Response to Notice of Breach. Within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan, acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach. Permittee's failure to so contact the city, or permittee's failure to timely submit an acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, permittee's failure to  so contact the city,  or permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan,  or  permittee's  failure  to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall automatically  place the permittee on probation for one (1) full year.

Subd. 4.  Cause for Probation. From time to time, the city may establish a list of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically place the permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited to, working out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way grossly outside of the permit authorization.

Subd. 5. Automatic Revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits a breach as outlined above, permittee's permit will automatically be revoked and permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for emergency repairs.

Subd. 6. Reimbursement of City Costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonableattorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation.
 
SECTION 14.23.	MAPPING DATA.


Subd. 1. Information Required. Each  registrant  and  permittee  shall provide mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minnesota Rules 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within ninety (90) days following completion of any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the director accurate maps and drawings certifying the "as-built" location of all facilities  installed, owned and maintained by the permittee. Such maps and drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all facilities and shall be provided consistent with the city's electronic mapping system, when practical or as a condition imposed by the director. Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this subsection shall be grounds for revoking the permit holder's registration.

Subd. 2. Service Laterals.  All permits issued for the installation or repair of service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minnesota Rules 7560.0150 subpart 2, shall require the permittee's use of appropriate means of establishing the horizontal  locations of installed service laterals, and the service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the director reasonably requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to the  director  evidence satisfactory to the director of the installed service lateral locations. Compliance with this subdivision 2 and with applicable Gopher State One Call law and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals installed after  December  31,  2005, shall be a condition of any city approval necessary for 1) payments to contractors working on a public improvement project including those under  Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 429, and 2) city approval of performance under development agreements, or other subdivision or site plan approval under Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 462. The director shall reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such information to the city. Failure to provide prompt and  accurate information on the service laterals installed may result in the revocation of the permit issued for the work or for future permits to the offending permittee or its subcontractors.


SECTION 14.24.	LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.


Subd. 1. Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with the Act, with other applicable law, and with Minnesota Rules  7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.
 
Subd. 2. Corridors. The city may assign a specific area within the right-of­ way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city expects will someday be located within the right-of-way. All right-of-way permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.

Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no later than at the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area where  the  facilities  are  located, move the facilities to the assigned position within the right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer service needs and hardship to the registrant.

Subd. 3. Nuisance. After January 1, 2013, any facilities found in a right­ of-way that have not been registered shall be deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a useable condition.


Subd. 4. Limitation of Space. To protect health, safety, and welfare, or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the city shall strive to the  extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public  interest,  the  public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to be in the public interest.

Subd. 5. Relocation of Facilities. A Registrant  must promptly and at its own expense, with due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate its facilities in the right-of-way whenever  the  director  for good cause requests such removal and relocation, and shall restore the right-of­ way consistent with PUC standards, local regulations and MnDOT standard specifications. The director may make such request to  prevent  interference  by the registrant's facilities with (i) a present or future city use of the right-of-way, (ii) a public improvement undertaken by the city, (iii) an  economic  development project in which the city has an interest or investment, (iv) when the public health, safety and welfare require it, or (v) when necessary to prevent interference with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way.
 
Relocation Notification Procedure: The director shall  notify  the  utility owner at least six (6) months in advance of the need to relocate existing facilities so the owner can plan the relocation. The director shall provide a second notification to the owner one (1) month before the owner needs to begin the relocation. The utility owner shall begin relocation of the facilities within one (1) week of the second notification. All utilities shall be relocated within one  (1) month. The director may allow a different  schedule  if it does  not interfere with the city's project. The utility owner shall diligently work to relocate the facilities within the above schedule.


Delay to City Project: The director shall notify the  utility owner if the owner's progress will not meet the relocation schedule. If the owner does not take action to insure the relocation will be completed in accordance with the above schedule and the director feels this delay will have an adverse impact to a city project, then the director may hire a competent contractor to perform the relocation. In that event, the city may charge the utility owner all costs incurred to relocate the facility.

The city may charge the utility owner for all costs incurred and requested by a contractor working for the city who is delayed because the relocation is not completed in the scheduled timeframe and for all costs incurred by the city due to the delay.


Notwithstanding the foregoing, according to the PUC rules, a person shall not be required to remove or relocate its facilities from any right-of-way which has been vacated in favor of a non-governmental entity unless and until the reasonable costs thereof are first paid to the person. However this does not exempt the utility company from paying for the value of any taking of  said property by occupation without compensation.

SECTION 14.25.	PRE-EXCAVATION	FACILITIES	LOCATION.	In
addition to complying with the  requirements  of  Minn.  Stat.  2160.01-.09  ("One Call Excavation Notice System") before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has facilities in the area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal and vertical placement of all said facilities. Any registrant whose facilities are less than twenty (20) inches below a concrete or  asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation.

SECTION 14.26.	DAMAGE  TO  OTHER  FACILITIES.	When  the  city
does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move a registrant's facilities to protect it, the city shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably possible.



14-20
 
The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall  be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damage. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of  repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during the city's response to an emergency occasioned  by that registrant's facilities.

SECTION 14.27. RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.  Reservation of right.  If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a registrant, the registrant's rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by Minnesota Rules 7819.3200.

SECTION 14.28.	INDEMNIFICATION  AND  LIABILITY.	By registering
with the city, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.1250.



SECTION 14.29.	ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES.


Subd.1. Discontinued Operations. A registrant who has determined to discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide information satisfactory to the city that the registrant's obligations for its facilities in the right­ of-way under this chapter have been lawfully assumed by another registrant.

Subd. 2. Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is waived by the city.

SECTION 14.30. APPEAL. A right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied registration; (2) has been denied a permit; (3) has had a permit revoked; (4) believes that the fees imposed are not in conformity with Minn. Stat. § 237.163, Subd. 6; or (5) disputes a determination of the director regarding Section 14.23, subd. 2, of this ordinance may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or decision reviewed, upon written request, by the city council. The city council shall act on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided the right-of-way user has submitted its appeal at least 7 business days before the next regularly scheduled meeting. A decision by the city council affirming the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or decision of the director regarding Section 14.23 will be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.




14-21
 
SECTION 14.31.	SEVERABILITY.  If any portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.  Nothing in this chapter precludes the city from requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to requirements set forth herein.
 
Title	Page

CHAPTER 16	HERITAGE PRESERVATION

 
Section 16.01
16.02
16.03
16.04
16.05

16.06
 
Purpose Definitions
Heritage Preservation Commission
Design Guidelines for Local Historic Districts Design Guidelines for Neighborhood Conservation Districts
Violation a Misdemeanor
 
16-1
16-1
16-3
16-6

16-17
16-21
 
CHAPTER16 HERITAGE PRESERVATION

SECTION 16.01. PURPOSE. The Council  hereby  declares  that  as  a matter of public policy the preservation, protection,  perpetuation,  promotion  and use of areas, places, Buildings, Structures, lands, Districts and  other  objects having a special historical, architectural, archaeological or aesthetic  interest  or value is a public necessity, and is required in the interest of the health, prosperity, safety and welfare of the people. To this  end, the Commission is created and charged with the stewardship of Red Wing's heritage. The purpose of this Chapter is to:

1.	Safeguard the heritage of the City of Red Wing by preserving properties which reflect elements of the City's cultural, social, economic, political, visual, or architectural history;

2.	Protect and enhance the City of Red Wing's appeal and attraction to residents, visitors, and tourists, while enhancing its economic viability through the protection and promotion of its unique character as related to its history and heritage;

3.	Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest of the City of Red Wing;

4.	Foster civic pride in the beauty and notable accomplishments of the past;

5.	Promote the preservation and continued use of historic properties for the education and general welfare of the people of the City of Red Wing; and

6.	Provide educational opportunities on heritage preservation, act in an advisory capacity to its citizens, accept gifts and contributions for heritage preservation,  and coordinate activities with various related groups.

SECTION 16.02. DEFINITIONS. The following terms, as used  in this Chapter, shall have the meanings stated:

1.	"Archaeological Site" - a geographic location containing the relics, artifacts and other cultural aspects of life associated with ancient peoples.
 
2.	"Building" - any Structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.

3.	"Commission" - the City of Red Wing Heritage Preservation Commission.

4.	"Contributing Building/Structure" - a Building/Structure which has undergone significant alterations but still retains many of its original architectural details and continues to contribute to the architectural character of its District.

5.	"District" - a geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration of linkage of sites, Buildings, Structures or objects unified by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development.

6.	"Heritage Preservation Designation" - an official  action by the Council which proclaims a Heritage Preservation Site located within the limits of Red Wing to be worth preserving. Designated Buildings, Structures or Districts are protected from alteration or destruction through permit review by the Commission.

7.	"Heritage Preservation Site" - any area, place, Building, Structure, land, District, or other object, which has been duly designated as a Heritage Preservation Site pursuant to this ordinance.

8.	"Intrusive Building/Structure" - a Building/Structure which does not contribute to the architectural character of its District; this includes Buildings/Structures	that are less than 50 years old, and Buildings/Structures that have been so extensively altered that they no longer contribute to the architectural character of its District.

9.	"Local Historic Districts" - a District, as designated by the City Council,	having special or unique historical, architectural, archaeological or aesthetic interest or value, which merits protection and preservation. And, which said protection and preservation is deemed best accomplished through a full design review process.

10.	"National Trust for Historic Preservation" - a non-profit educational organization chartered by Congress to encourage public participation in the preservation of Districts, sites, Buildings, Structures and objects significant in American History and architecture.

11.	"National Register for Historic Places" - the nation's official list of properties worthy of preservation designated by the United States
 
Department of Interior, National Park Service. Nominations of properties within Minnesota to this list are made  through  the auspices of the State Historic Preservation Officer,  Minnesota Historical Society.

12.	"Neighborhood Conservation District" - a District, as designated by the City Council, having special or unique historical, architectural, archaeological or aesthetic interest or value, which merits protection, conservation	and preservation. And, which said protection, conservation and preservation is deemed best accomplished through limited design review and emphasizing public education, incentives, and minimizing direct governmental  regulation.

13.	"Pivotal Building/Structure" - a Building/Structure that retains the highest degree of its original  workmanship  and  architectural  style and has the most significant impact on the architectural character of its District; or a Building/Structure that is historically significant for its association with an important figure or event in local, State, or American  history.

14.	"Structure" - anything constructed or erected the  use of, which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground.

15.	"Directional Expression of a Building/Structure" - that the structural shape, placement of openings, and architectural details provide for a predominantly vertical, horizontal, or non-directional character to the major elevations of a Building or Structure.

16.	"Major Elevation" - those portions of a Building or Structure which are visible from the abutting public streets.

17.	"Subordinated or Minor Elevation" - those portions of a Building or Structure which are not major elevations.

SECTION 16.03.	HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION.

Subd. 1. Establishment and Composition. A Heritage Preservation Commission is hereby established. The Commission shall be composed of seven members, one of whom must be a designated representative of the  Goodhue County Historical Society, if available, pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 471.193, Subd. 5. Members of the Commission shall have  a  demonstrated interest and competence or knowledge in historic preservation.

Subd. 2.  Powers  and  Duties.  The  Commission  shall  perform  such duties as the Council may direct and shall  recommend to the Council  Buildings,
 
Structures,  lands,  archaeological  sites,  areas  or  Districts  to  be  designated  or described for Heritage Preservation, as follows:

A. The Commission shall direct the Community Development Director or designee in cooperation with required consultants to prepare studies which would catalogue Buildings, Structures, land areas  or Districts to be considered for Heritage Preservation.

B.	All Heritage Preservation Sites previously designated by the City of Red Wing shall continue their designation under this Chapter unless the Commission specifically finds that any such sites do not meet the designation criteria provided in this Subdivision.  The designation criteria shall include the following:

1.	Its character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the City of Red Wing;

2.	Its location as a site of a significant historic event;

3.	Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed	to the culture and development of the City; Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style, period, form or treatment;

4.	The identification as work of an architectural or master builder whose individual work has influenced the development of the City of Red Wing;

5.	Its embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail, material, or	craftsmanship, which represents a significant architectural innovation; and

6.	Its unique location, scale or  other  physical  characteristics representing	an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood, a District, the community, or the City of Red Wing.

C.	If the Commission recommends a proposed site be designated as a Heritage Preservation Site,  the Commission shall  transmit  to  the Advisory	Planning Commission its recommendation, including boundaries, and the proposed program for preservation of the Site. The Commission's recommendation shall determine if the designation is classified as a Local Historic District or as a Neighborhood Conservation District. The Commission shall request from the Advisory Planning Commission its comments on the proposed designation as a Heritage Preservation Site relative to the City Zoning Code and Comprehensive Plan  of  the  City  of  Red  Wing,  and  any  other  valid  City  planning
 
considerations relevant to the proposed designation. The Advisory Planning Commission's comments shall become part of the official record concerning the proposed designation, as it deems necessary. In addition, in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Section 471.193, the Commission shall send to  the  Minnesota  Historical  Society/State Historic Preservation Office any  proposed  program for  preservation  of the Heritage Preservation Site. The Commission  may make such modifications concerning the proposed designation as it deems necessary in consideration of the comments of the Minnesota Historical Society/State  Historic Preservation Office.

D.	The Commission shall review the comments of the Advisory Planning Commission and, prior to making its recommendations  to the  Council, the	Commission shall hold a public hearing and seek the recommendations of all concerned citizens. Prior to such hearing, the Commission shall cause to be published in the City's official newspaper a notice of the hearing at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing, and notice of the hearing shall be mailed at least 10 days before the day of the hearing to all owners of record of the property or properties proposed to be designated as a Heritage Preservation Site and to all owners of property situated wholly or partly within 350 feet of the Heritage	Preservation Site. The Commission may make such modifications	concerning the proposed designation, as it deems necessary in consideration of the comments of the citizens.

E.	The City Council, upon the request of the Commission, may, by ordinance, designate a Heritage Preservation Site. Such an ordinance shall require a majority vote  of all members of the City Council to be effective.

F.	For each Heritage Preservation Site recommended to the City Council, a proposed program for rehabilitation and preservation shall  be created. The United States Secretary of the Interior Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties shall be among the standards used to create such a program.	For any site within the Downtown Historic District, the Red Wing Downtown Guidelines will also be used as a standard of guidance.

G.	The Commission shall make no application to any historic register without the consent of the property owner and the Council.

H.	The Commission shall have the authority to solicit gifts and contributions to be made to the City and to assist in the preparation of applications for grant funds or for the purpose of heritage preservation programs or projects.

Subd. 3.	Building and Sign Permits.
 

A. The Building Inspector shall issue no Building permit for exterior  or interior building improvements that changes the exterior appearance of a building for any property or District that has been designated as a Heritage Preservation Site until such time as the applicant has received a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Commission pursuant to Section 16.04.

B.	The Community Development Director or designee shall issue no sign permit for any property or District that has been designated as a Heritage Preservation Site until such time as the applicant has received a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Commission pursuant to Section 16.04.

C.	The Building Inspector shall issue no permit for demolition, Building additions, or new construction for any property or District that has been designated as a Heritage Preservation Site until such time as the applicant	has received a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Commission pursuant to Sections 16.04 or 16.05.

D.	In the event a Certificate of Appropriateness is not granted, the Commission shall inform the applicant, in writing, of the procedure for appeal of the Commission's decision.

Subd. 4.	Decisions of Commission.

A. In the case that the Commission has made the necessary findings that Buildings, Structures, lands, areas or Districts cannot be preserved without acquisition, the Commission shall recommend  to  the  Council that the property in question be acquired by gift, by negotiation or by eminent domain as provided for in Chapter 117 of Minnesota Statutes.

B. The Commission may also recommend to the Council variations of use from those permitted by the Zoning Chapter which are comparable to the improvements on the property and to other properties in the area when the Commission finds that such variances are necessary to alleviate financial hardship placed upon the owner of  designated properties by orders of the Commission.

Subd. 5.   Recording of Designated Areas.   The City Clerk shall record with the Goodhue County Recorder the legal description  of  all  Buildings, Structures, lands, areas or Districts designated for historical preservation by the Council.

SECTION 16.04.	DESIGN	GUIDELINES	FOR	LOCAL	HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
 

Subd. 1. No sign permit or Building permit for exterior modifications or interior structural changes that would impact any future exterior renovation to any Building, Structure, or landscape, located within a local historic District, shall be issued, until such time as the applicant has submitted a design review application to the Heritage Preservation Commission and received a Certificate of Appropriateness. Said design review application shall be on a form prescribed by the Commission. In the event a Certificate of Appropriateness is not granted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the Commission to the Council.

In the case of additions and new construction, Certificates of Appropriateness for additions to subordinated or minor elevations and new construction of accessory structures and garages located in a residential Historic District shall be issued without review by the Commission. Review by the Commission shall not be required for the demolition of accessory structures and garages located in residential Historic Districts which have been determined to have no special or unique historic characteristics. The Commission shall conduct surveys in all residential Historic Districts for the purpose of identifying  and inventorying said special or unique accessory structures and garages.

Subd. 2. When reviewing design applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Commission shall make its findings based upon the following guidelines and criteria:

A.  A  completed  design  review  application  form  available  from  the  City Community Development Director or designee.

B.	Adherence  to the Secretary  of Interior's General Standards for Historic Preservation Projects as amended:

1.	Every reasonable effort shall  be made to provide a compatible use for a property that requires minimal alteration of the  Building, Structure or site and its environment, or to use a property for its originally intended purpose. The Commission may require written economic,	architectural, and/or Building use justifications  for proposed	uses which would alter the compatibility of the Building/Structure or use with surrounding Buildings or Structures.

2.	The distinguishing original qualities or character of a  Building, Structure, or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The removal	or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural features shall be avoided whenever possible.

3.	All Buildings, Structures, and sites shall be recognized as products of their own time.   Proposed alterations which have no historical basis and which seek to create an appearance from an earlier era shall be
 
avoided whenever possible.

4.	Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and development of a Building, Structure, or site and its environment. If significant, these changes shall be left intact whenever  possible.

5.	Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a Building, Structure, or site, shall be retained if at all possible.

6.	Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material should match the material being replaced  in composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features shall be based on accurate	duplications of features, substantiated by historical, physical, or pictorial evidence, rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements from other Buildings or Structures.

7.	The surface cleaning of Buildings or Structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the historic Building materials shall not be undertaken.

8.	Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archeological resources affected by, or adjacent to, any acquisition, protection, stabilization, preservation, rehabilitation, restoration, or reconstruction project.

9.	Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall be discouraged when such alterations and additions destroy significant historic, architectural, or cultural material and such design is not compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of the property, neighborhood, or environment.

10.	Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to Buildings or Structures approved by the Commission shall be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the Building or Structure would be unimpaired.

11.	The original exterior  walls  or  surfaces  of  historically  significant Buildings  and  Structures  shall  be retained  to  the  maximum  extent
 
possible.	In  no  case  shall  more  than  25  percent  of  the  original exterior walls or surfaces be destroyed, removed, or covered.

Subd. 3.     The applicant for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall identify the Proposal as one of Seven Classifications of Work: (1)  Minor  Face-Lift;  (2) Major  Face-Lift;  (3)  Restoration;  (4)  Major  Rehabilitation;  (5)  New  Construction;
(6)	Signage; and (7) Other. In all of the seven classifications, the applicant shall attach the following information (listed below) to  the  design  review  application form: (1) current photograph; (2) scaled elevation of side(s) of Building  or Structure to be modified; (3) paint chips; (4) narrative of work to be done and how the work relates to the architectural history of the Building or Structure (A history of the Building is available from the City Community Development office, City Library, and/or the Goodhue County Historical  Museum);  and  (5)  Building  material samples.

A.	Minor Face-Lift.

1.	A  minor face-lift  is defined  as work that does  not significantly  alter, but  rather, enhances  the  historic or original  exterior  appearance  of the Building or Structure. This  may  include  refinishing,  repair, painting, and general maintenance.

2.	The Commission encourages the use of  materials similar to those used in the original construction, wherever possible. Synthetic and non-similar materials may be allowed only when replacement of similar materials is not feasible.

3.	Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to Buildings or Structures shall be done in such a manner that if they were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the original Building or Structure would not be destroyed. The Commission will not approve sandblasting or chemical treatment that would damage the Building or Structure. The Commission will not approve the removal of cornices, painting of unpainted masonry, alterations to existing historic or original openings for windows and doorways and changes to other significant architectural detail.

B.	Major Face-Lift.

1.	A major exterior wall face-lift shall not  destroy  the  distinguishing qualities or character of the property and its environment. It shall enhance the existing size, scale, color, material, and character of the exterior historic features of the Building or Structure.

2.	The requirements  for  Building  or  Structure  modification  outlined under  minor face-lift  also  apply  to  major face-lift.    The  removal  or
 
alteration  of any  historic  material  or architectural  features  shall  be minimized, consistent with the proposed use.

3.	Change of an intrusive Building or Structure shall be encouraged if such design is compatible to the size, scale, color, material, and character of the neighborhood or adjacent Buildings or Structures.

C.	Restoration.

1.	Restoration is defined as the act or process of accurately recovering the original form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing earlier work.

2.	Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, new synthetic material shall match the material being replaced in design,	color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features shall be based on accurate duplications of original features,  substantiated  by physical or pictorial evidence from the local District survey information rather than	on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural features from other Buildings or Structures.

3.	The requirements outlined under  major  facelift  also  apply  to restoration.

D.	Major Rehabilitation.

1.	Major rehabilitation is defined as the act or process of returning a property to a state of utility (both interior and exterior) through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient contemporary  use while preserving those portions or features of the property which are significant to its historical, architectural, and cultural values.

2.	The requirements outlined under restoration also apply to major rehabilitation.

E.	New Construction. New construction with designs which are architecturally	significant and durable shall be encouraged. Contemporary	design for new Buildings or Structures in old neighborhoods	and additions to existing Buildings, Structures or landscaping shall be encouraged if such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of the neighborhood and adjacent Buildings or Structures.  New retail Buildings or Structures shall
 
have window and doorway openings compatible with adjacent Buildings or Structures in the District.

F.	Signage. Signage shall be designed to enhance and complement the historic character of Buildings and Structures within the District. Prior to issuance of a sign permit for a new sign or the replacement  of  an existing sign, the applicant shall complete a design review application. The Commission shall review said application and issue a Certificate of Appropriateness  provided the following guidelines are met:

1.	Compliance. All sign permits for property within the local historic Districts shall comply both with the requirements of this Chapter and the Zoning Chapter.

2.	Sign and Placement. Signs shall be positioned so they are  an integral design feature of the Building or Structure which means that signs shall help define and enhance the architectural features of the Building or Structure and shall be placed so that they do not destroy architectural details, such as but not limited to, stone arches, glass transom panels, or decorative  brickwork.  Signs may be placed only in the horizontal lintel "sign space" above the store front windows, or within window glass, attached to awnings, or in areas where signs were historically attached. In addition  to the  maximum  sign sizes and placement which are controlled by the Zoning Chapter, the following rule shall be followed: Awning signs may be placed on the side panels, front drop, or awning valance but shall not extend vertically or horizontally beyond the limits of an awning and shall not exceed 40 percent of the surface area of the side panel, front drop, or valance of the awning.

3.	Colors. Sign colors shall blend with the Building or Structure facade to which the sign is attached and be compatible with the property's use.  No more than two colors shall be used for sign lettering.

4.	Message. The sign message shall be legible and relate to the nature of the use. These requirements may be accomplished through the use of words, pictures, names, symbols, and logos.

5.	Lettering. Lettering styles shall be legible and relate to the character of the property's use. In addition, a sign shall contain no more than two lettering styles; and lettering shall occupy no more than 60 percent of the sign's total area and capital letters shall be no more than 75 percent of the height of the sign background.

6.	Illumination. External illumination of signs is permitted. Illumination may be incandescent or fluorescent but shall emit a continuous white
 
light that prevents direct light from shining onto the street. Exposed neon lighted signs may be appropriate to  the  historic  District provided they meet the other requirements of this Section.  The use of internally lit signs, such as but not limited to, backlit plastic, is not permitted. Exceptions to this guideline shall be allowed for the following: public service time and/or temperature signs; theater signage.

7.	Freestanding Signs. All freestanding signs which comply with the requirements of the Zoning Chapter shall be located, sized, and landscaped	so that they do not obscure the view of historic properties.

8.	Historic Projecting Signs. A sign may project more than 18 inches from the Building or Structure onto public rights-of-way if it meets all of the following criteria:

(a)	Historic projecting signs are only allowed within designated local historic Districts  and  after application and approval of a design review application.

(b)	There shall be no more than one historic projecting sign per storefront business with a street entrance except that retail malls shall be allowed one historic projecting sign per major public entrance.	There shall be no more than two historic  projecting signs located within any 20 foot block frontage on the same side of the street.

(c)	A historic projecting sign shall be considered secondary to other signage  on the  Building  or Structure.   The  maximum  allowable size of each sign shall be six square feet per sign face. Historic projecting signs set perpendicular to the Building or Structure wall shall be double faced and allowed up to 12 square feet for both sides.  Historic projecting signs shall present the same image on each side so public view is a consistent view and no plain backs are in public view.  Three  dimensional  object  signs  shall  not exceed two square feet at their largest cross section.

(d)	No historic projecting sign shall have a width greater than four square feet.

(e)	Historic projecting signs shall not extend more than five feet beyond the wall of the Building or Structure. Such signs shall not be closer than six inches from the wall of the Building/Structure to which it is attached.
 
(f)	No part of the historic projecting sign and supports shall be less than eight feet above grade nor higher than two-thirds  of  the height of the Building or Structure to which it is attached or 15 feet above grade, whichever is higher.

(g)	All projecting signs and brackets shall be securely fastened to the Building or Structure.

(h)	Supporting brackets shall be designed to be compatible  to  the sign and bolted whenever possible into masonry joints in order to avoid damaging brick or other stonework.

(i)	Historic projecting signs shall be designed so that they are compatible with the architecture of the local historic District that the sign is located within and shall be compatible with the architectural style and character of the Building or Structure to which the sign  is attached. Well-designed contemporary signs, which symbolize the services offered, are encouraged. Allowed historic projecting signs shall be designed to be legible, related to the character of the property's use, and be constructed of compatible material to the Building or Structure such as wood, iron, or steel.

U) No historic projecting sign shall be erected, placed or mounted in such a manner as to interfere with any exit, fire escape or window of any Building or Structure, nor shall any historic projecting sign interfere with, block, cover or overlap an architectural feature of the Building or Structure, such as: cornices, window trims, lintels, and decorative brick, stone, inlays, or other similar architectural ornamentation.

(k) No historic projecting sign or sign structures shall have any nails, tacks, wires, or sharp metal edges protruding therefrom.

9.	A-Frame/Swinger/Sandwich    Signs.	A-Frame  style  signs  shall  be permitted provided they meet the following regulations:

(a)	Such signs shall be no larger than 10 square feet in sign area per side.

(b)	Such signs shall not be higher than forty-eight (48) inches (4 feet) or wider than thirty (30) inches (2-1/2 feet).

(c)	Such signs shall only be displayed during business hours.
 
(d)	Such signs may be placed on private property or on the  public sidewalk near the place of business but  must  provide  at  least sixty (60) inches (5 feet) of clearance on the sidewalk for pedestrian movement.

(e)	Only one such sign shall be allowed per Zoned Lot.

(f)	Such signs shall complement and enhance the architectural qualities of the Building or Structure and shall be compatible and consistent with the fagade of the Building or Structure and other permanent signage on the Building or Structure.

G.	Other. Other is defined as exterior work not meeting the definitions of the categories listed above in SECTION 16.04., Subd. 3 - Minor Face-Lift, Major Face-Lift, Restoration, Major Rehabilitation, New
Construction, and Signage.  Work falling under this category includes
alterations which make possible an efficient contemporary  use while preserving those portions or features of the property which are significant to its historical, architectural, and cultural values. Wherever possible, alterations to Buildings or Structures shall be done in such a manner that if they were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the original Building or Structure would not be destroyed.

Solar Energy Systems.  The City of Red Wing encourages the installation of solar energy systems as a renewable energy source. However, there may be instances where solar energy systems are not appropriate on a particular building or site and may be detrimental to the character of the District.

a.	The Commission has established the following recommendations  for property owners that are considering the placement of a solar energy system on their property located in a historic district.
1.	If possible use a ground mounted system in a screened rear or side yard that limits views from public streets and adjacent properties.
11.	If a ground  mount system  is not possible, locate a
system on an accessory building or a new addition to minimize the impact of the system on the distinguishing features of the historic asset on the site.  A principle building mount should only be considered when a ground mount or accessory building mount is not possible.
111.		If possible, a principle building mount should be placed on a new addition or a non-historic building to minimize
 
the impact of the system on the distinguishing features of the historic asset on the site.
1v. Place systems in areas that minimize their views from public streets, including side streets. Avoid placing systems on primary fagades or street facing walls and roofs.
v.   Avoid system placement  that would require or result in the removal or alteration of distinguishing qualities or character defining elements of the property and its environment.
v1.   On pitched roofs, low profile systems should be used that match the roof profile and are flush mounted.
v11.		On flat roofs, systems should be set back from the roof edge to limit visibility from public streets. The system's installation angle and height should also be considered to limit visibility.

b.	Solar energy systems shall be permitted without review by the Commission provided they meet the solar energy system regulations found in Division 55 of the Red Wing Zoning Ordinance and the following regulations:
1.	The solar energy system is ground mounted and is
screened from all public streets to the greatest possible means while still achieving maximum function and effectiveness.
11.     The solar energy system  is mounted on an accessory
building which has been determined by the Commission to have no special or unique historic characteristics.
111.	The solar energy system is mounted on a non-street
facing pitched roof, matches the pitch of the roof, is flush mounted or mounted no higher than four inches above the roof, and is not visible above the roofline of the primary fagade.
1v.  The solar energy system is mounted on a flat roof and is setback from the edge of the roofline as follows:
a.	A forward facing collector surface, parallel to a corresponding roofline, must be setback from the corresponding roofline a distance of at least four feet (4').
b.	A backward or side facing collector surface, parallel to a corresponding roofline, must be setback from the corresponding roofline a distance equal to or greater than 50% of the system's overall height above the roof surface.
 
c.	Solar energy systems that require a Building Permit and that do not meet the regulations above in Section 16.04 Subd. 3,
G. b. shall not be issued a Building Permit until such time as the applicant has submitted a design review application to the Heritage Preservation Committee and received a Certificate of Appropriateness.

Subd. 4.	The Commission shall make findings of fact prior to approving a Certificate of Appropriateness.   These findings shall include:

A. In the case of a proposed alteration or addition to an existing Building or Structure, that such alteration or addition will not materially impair the architectural	or historic value of the Building or Structure; the Commission	shall make written findings considering the existing Buildings or Structures and  existing  exterior  appearance,  Building height, Building width, depth, or other dimensions, roof style, type of Building materials, ornamentation, paving, setback and color.

B.	In the case of the proposed demolition of a Building or Structure, prior to approval of such demolition the Commission shall make written findings on the following: architectural and historical merit of the Building or Structure, the effect on surrounding Buildings or Structures, the effect of any new proposed construction on the remainder of the Building or Structure, in case of partial demolition, and on surrounding Buildings or Structures; the economic value or usefulness of the Building or Structure as it now exists; or if altered or modified, in comparison with the value or usefulness of any proposed Structure designated to replace the present Building(s) or Structure(s).

Review by the Commission shall not be required for the demolition of Buildings or Structures that have been damaged by fire, a natural disaster, or other similar event and which has been determined to be a total loss by the Community Development Director, or designee after consultation with the City's Building Official and the property owner. In the case of a proposed demolition of a pivotal or contributing building requiring a Certificate of Appropriateness, a mandatory 120-day waiting period from the date the application is accepted shall be in effect before demolition may begin.

C.	In the case of a proposed new Building or Structure, that such Building or Structure will not in itself, or by reason of its location or the site, materially impair the architectural or historic value of Buildings or Structures or adjacent sites in the immediate vicinity within the Local Historic District.
 
D.	The Commission shall compare the proposal with an equivalent pivotal Building or Structure of similar architectural style that is located within the same local historic District.

Subd. 5. The applicant shall pay to  the  City  design  review  fees  as outlined in the City fee ordinance.

Subd. 6. Amortization  -  Removal  of  Nonconforming  Signs.  Any  sign which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter shall be amortized and removed from the Heritage Preservation District by March 1, 1996, and continuance of such a sign shall thereafter be unlawful and subject to all penalties imposed by this Chapter and City Code, and the City may exercise any and all remedies available to it, including civil remedies to compel its removal. Until removed, all signs shall be kept in good repair; however, if major repair is required, the sign shall be removed from the Heritage Preservation District. Major repair includes but is not limited to replacement or covering of more than 25 percent of the surface area of the sign or replacement of a structural, major electrical or supporting part.

Subd. 7.    If no action  upon the design  review application  submitted  to the Commission has been taken at the expiration of 60 days from the date submitted, the Certificate of Appropriateness  shall be deemed to be issued.

Subd. 8. Upon issuance of a Certificate  of  Appropriateness,  the Community Development Director or designee shall furnish the applicant and the Building Inspector with a copy of the Certificate. In the event the Commission denies the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Community Development Director or designee shall furnish the applicant and the Building Inspector with a copy of recommendations for changes necessary to be  made before the Commission will reconsider the application. Said Certificate or recommendations shall be dated as of the date on which the Commission reached its decision on said application and shall be sent to the address of the applicant as shown on the application.

Subd. 9.    Any  individual  having a legal interest in property affected  by the Commission's decision shall, within 30 days after the date of said decision, have a right to appeal such decision to the Council for review.

SECTION 16.05. DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION  DISTRICTS.

Subd. 1.  Definitions.  The following terms, as used in this Section, shall have the meanings stated:

1.	"Directional Expression of a Building/Structure" - that the structural shape, placement of openings, and architectural details provide for a
 
predominantly vertical, horizontal, or non-directional  character to the major elevations of a Building or Structure.

2.	"Major Elevation" - those portions of a Building or Structure which are visible from the abutting public streets.

3.	"Subordinated or Minor Elevation" - those portions of a Building or Structure which are not major elevations.

Subd. 2.	Application Required.

A. No Certificate of Appropriateness for demolition, Building additions, including solar energy systems, or new construction for any Building, Structure, or landscape located within a Neighborhood Conservation District shall be issued until such time as the applicant has submitted a design review application to, and said  application  has been  reviewed and approved by, the Commission. No application shall be accepted unless completed  in full and accompanied by any additional information as may reasonably be required by the Commission. Review by the Commission shall not be required for the demolition of Buildings or Structures that have been damaged by fire, a natural disaster, or other similar event and which has been determined to be a total loss by the Community Development Director, or designee  after  consultation  with the City's Building Official and the property owner. In the case of a proposed demolition of a pivotal or contributing building requiring a Certificate of Appropriateness, a mandatory 120-day waiting period from the date the application is accepted shall be in effect before demolition may begin.

B. Design review applications shall be on a form prescribed by the Commission, and available from the City Planner or Building Inspector. Review by the Commission shall not be  required  for  accessory structures and garages which have been determined to have no special or unique historic  characteristics.  The  Commission  shall  conduct surveys in all Neighborhood Conservation Districts for the purpose of identifying and inventorying said special or unique accessory structures and garages.

Subd. 3.	The Commission shall make findings of fact prior to approving a Certificate of Appropriateness.   These findings shall include:

A. In the case of proposed demolition of a Building or Structure: i) the architectural and historic merit of the Building/Structure; ii) the effect of demolition on surrounding Buildings and Structures; iii) if a partial demolition, the effect of the proposed demolition on the remainder of the Building/Structure;  and  iv)  the  economic  value  or  usefulness  of  the
 
Building or Structure as it currently exists, compared with the economic value or usefulness of the proposed Building or Structure.

B.	In the case of additions and new construction, Certificates of Appropriateness for additions to  subordinated or minor elevations and new construction of accessory structures and garages shall be issued without review by the Commission. The Commission shall review applications	relating to major elevations and new construction of principal Buildings or Structures for compatibility of said addition or new construction		with standard characteristics found within the Neighborhood Conservation District. Said standard characteristics shall be established for the following:

Building/Structure  height mass of Building/Structure volume
scale of adjacent Buildings/Structures roof lines
site setbacks
proportion of door and window openings directional expression of Buildings/Structures

1.	Solar Energy Systems.  The City of Red Wing encourages the installation of solar energy systems as a renewable energy source. However, there may be instances where solar energy systems are not appropriate on a particular building or site and may be detrimental to the character of the District.

a)	The Commission has established the following recommendations for property owners that are considering the placement of a solar energy system on their property located in a conservation district.

1.	If possible use a ground mounted system in a screened rear or side yard that limits views from public streets and adjacent properties.
11.	If a ground  mount system  is not possible, locate a system on
an accessory building or a new addition to minimize the impact of the system on the distinguishing features of the historic asset on the site.  A principle building mount should only be considered when a ground mount or accessory building mount is not possible.
111.	If possible, a principle building mount should be placed on a
new addition or a non-historic building to minimize the impact of the system on the distinguishing features of the historic asset on the site.
 
1v.		Place systems in areas that minimize their views from public streets, including side streets. Avoid placing systems on primary fagades or street facing walls and roofs.
v.	Avoid system placement  that would require or result in the
removal or alteration of distinguishing qualities or character defining elements of the property and its environment.
v1.	On pitched roofs, low profile systems should be used that match the roof profile and are flush mounted.
v11.		On flat roofs, systems should be set back from the roof edge to limit visibility from public streets. The system's installation angle and height should also be considered to limit visibility.

b)	Solar energy systems shall be permitted without review by the Commission provided they meet the solar energy system regulations found in Division 55 of the Red Wing Zoning Ordinance and the following regulations:
1.	The solar energy system is ground mounted and is screened from all public streets to the greatest possible means while still achieving maximum function and effectiveness.
11.	The solar energy system is mounted on an accessory building which has been determined by the Commission to have no special or unique historic characteristics.
111.	The solar energy system is mounted on a non-street facing
pitched roof, matches the pitch of the roof, is flush mounted or mounted no higher than four inches above the roof, and is not visible above the roofline of the primary fagade.
1v.	The solar energy system is mounted on a flat roof and is setback from the edge of the roofline as follows:
a)	A forward facing collector surface, parallel to a corresponding roofline, must be setback from the corresponding roofline a distance of at least four feet (4').
b)	A backward or side facing collector surface, parallel to a corresponding roofline, must be setback from the corresponding roofline a distance equal to or greater than 50% of the system's overall height above the roof surface.
c)	Solar energy systems that require a Building Permit and that do
not meet the regulations above in Section 16.05 Subd. 3., B., 1.,
b. shall not be issued a Building Permit until such time as the applicant has submitted a design review application to the Heritage Preservation Committee and received a Certificate of Appropriateness.
 
C.	In the case of public improvements, the Commission shall review  all plans for curb and gutter, street, or utility reconstruction and comment to the City Council on the effects of said improvements within 30 days of notification of the project. No construction or reconstruction of a public improvement shall commence until said comment has been made to the City Council or 30 days has elapsed since the Commission was notified of the project. Review shall not be required for routine maintenance, repair, or emergency work such as street patching, street overlays, driveway	installations, boulevard tree planting, accessibility ramp improvements, utility repairs, sidewalk repair, or sidewalk replacement.

Subd. 4.   Standards  For  Issuance.    A  Certificate  of  Appropriateness shall not be issued until the Commission determines that the project proposed in the design review application complies with Section16.04, Subdivision 2B.

Subd. 5.    If no action  upon the design  review application  submitted  to the Commission has been taken at the expiration of 60 days from the date the application is accepted, the Certificate of Appropriateness shall be deemed to be issued.

Subd. 6.     Upon acceptance  by the  City of a design  review application for demolition, signs shall be posted on all proposed demolition sites indicating the following:

A.  The Building/Structure to be demolished;

B.	The future plans for the site;

C.	That a 120-day waiting period, from the date the application is accepted, is in effect before demolition may begin; and

D.	The actions taken to mitigate the adverse impacts of demolition.

Subd. 7. Upon issuance of a Certificate  of  Appropriateness,  the Community Development Director or designee shall furnish the applicant and the Building Inspector with a copy thereof. In the event the Commission denies the issuance of  a Certificate of Appropriateness,  the  Community  Development Director or designee shall furnish the applicant and the Building Inspector with a copy of recommendations for changes necessary to be  made before the Commission will reconsider the application. Said Certificate or recommendations shall be dated as of the date the Commission reached its decision on said application and shall be sent to the address of the applicant as shown on the application.

Subd. 8.    Any  individual  having a legal interest in property affected  by the Commission's  decision pursuant to Subdivision 3 of this Section shall, within
 
30 days after the date of said decision, have a right to appeal such decision to the Council for review.

(CODIFIER'S NOTE: Heritage Preservation Districts appear in Chapter 25.)

SECTION 16.06.	VIOLATION	A	MISDEMEANOR.	Every	person
violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this Chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and  upon  conviction  thereof, shall be punished as for  a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions  hereof.
 
Title	Page

CHAPTER 17	HARBORS AND BAYS

 
Section  17.01
17.02
17.03
17.04
 
Regulation of Boats in Harbors
Barge and Commercial Craft Prohibited Commercial  Fishing Prohibited
Violation a Misdemeanor
 
17-1
17-2
17-2
17-3
 
CHAPTER17 HARBORS AND BAYS

SECTION 17.01.	REGULATION OF BOATS IN HARBORS.

Subd. 1.	Definitions.  The following terms, as used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings stated:

1.	"Boat" - any contrivance used or designed for navigation on water.

2.	"Motorboat" - any watercraft propelled in any manner by machinery, including watercraft temporarily equipped with detachable motors.

3.	"Red Wing Mississippi Waterways" - the "Upper Commercial and Recreational Harbor", "Colvill Park Harbor", also known as "Training School Slough", "Colvill Slough", "Little River" and "Small Boat Harbor'' also known as "Red Wing Bay" and their connecting channels to the Mississippi River located within the municipal boundaries of the City of Red Wing, Goodhue County, Minnesota. A map thereof is on file in the office of the City Engineer and the Port Authority Office.

4.	"Slow-Minimum Wake Speed" - operation of a motorboat at less than planning speed whereby the wash or wake created by the motorboat is minimal and in no case at a speed of more than five miles per hour.

5.	"Live Aboard" - any boat in which human occupants choose to stay overnight anytime between the dates of October 31 and April 1 of any calendar year.

6.	"Red Wing Small Boat Harbor" - "Small Boat Harbor" - also known as "Red Wing Bay".

Subd. 2.	Regulations and Unlawful Acts.

A Regulations. In the interests of public health,  safety  and  general welfare, the following regulations are hereby imposed upon all boats operated,	placed or maintained in the "Red Wing Mississippi Waterways".

B.	Unlawful Act. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorboat at greater than a slow-minimum wake speed in the "Red Wing Mississippi Waterways".
 

C.	Live Aboards. It is unlawful for any individual to occupy a Live Aboard, as defined in this Chapter, unless it is in compliance with MN Statutes Section	103G.245, as amended, and the individual has received authorization from the City by entering into a Live Aboard lease agreement approved by the Red Wing Port Authority.

Subd. 3.  Exemption.  Boats  utilized  by  government   agencies   and rescue craft while on official business shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section.

Subd. 4.    Enforcement.   The  Sheriff  of  Goodhue  County  and the  City are authorized and directed to inform the public by official notification, as well as posting and buoying the "Red Wing Mississippi Waterways", in accordance  with Department of Natural Resources Regulations. The Goodhue County Sheriff's Department and the Police Department shall be authorized and entitled to enforce the provisions of this Section.

SECTION 17.02.	BARGE AND COMMERCIAL CRAFT PROHIBITED.

Subd. 1.  Prohibition.  It is unlawful for any barge, tanker, tug boat, or other vessel used primarily for the commercial transportation of commodities to be permitted to enter, tie up, moor or anchor within the entrance limits of the "Red Wing Small Boat Harbor".

Subd. 2.  Entrance Limits.  The entrance limits of the "Red Wing Small Boat Harbor" are hereby defined as follows: Commencing at the intersection of the North right-of-way line of the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad and a line parallel to and 60 feet Westerly from the Westerly line of Hill Street vacated; thence North 26° 48' 30" West along said line (which is parallel to and 60 feet Westerly from the Westerly line of Hill Street vacated) a distance of 161.0 feet to a point; thence North 51° 32' 30" East a distance of 233 feet to a point; thence North 12° 44' 30" West 250 feet to the waters of a bay of the Mississippi River for a point of beginning; thence North 65° 39' West to a point on the shore of the "Bay Point Development Property" point and there terminating.

Subd. 3.  Signs.  Signs  shall  be  erected  and  maintained   at   the entrance of the "Red Wing Small Boat Harbor" indicating the limits of the harbor and notifying the public that entrance therein by any barge, tanker, tug boat or other vessel used primarily for the commercial transportation of commodities is unlawful.

SECTION 17.03.	COMMERCIAL  FISHING PROHIBITED.	It is unlawful
for any person to engage in commercial fishing, wherein nets of any kind are used, in "Colvill Park Bay;" also known as "Training School Slough," "Colvill Slough" and the  "Little  River;"  except  that  the  Council  may  authorize  and  direct  persons
 
engaged by them to seine in Colvill Park Bay for the purpose of removing rough fish in said Bay.

SECTION 17.04.	VIOLATION	A	MISDEMEANOR.	Every	person
violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this Chapter when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and  upon  conviction  thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
 
Title	Page

CHAPTER 25		LISTING OF UNCODED ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS IN EFFECT

 
Section 25.01

25.02
25.03
25.04
25.05
25.06
25.07
25.08
25.09
25.10
25.11
25.12
25.13
25.14
25.15
25.16
25.17
25.18
25.19
25.20
25.21
25.22
25.23
25.24
25.25
25.26
 
Resolution of October 7, 1904 Accepting T. B. Sheldon Memorial Auditorium
Acceptance of John H. Rich Gift.
Establish Improvement Bond Account Grant Railroad Right-of-Way
Establish Downtown Parking District Change of Ward Boundary Lines Vacation of Land
Naming and Renaming Streets
Port Authority
Adoption of Codification Charter Amendments
Establish Urban and Rural Service Districts
Cable TV Franchise Gas Franchise Electric Franchise
Flood Plain Map Amendments
Heritage Preservation District Designations Annexations
Zoning Map Amendments Authorize Issuance of Bonds Zoning Moratoriums
Zoning Annexed Property
Declaring a State of Emergency Fee Schedule Amendments
Unpaid Fees Assessment Ordinance
Opt-Out of Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593
 


25-2
25-5
25-5
25-5
25-7
25-8
25-9
25-11
25-11
25-12
25-12
25-14
25-15
25-16
25-16
25-16
25-17
25-17
25-19
25-27
25-28
25-28
25-29
25-30
25-31
25-32
 























(Updated 08-27-2011)
 
CHAPTER 25

LISTING OF UNCODED ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS IN EFFECT

All ordinances and resolutions described in this Chapter  remain  in effect after adoption of the City Code. They are of a permanent and continuing nature as authority for a specific act which has been performed. The ordinances are of two types that generally distinguish them from other provisions of the City Code, either
(1) their texts have no continuing reference value, or (2) they are in the nature of a
contract and of only occasional reference value. For these reasons it appears justified to list and describe them here only to facilitate finding them in the event this becomes necessary. Also included in this Chapter is the resolution adopted October 7, 1904, accepting T. B. Sheldon Memorial Auditorium in its full text. However, this is not to imply that any other resolution adopted by the City Council is in any way amended or affected by inclusion of this resolution.
 
SECTION 25.01.	RESOLUTION.

Resolution of October 7, 1904, Accepting T. B. Sheldon Memorial Auditorium

WHEREAS, at a meeting of the City Council of the City of Red Wing, held on March 14, 1903, a resolution was duly adopted accepting the proposition made to said city by Annie L. Sheldon, Fred Busch and E. H. Blodgett,  as  Trustees under the will of T. B. Sheldon, deceased, to give and convey to the  city  a Memorial Auditorium (which said proposition is now on the files of the city), provided that the legislature of the state should grant to the city the authority to accept the gift of the proffered Auditorium, and authorize the City  Council  to provide for the manner of its management.

AND, WHEREAS, the legislature of the state of Minnesota, by Chapter 22 of General Laws for 1903, has granted to the city the authority to accept such gift and authorize the City Council to provide for the manner of its management;

AND, WHEREAS, the said Trustees have signified their readiness to complete their said gift to the city by conveying to it the said Auditorium building and its equipment together with the real premises whereon the same is situate, to­ wit: Lots five, six and seven in Block twenty-nine in said Red Wing, upon the terms and conditions, and with the restrictions and for the purposes in the deed of conveyance thereof and hereinafter set forth; therefore, be it

RESOLVED, by the City Council of the City of Red Wing, Minnesota, as follows, to-wit:

That the said gift and conveyance to the City of Red Wing of the said property by said Trustees upon the terms and conditions and with the restrictions and for the purposes in said conveyance contained is hereby accepted by the City of Red Wing, and the Mayor of the city, or such person as he may designate for that purpose, is hereby authorized for and in behalf of the city to  receive  and accept delivery of the said conveyance.

That the said gift and conveyance of said property and the title thereto is hereby so accepted and the same shall by said city be held, managed, controlled, maintained and preserved for the use and benefit of said city and the residents thereof in the manner, and upon the terms and conditions and with the restrictions and for the purpose in said conveyance contained and as follows, to-wit:

First - That the said building upon said premises shall forever be known as "The T. B. Sheldon Memorial Auditorium", and the said real premises  shall  be used exclusively as a site for and for the purpose of the said building.
 
Second - The exclusive care, custody and management of said property shall be forever vested in five resident voters of said city, who shall constitute a body to be known as "The T. B. Sheldon Auditorium Board". Said board shall for and in behalf of said city have the general charge of said property and full power and authority to let or lease the same for  musical and theatrical entertainments, public meetings, lectures and such other purposes as in their judgment may contribute to the education, enjoyment, improvement or amusement of the people of Red Wing. Such board shall also have exclusive power to fix the rental of said building for such purposes; and may in their discretion grant the use of said Auditorium for any local public purpose or for entertainments of an unusually high character, or for memorial services of the Grand Army of the Republic or for similar societies, or for the exercises or entertainments of the public schools or other institutions of learning, or of any literary, musical, social, or charitable society of Red Wing, or of any political or fraternal organization of said city free or at such reduced rates as they may deem proper.

All revenues derived from said property shall by said board be paid to the City Treasurer, and shall be by him set apart and kept as a separate special fund to be known as the "Auditorium Fund" and shall be by him paid out for  such purposes as said board may see fit to use the same, but only upon the written order therefor drawn and signed by some officer of said board by it duly authorized to draw such orders. In no case shall the said fund or any part thereof be mingled with or transferred to any other fund belonging to said city, nor used for any other purpose than the care, maintenance, and conduct of said Auditorium  as is herein provided.

The said board shall have power to use and appropriate said fund for the care, improvement, repair, equipment and maintenance of said property in such manner and to such extent as it may deem desirable. Whenever such fund may by accumulation exceed the amount required for the current  expenses  of  said board for the purpose aforesaid, said board may and is hereby authorized to invest and reinvest such accumulated funds from time to time in interest-bearing securities as it may deem safe and desirable, and all income derived from such investment shall constitute and be a part of said Auditorium Fund.

Third - The members of said board shall in the first instance be the following named resident voters of Red Wing, and their respective terms  of  office  shall expire on the first day of August in the year herein set opposite their respective names, to-wit:

Horace S. Rich, term expires August 1, 1905. Charles A. Betcher, term expires August 1, 1906.
B. Gerlach, term expires August 1, 1907.
Charles E. Sheldon, term expires August 1, 1908.
0. M. Hall, term expires August 1, 1909.
 
Thereafter their respective successors shall be nominated and, with the approval of the city council, appointed by the Mayor of said city, and shall hold their respective offices for the term of five years from the time of expiration of the terms of their respective predecessors.

Fourth - Any vacancy which may hereafter occur in the membership of the said board shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the Mayor.

Fifth - The said city shall not charge or collect any fee or license for any exhibition or other entertainment by said board allowed to be held in said Auditorium. It shall keep the sidewalks about said building in neat and proper condition, and it shall furnish free of charge the water necessary for said building, and if so requested by said board by reason of the inadequacy of its said fund, it shall furnish suitable janitor service for the care of said building under the direction of said board.

Sixth - The said board shall out of its said fund insure and keep insured the said building for and in the name of said city against loss and damage by fire. Any and all moneys derived from such insurance by reason of any such loss or damage, if such there be, shall be paid into and form a part of said Auditorium Fund, and shall only be used for the said purposes for which said fund is available as aforesaid.

Seventh - In case such building is injured or partially destroyed by fire or otherwise, and the said fund is insufficient to fully repair the same, the said city shall from its general fund contribute sufficient money to  enable  said  board  to effect such repairs.

Eighth - In case such building should be wholly destroyed and the said fund is insufficient, in the judgment of said board, to properly rebuild the same, or if the said board shall deem it undesirable to rebuild the same as an Auditorium, or if at any time in the judgment of two-thirds of the City Council and of four-fifths of the then members of the said board, it is deemed desirable that the said property be sold, the same may be sold and conveyed and disposed of by said city and the proceeds of such sale paid into said fund, and in any such case the said board may use and apply the said fund and the proceeds of such sale to the erection of some other public building or institution, or the enlargement or  improvement  of some then existing public building or institution in the said City of Red Wing, PROVIDED, however, that such building or institution shall be used exclusively for some public purpose or some charitable or beneficent and not for any sectarian purpose; and the money so used and applied shall be so used and applied in conformity with the intent, conditions and provisions of said last will of said Theodore B. Sheldon, deceased, and provided also that the same is so done as a memorial to and the gift of said Theodore B. Sheldon, deceased, to the said City of Red Wing.
 
THE CITY OF RED WING,

By A. P. Pierce, Mayor

October 10, 1904.

The foregoing resolution passed October 7, 1904.



(CODIFIER'S NOTE: The Auditorium Board  is established  by Ordinance No. 12, Third Series, adopted December 23, 1985, as required by the City Charter and increased the membership from five to seven members.)



SECTION 25.02.	ACCEPTANCE OF JOHN H. RICH GIFT.

Ordinance No. 198, adopted October 4, 1907, accepts gift of John H. Rich to park Broad Street, authorizes and pledges work to be done by City.



SECTION 25.03.	ESTABLISH IMPROVEMENT BOND ACCOUNT.

Ordinance No. 503,  adopted February 4, 1960, establishes Improvement Bond Account and provides for administration of same.



SECTION 25.04.	GRANT RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY.
Ordinance	Date of	
No.	Adoption	Grantee	Brief Description

First Series
52	07-12-1871	St. Paul & Chicago R.R.	Public levee fronting Lots 41, 42, 43.

55	
08-29-1874	
St. Paul & Chicago R.R.	
Add'I. track on public levee.

75	
11-13-1882	
Minnesota Central R.R.	
Certain streets and alleys.

76	
11-14-1882	
St. Paul & Chicago R.R.	
Amends  Ordinance No. 52.

145	
08-31-1898	
Chicago, Milwaukee &
St. Paul R.R.	
Portion of Levee Street.
 
(Section 25.04, cont. - GRANT RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY)

Ordinance No.	Date of Adoption	

Grantee	

Brief Description

First Series			
154	08-10-1900	Duluth, Red Wing &
Southern R.R.	Portion of Third
Street.

157	
06-07-1901	
Duluth, Red Wing &
Southern R.R.	
Portion of West Third Street.

158	
06-27-1901	
Chicago, Milw. & St. Paul R.R.	
Bridge over "Nymphara Lane".

161	
12-06-1901	
Chicago, Milw. & St. Paul	
Portion of Levee
		R.R.	Street.

170	
12-11-1903	
Chicago, Milw. & St. Paul	
Levee St. and the
		R.R.	Levee (Hill St. to
Bluff St.)

173	
05-03-1904		
Amends  Ordinance No. 170.

174	
05-13-1904	
Chicago, Milw. & St. Paul R.R.	
Spur track - Franklin and Hill Streets.

185	
07-25-1905	
Wisc., Minn., and Pacific R.R.	
Certain streets and vacation of other
			streets.

194	
10-08-1906		
Amends  Ordinance
			No. 170.

210	
11-19-1908	
Chicago, Milw. & St. Paul	
Second main track
		R.R.	(Hill Street to Cedar
Street).

211	
02-05-1909	
Chicago, Milw. & St. Paul R.R.	
Second main track (Hill Street to Cedar
			Street).

214	
09-03-1909	
Chicago, Milw. & St. Paul	
Portion of Lots 18
		R.R.	and 19, Freeborn
Addn. (Hill Street).
 
(Section 25.04, cont. - GRANT RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY)

Ordinance No.	Date of Adoption	

Grantee	

Brief Description

Third Series			

330	
03-05-1926	
Receivers of Chicago, Milw. & St. Paul R.R.	
Spur track over Jefferson Street.

472	
08-04-1955	
Chicago, Milw., St. Paul
& Pacific R.R.	
Broad Street, Dakota and Franklin Streets.

482	
07-05-1956	
Chicago, Milw., St. Paul
& Pacific R.R.	
Plum Street.























SECTION 25.05.	ESTABLISH DOWNTOWN PARKING DISTRICT.

Ordinance  No. 101, Second Series, adopted January  6, 1979, establishes boundaries of Downtown Parking District within Zone B-3 District.
 
SECTION 25.06.	CHANGE OF WARD BOUNDARY LINES.

Ordinance No. 126, Second Series, adopted August 10, 1981, establishes boundary lines for First, Second, Third, and Fourth Wards.

Ordinance No. 5, Third Series, adopted July 8, 1985, changes the boundary lines of the First, Second, Third, and Fourth Wards.

Ordinance No. 48, Third Series, adopted May 25, 1988, changes the boundary lines of the Second Ward.

Ordinance No. 88, Third Series, adopted July 23, 1990, changes the boundary lines of the Second Ward.

Ordinance No. 117, Third Series, adopted February 24, 1992, changes the boundary lines in First, Second, Third, and Fourth Wards.

Ordinance No. 145, Third Series, adopted June 14, 1993, changes the boundary lines in Second and Third Wards.

Ordinance No. 156, Third Series, adopted March 14,  1994, changes the boundary lines in Third and Fourth Wards.

Ordinance No. 161, Third Series, adopted July 25, 1994, changes the boundary lines in Third and Fourth Wards.

Ordinance No. 312, Third Series, adopted April 29, 2002, changes the boundary lines of the Ward and Precincts in the City of Red Wing.

Ordinance No. 30, Fourth Series, adopted March 28, 2012, changes the boundary lines of the Ward and Precincts and establishes polling places in the City of Red Wing.

Ordinance No. 33, Fourth Series, adopted May 14, 2012,  Amends Ordinance No 30, Fourth Series by correcting the precinct boundaries description for Ward One and establishing the wards and precincts and polling places in the City of Red Wing.
 
SECTION 25.07.	VACATION OF LAND.

Ordinance Number	Date of Adoption	

Brief Description

First Series
31	

06-03-1865	

Portion of Levee Street

56	
03-30-1868	
Portion of Main Street

124	
07-13-1894	
Repeals Ordinance No. 31 except
		condition

185	
07-25-1905	
Certain streets for use by Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Pacific
		Railroad Company

481	
07-07-1956	
Potter Street grade crossing

Third Series		
67	11-28-1988	Scenic Easement (Hallquist)
		Hi Park Heights

68	
11-28-1988	
Park Dedication - Hi Park Heights

70	
02-27-1989	
City Alley - LaGrange Addition

90	
10-09-1990	
Scenic Easement - Clay City

92	
11-13-1990	
Streets and Easements in Hi Park Third Subdivision that lie within
		replat known as Hi Park Hills
Addition

93	
11-26-1990	
Easement (Bengtson) - Lot 44,
		Auditor's  Subdivision

104	
05-28-1991	
Portion of Fourth Street (F & D Supply)

111	
08-26-1991	
Portion of Main Street SE of
		Block 43

115	
10-15-1991	
Portion of Fourth Street (Norgaard & Rainwater)
 
SECTION 25.07, cont. -VACATION OF LAND.

Ordinance No.	Date of Adoption	

Brief Description

Third Series		
119	03-09-1992	Portion of Cedar Street
		(Johnson & Scofield)

120	
03-09-1992	
Public Alley (Banitt Motors)

127	
06-22-1992	
Portion of Hi Park Heights and
		Hi Park Heights Second and
		Fourth Replats

129	
07-27-1992	
Portion of Fifth Street and Park I
		Lot Reserved Adjacent to Block 10
		of Freeborns Addition

135	
10-13-1992	
Portion of Old West Main Street
		(Pottery Development Company)

138	
10-26-1992	
Portion of Old West Main Street
		(Bob Rehder)

148	
07-26-1993	
Portion of Hi Park Avenue and
		portion of drainage and utility
		easement
Resolution	06-23-2008	
Vacating park dedication in the
No. 5851		Med Tech Park Subdivision
 
SECTION 25.08.	NAMING AND RENAMING STREETS.

Ordinance No. 310, First Series, adopted July 6, 1923, establishes Kellogg Avenue.

Ordinance No. 339, First Series, adopted July 1,  1927, changes Phillips Street to Grace Street and Walnut Street to Twelfth Street.

Ordinance No. 393, First Series, adopted June 6, 1941, establishes the name of Central Park Street.














SECTION 25.09.	PORT AUTHORITY.

Enabling Resolution No. 2226 - Adopted July 8, 1985.

Ordinance No. 11, Third Series, adopted November 25, 1985, authorizes the Port Authority to exercise all powers conferred by Minnesota Statutes, Sections 462C.01to462C.10.

 


1996.
 
Resolution No. 3643 modifying Resolution No. 2226 - Adopted February 12,
 

 


1999.
 
Resolution No. 4185 modifying Resolution No. 2226 - Adopted March 8,
 

 


2010.
 
Resolution  No.  6136  modifying  Resolution  No.  2226  - Adopted  July  12,
 

 


2011.
 
Resolution No. 6312 modifying Resolution No. 2226 - Adopted August 22,
 

 


2014.
 
Resolution No. 6685 modifying Resolution No. 2226 - Adopted May 12,
 
SECTION 25.10.	ADOPTION  OF CODIFICATION.

Ordinance No. 1, Third Series, adopted April 22, 1985, provides  for adoption of a codification of ordinances, effective May 1, 1985, known as the Red Wing City Code.

Ordinance No. 1, Fourth Series, adopted December 13, 2010, provides for adoption of a codification of ordinances, effective January 1, 2011, known as the Red Wing City Code.







SECTION 25.11.	CHARTER AMENDMENTS.

Ordinance No. 6, Third Series, adopted July 8, 1985, amends Section 5.14: Acquiring and Selling Property.

Ordinance No. 128,  Third  Series,  adopted  July  13,  1992,  amends Section 2.06:   Vacancies;   3.08:   City   Engineer;   5.03:   Council    Meetings; 5.06: Ordinances, Resolutions and Motions;  5.07:  Procedure  on  Ordinances; 5.10: Signing and Publications of Ordinances and Resolutions; 5.11: When Ordinances  and  Resolutions  Take  Effect;  6.02:  Expenditures  of  Petitioners; 7.05: Budget  Estimates;  7.06:  Budget  Preparation;  7.07:  Budget   Approval; 7.09: Budget Alterations; 7.11: Funds; 8.01: Vacating of [Streets: Conditions] Easements and Similar Interests in Real Property; 8.04: Vacating  of Streets  by City Council; and 9.10 Contracts.

Ordinance No. 176, Third Series, adopted July 10, 1995, amends Section 1: Names, Boundaries, Powers, and General Provisions.

Ordinance No. 177, Third Series, adopted July 10, 1995, amends Section 2: Form of Government.

Ordinance No. 178, Third Series, adopted July 10, 1995, amends Section 3: General Administration.

Ordinance No. 179, Third Series, adopted July 10, 1995, amends Section 4: Elections.

Ordinance No. 180, Third Series, adopted July 10, 1995, amends Section 5: City Council.

Ordinance No. 181, Third Series, adopted July 10, 1995, amends Section 6: Initiative, Referendum, and Recall.
 

SECTION 25.11, cont. - CHARTER AMENDMENTS.

Ordinance No. 182, Third Series, adopted July 10, 1995, amends Section 7: Finances.

Ordinance No. 183, Third Series, adopted July 10, 1995, amends Section 8: Public Improvements.

Ordinance No. 184, Third Series, adopted July 10, 1995, amends Section 9: Miscellaneous  Provisions.

Ordinance No. 239,  Third  Series,  adopted  July  27,  1998,  amends Section 2.02:  Elective Officers, and Section 4.08 is deleted.

Ordinance No. 240,  Third  Series,  adopted  July  27,  1998,  amends Section 7.19:  Endowment Fund Investments.

Ordinance No. 251, Third Series, adopted February 22, 1999, amends Section 2.07: Mayor, and Section 3.01:  Departments  and  Offices  of Administration.

Ordinance No. 305, Third Series, adopted November 26, 2001, amends Section 8.01:  Vacation of Certain Public Lands.

Ordinance No. 342, Third Series, adopted December 17, 2003, amends Section 3.01:  Departments and Offices of Administration.

Ordinance No. 358,  Third  Series,  adopted  May  24,  2004,  amends Section 2.04 regarding board member or advisory member term limitations.

Ordinance No. 359,  Third  Series,  adopted  May  24,  2004,  amends Section 3.01 regarding a director of engineering.

Ordinance No. 365, Third  Series,  adopted  July  12,  2004,  amends Section 5.04:  Rules of Procedure.

Resolution No. 5924, adopted November 6, 2008, amends Section  2.06: Vacancies.

Ordinance No. 38, Fourth Series, adopted August  27, 2012, amends Section 2.08: Mayor, Section 4.03 Primary Election, and Section 4.05 Special Elections.

Ordinance No. 44, Fourth Series, adopted March 25, 2013, amends section
2.4	regarding board members residency.
 

Ordinance No. 53, Fourth Series, adopted January 27, 2014, amends Section 5: City Council and Section 6: Initiative, Referendum and Recall.




SECTION 25.12. ESTABLISH URBAN AND  RURAL  SERVICE DISTRICTS.

Ordinance No. 20, Second Series, adopted September 18,  1972, establishes taxing districts and legally describes the Urban Service District and the Rural Service District.

Ordinance No. 51, Second Series, adopted December 10, 1974, amends Ordinance No. 20 to add legally described property to the Urban Service District.

Ordinance No. 61, Second Series, adopted October 13, 1975, removes certain land from the Rural Service District and places  same in Urban Service District.

Ordinance No. 108, Second Series, adopted May 14, 1979,  removes certain land from the Rural Service District and places  same in Urban Service District.

Ordinance No. 46, Third Series, adopted March 28, 1988, removes certain land from the Rural Service District and places same in the Urban Service District.

Ordinance No. 293, Third Series, adopted May 14, 2001, modifies the Rural Service District by amending Ordinance No. 20, Second Series, and any amendments thereto.
 
SECTION 25.13.	CABLE TV FRANCHISE.

Ordinance No. 576, adopted April 16, 1970, grants community antenna television system franchise to Red Wing Publishing Company and K &  M Electronics, Inc., a joint venture doing business as Red Wing Cable TV,  for  a period of fifteen (15) years.

Ordinance No. 80, Second Series, adopted May 23, 1977, amends Ordinance No. 576 to authorize transfer from Cable TV, Inc. to Red Wing Cablevision,  Inc.

Ordinance No. 124, Second Series, adopted January 26, 1981, amends Ordinance No. 576, as amended, and extends franchise for additional fifteen (15) years.

Ordinance No. 140, Second Series, adopted May 23, 1983, amends Ordinance No. 124 and grants franchise for fifteen (15) years from effective date of Ordinance No. 124 (January 26, 1981).

Ordinance No. 62, Third Series, adopted July 11, 1988, amends Ordinance 576(a), previously amended by requiring specific hours of operation and a 24-hour toll free number, written logs to be kept of complaints and repair service, prompt service for repair work and  credit to customers if repair work not performed on time.

Ordinance No. 185, Third Series, adopted August 14, 1995, grants a franchise to Marcus Cable Partners, L.P. to construct, operate  and  maintain  a cable television system In the City of Red Wing for a period of fifteen (15) years.

Ordinance No. 6, Fourth Series, adopted April 25, 2011, grants a franchise to Hiawatha Broadband Communications,  Inc., to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system in the City of Red Wing for a period of ten (10) years.

Ordinance No. 13, Fourth Series, adopted September 12, 2011, renews cable television franchise to Marcus Cable Partners, L.P. d/b/a Charter Communications to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system  in the City of Red Wing.

Ordinance No. 40, Fourth Series, adopted December 12, 2012 amends Ordinance No. 13, Fourth Series by correcting the name of the  grantee  from Marcus Cable Partners, L.P. to Charter Cable Partners LCC.

Resolution No. 6874, adopted October  12, 2015,  amends  Ordinance  No. 40, Fourth Series by approving the proposed transfer of the cable franchise currently held by CC VII Operating, LLC, OBA Charter Communications
 

SECTION 25.14.	GAS FRANCHISE.

Ordinance No. 13, Third Series, adopted January  27,  1986,  grants franchise to Northern States Power Company for a period of twenty (20) years.

Ordinance No. 428, Third Series, adopted  August  27,  2007,  grants franchise to Northern States Power Company, d/b/a, Xcel Energy, for a period of twenty (20) years.



SECTION 25.15.	ELECTRIC FRANCHISE.

Ordinance No. 14, Third Series, adopted January  27,  1986,  grants franchise to Northern States Power Company for a period of twenty (20) years.

Ordinance No. 429, Third Series, adopted  August  27,  2007,  grants franchise to Northern States Power Company, d/b/a, Xcel Energy, for a period of twenty (20) years.










SECTION 25.16.	FLOOD PLAIN MAP AMENDMENTS.

 
Ordinance Number
 
Date of Adoption
 

Second Series
118	07-28-1980

Third Series
250	01-25-1999

459	09-14-1909
 
SECTION	25.17. DESIGNATIONS.
 
HERITAGE	PRESERVATION	DISTRICT
 

Ordinance No. 98, Second Series, adopted July 24, 1978, designates certain property within the  City as Heritage  Preservation District Number 2: The Heritage Mall.

Ordinance No. 138, Second Series, adopted April 11, 1983, designates certain properties within the City as Heritage Preservation District Number 3: The Downtown Historic District.

Ordinance No. 23, Third Series, adopted November 24, 1986, designates Lots 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of Block 44 of the Original Plat as a Heritage Preservation District.

Ordinance No. 78. Fourth Series, adopted July 13, 2015, designates certain properties within the City of Red Wing as a Heritage Preservation Site: The South end Residential Neighborhood Conservation District.

SECTION 25.18.	ANNEXATIONS.

Ordinance No.	Date of Adoption	

Brief Description

588	
11-06-1970	
NE-1/4, 6-112-14

590	
04-06-1971	
Part of Government Lot 4, 6-112-14

Second Series		
50	11-12-1974	North 1/2 of SE-1/4, 6-112-14

90	
11-12-1974	
S-1/2 of NE-1/4 except West 10
		acres and part of North 1/2 of
NE-1/4, 33-113-14; SW-1/4 of
		NE-1/4, NW-1/4 of SE-1/4, part of
NW-1/4 of NE-1/4, part of NW-1/4, 34-113-14

Third Series		
27	03-09-1987	Part of SE-1/4 of NW-1/4, 5-112-14

80	
10-10-1989	
Part of NE-1/4 of NW-1/4, 5-112-14

95	
02-11-1991	
Part of Gov't. Lot 4, Sec. 6-112-14
 

SECTION 25.18, cont. - ANNEXATIONS.

Ordinance No.	Date of Adoption	

Brief Description

Third Series
109	

08-26-1991	

Pt. SW-1/4 Sec. 34, 113N-14W

114	
10-15-1991	
Pt. Sec. 6, 112 N-14W and Pt.
		Gov't. Lot 4, Sec. 6-112N-14W

124	
04-27-1992	
Place Property - Pt. Lot 4, Sec. 6, Township 112 N., Range 14 West
		Fairbanks Property - Pt. Lot 4,
Sec. 6, Township 112 N., Range
		14 West
Red Wing School District- Pt.
		Sec. 6, Township 112, Range 14

134	
09-14-1992	
Von Helmst Property - Pt. Gov't. Lot 4 & W 1/2 of NW 1/4 Sec. 6,
		Township 112 N, Range 14

141	
02-22-1993	
Fairbanks Property - Pt. Gov't. Lot4, Sec. 6, Township 112 N,
		Range 14 West

152	
09-13-1993	
Neufeldt Property - Pt. of NE 1/4 of SW 1/4, Sec. 5, Township 112
		N, Range 14 W

218	
04-28-1997	
Lawrence Property - Part of Gov't. Lot 3, Sec. 6, Township 112 N,
		Range 14 W

226	
07-28-1997	
Unincorporated Land - Part of Gov't. Lot 3, Sec. 6, Township 112
		N., Range 14 W

254	
04-26-1999	
Horvat Property - NW 1/4 of Sec. 6, Township 112 N,
		Range 14 W

318	
09-22-2003	
Ziemer Property - NE 1/4 of Sec. 2, Township 112,
		Range 15 W
 

SECTION 25.18, cont. - ANNEXATIONS.


 
Ordinance No.
 
Date of
Adoption	Brief Description
 

Third Series
333	07-14-2003	Payzant Property - NE 1/4 of
NE 1/4 of Sec. 1, Township 112, Range 15 W

334	07-14-2003	Jensen/Goudy/Gustafson  Property
- Lot 7, Sec. 6, Township 112,
Range 14 W

354	05-10-2004		First Covenant Church - 2302 Hay Creek Trail

402	07-10-2006	Mississippi National Golf Course - Parcels within Wacouta Township



SECTION 25.19.	ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS.

Second Series Ordinance	

Date of
Number	Adoption

92	
05-08-1978

93	
05-08-1978

94	
05-08-1978

99	
08-14-1978

106	
05-14-1979

114	
03-19-1980

119	
10-27-1980

134	
11-22-1982

143	
10-24-1983
 
SECTION 25.19, cont.  -  ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS.

Ordinance	Date of	
No.	Adoption	Brief Description

Third Series
31	

04-27-1987	

Clayton Roberts Property
		P&P 55-625-0650

38
(with conditions)	
07-27-1987	
Golden Corral P&P 55-860-0040

42	
01-25-1988	
Bodelson Property

43	
01-25-1988	
Bodelson Funeral Home

44	
02-08-1988	
Olander Property P&P 55-900-0080
P&P 55-900-0081

65	09-26-1988	
Golf Hill Subdivision

74	
04-24-1989	
Sunny  Meadow  11

79	
06-26-1989	
Alan Childs Property

84	
04-09-1990	
Quiet House Motel

86	
05-29-1990	
Super 8 Motel
		232 Withers Harbor Dr.

96	
02-25-1991	
Golf View Addition

107	
07-22-1991	
Sec. 30, 113 N, R 14 W

125	
04-27-1992	
Recycling Facility

131	
08-10-1992	
Neighborhood  Conservation District No. 1

136	
10-13-1992	
Jehovah Witness  Church

144	
05-24-1993	
Charlson Crest Subd.

146	
06-28-1993	
Charlson Crest Subd.
 
SECTION 25.19, cont.  -  ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS.

Ordinance No.	Date of Adoption	

Brief Description

Third Series		
147	07-12-1993	Mill Road Subdivision
		Alfonso Much Property

149	
07-26-1993	
Hi Park Hills Townhouses

159	
05-23-1994	
Clay City Land

160	
05-23-1994	
Hay Creek Trail Subd.

173	
05-08-1995	
Old Burnside School

175	
07-17-1995	
Continental Grain Property P&P 55-005-4700

208	
11-25-1996	
Bur Oak Subdivision

227	
11-10-1997	
Baartman Property

231	
04-13-1998	
Blocks 7 and 8

245	
10-26-1998	
High School Addition P&P 55-441-0020

249	
01-25-1999	
Syverson Ford P&P 55-722-0320

255	
05-10-1999	
Assembly of God Church

259	
08-09-1999	
E. Smith Property

260	
08-09-1999	
Med-Tech Park Subd.

262	
08-23-1999	
Sweney's Addition

265	
11-08-1999	
Fairview Health Services

267	
11-22-1999	
Wooden Properties P&P 55-835-1120
		P&P 55-835-1130
 

SECTION 25.19, cont.  -  ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS.

Ordinance No.	Date of Adoption	

Brief Description

Third Series
268	

11-22-1999	

Wooden Properties
		P&P 55-835-1120
		P&P 55-835-1130

269	
12-13-1999	
Brown/Severson  Property

270	
12-13-1999	
Severson Property

271	
02-14-2000	
Ken Smith Minor Subd.

274	
05-22-2000	
Med-Tech Park

278	
06-26-2000	
Ghei Property

280	
09-25-2000	
Siewert Planned Unit Dev. P&P 55-835-2140
		P&P 55-835-2150
P&P 55-835-2160
		P&P 55-835-2170
P&P 55-835-2290

282	
10-09-2000	
Latter Day Saints

283	
11-13-2000	
Mike Wilson Property P&P 55-630-0030

285	
11-13-2000	
Mike Wilson Property P&P 55-640-0120
		P&P 55-640-0130
P&P 55-640-0140
		P&P 55-640-0150
P&P 55-318-0030
		P&P 55-318-0040
P&P 55-152-0010
		P&P 55-152-0020

291	
02-12-2001	
Sec. 29 Twp. 113N R15W

295	
04-09-2001	
Goudy/Gustafson  Property
 
SECTION 25.19, cont.  -  ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS.

Ordinance No.	Date of Adoption	

Brief Description

Third Series
296	

11-26-2001	

Target Development

300	
07-09-2001	
Olanders Subdivision

303	
08-27-2001	
Bryan Gravel Pit P&P 55-720-0180

306	
12-10-2001	
Spring Creek Addition Lots 9 & 10, Block 1

307A	
04-08-2002	
Charlson Crest 2nd Addn.

309	
04-08-2002	
Old West Main Street Area

310	
04-22-2002	
Westwood Hills II

311	
04-22-2002	
E. Stelter Property

316	
06-10-2002	
Walser's Chrysler Center P&P 55-925-0070

329	
05-12-2003	
D. Child's Property

331	
05-27-2003	
P&P 55-835-0600

332	
07-14-2003	
179 Tyler Road South P&P 55-835-2100
		161 Tyler Road South
P&P 55-835-1740

336	
08-25-2003	
P&P 55-835-2090

344	
01-26-2004	
Claudine Sellers Property

345	
01-26-2004	
Cannondale Court Subd.

346	
02-09-2004	
Menards/Med-Tech  Park

347	
02-09-2004	
Jacobson  Development
 
SECTION 25.19, cont.  -  ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS.

Ordinance No.	Date of Adoption	

Brief Description

Third Series
351	

03-08-2004	

Cannon River Bluffs Plat

355	
05-10-2004	
McDonald's  Restaurant

356	
05-10-2004	
Ziemer Property P&P 55-735-0100

360	
06-14-2004	
Wiemer Property
545 Spring Creek Rd S P&P 55-727-1060

361	
06-14-2004	
Dahlberg Property

362	
06-14-2004	
E. Stelter Property

363	
06-14-2004	
Tom Blue Property Stelter Oak Hill Subd. P&P 55-727-1120

366	
09-13-2004	
Tyler Road Area

375	
03-28-2005	
Don Lawrence Property Outlot A, Tyler Hills Subd.
		12 Acres

376	
04-11-2005	
R. Houghton, .56 Acres 2410 Goodhue Street

377	
05-09-2005	
Fred Bieri Property
		4925 Mill Rd, 4.61 Acres

382	
08-08-2005	
Former Pepin Bauer Lumber Yard 55-545-0260

385	
09-12-2005	
Village Cooperative
55-441-0040, -0070, -0010

386	
09-12-2005	

Robertson/Erickson  Oil
55-005-0650, -0660
 
SECTION 25.19, cont.  -  ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS

Ordinance No.	Date of Adoption	

Brief Description

Third Series		

387	
10-10-2005	
Cheryl Nagel 777 21st Street

389	
04-24-2006	
Highlands of Red Wing
		Hi Park Area

393	
04-10-2006	
Shelly Muelken
		4911 Learning Lane
		55-728-0671

394	
05-22-2006	
Nick & Mari Geiger
		4633 Mill Road

395	
04-10-2006	
First Covenant Church
		2302 Twin Bluff Road
		55-600-0180

399	
06-12-2006	
Nathan Payzant Property
		Hiawatha Hills Addition

410	
12-11-2006	
Brian Gadient Property
		2662 Gold Finch Lane

417	
05-14-2007	
Meir Properties
		Lot 1, Block 1, Med-Tech Park
		Subdivision  5th Addition

419	
05-14-2007	
Lots 1-8, Block 1
		Lots 1-8, Block 2
		Gadient Heights Third Subdivision

425	
06-11-2007	
Blocks 46, 47 & 48
		Original Plat of Red Wing

427	
08-13-2007	
River Valley Power Sports
		55-835-1120, -1130, -1140
		55-835-1150, -1160, -1170
		55-835-1180, -1190
 
SECTION 25.19, cont.  -  ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS

Ordinance No.	Date of Adoption	

Brief Description
431	10-08-2007	Stelter Property 909 E. y!h Street
		55-605-0070

433	
12-10-2007	
Riverfront Zoning District
		55-005-4681, -4685, -4690
		55-005-4710
		55-020-0030, -0060, -0100,
		55-020-0130' -0180
		55-050-0010, -0030, -0180,
		55-170-001 0' -0090
		55-535-0070, -0080
		55-575-0150
		55-580-0230
		55-605-0020, -0030, -0040,
		55-605-0090
		55-610-0020
		55-640-0010, -0040, -0070,
		55-724-0030

435	
12-10-2007	
Outlot D, Cannon River Bluffs
		Second Addition
		55-858-0900

440	
04-14-2008	
Mississippi National Golf Links

462	
10-12-2009	
Part of Lots 19, 20, 21 of Hoyt's
		Outlots to match MC zoning on
		North side of highway

470	
12-14-2009	
Portion of Red Wing Golf Club
		property fronting Southwood Ave.
		from AC to R-1

476	
05-24-2010	
New Official Zoning Map

479	
09-13-2010	
Red Wing Golf Club AC to R-1

Fourth Series
9	07-11-2011	Taco John Property
604 Main St., B-2A to B-3
 
SECTION 25.19, cont.  -  ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS

 
Ordinance No.
 
Date of Adoption
 


Brief Description
 

Fourth Series
10	07-11-2011	Blocks 49, 50 and 51 Original Plat Canadian Pacific Railroad/Sao
		Line Railroad Property

12	
08-08-2011	
Scott Berghammer Property
8 parcels fronting Withers Harbor
		Drive

59	
05-12-2014	
Rezoning some properties currently listed as B-3, B-2, R-2,
		RM-1, AR, and R-1 to Civic District

66	
08-25-2014	
Rezoning some properties from R- 2 and AC to Civic District and from
		AC to 1-1 Light Industrial

69	
01-12-2015	
Rezoning westerly  '!14 of Lots 7,8,9,
10, Block 19 (615 W. Fourth
		Street) to Civic District.

98	
05-09-2016	
Rezoning the Sly 42ft of Lot 1,
		Block 1 of Mcsorley Addition from
R-2 to B-2.












SECTION 25.20.	AUTHORIZE  ISSUANCE OF BONDS.

Ordinance No. 41, Third Series, adopted December 14, 1987, authorizes issuance  of  bonds  of  the  Red Wing  Port Authority  in the  principal  amount  of
$325,000.

Ordinance No. 292, Third Series, adopted  February 26, 2001,  authorizes the Port Authority  to issue General Obligation Bonds in aggregate principal amount  not  exceeding  $1,420,000;  providing  for  the  form  and  details  of  said
 
bonds; and pledging the full faith, credit and resources of the city of Red Wing for the security and payment of said bonds.

SECTION 25.21.	ZONING  MORATORIUMS.

Ordinance No. 21, Third Series, adopted November 10, 1986, places moratorium on all subdivision proposals containing lots of two and one-half acres or greater, with on-site septic systems and containing rural services, for a period of six months.

Ordinance No. 242, Third Series, adopted August 10, 1998, places a six-month moratorium on the construction of new towers and on the use and development of property for such new towers.

Ordinance No. 397, Third Series, adopted May 8, 2006,  enacts  a moratorium on development related to the Red Wing Upper Harbor Zoning Study.

Ordinance No. 400, Third Series, adopted June 12, 2006, enacts  a moratorium on new billboards in Red Wing for a term of six months, with the possibility of an additional six-month extension, during the pendency of the Zoning Ordinance Amendment.

Ordinance No. 404, Third Series, adopted November 13, 2006, amends interim Ordinance No. 397 enacting a moratorium on development related to the Red Wing Upper Harbor Zoning Study.

Ordinance No. 424, Third Series, adopted June 11, 2007, enacts  a 12-month moratorium on new electronic message sign erection within the City of Red Wing.

Ordinance No. 20, Fourth Series, adopted October 10, 2011, enacts a 12- month moratorium on the location and establishment of new silica/frac  sand mining operation (resource extraction land use) within the City of Red Wing.

Ordinance No. 36, Fourth Series, adopted June 11, 2012,  amends Ordinance No 20, Fourth Series, by expanding the scope  of  the  interim moratorium on the issuance of permits for  the  establishment  of  new  silica/frac sand mining operations within the City of Red Wing.
 




SECTION 25.22.	ZONING ANNEXED  PROPERTY.

Ordinance No.	Date of Adoption	

Brief Description

Third Series		
71	02-27-1989	KCUE/KWNG Property

72	
03-13-1989	
Hanson/Gadient  Property

108	
07-22-1991	
Bodelson Property

165	
11-14-1994	
Twin Bluff Area

169	
03-13-1995	
High School Property Neufeldt Property
		Danielson  Subdivision

339	
12-08-2003	
Jensen, Goudy, Gustafson P&P 34-006-2700

340	
12-08-2003	
Payzant Property P&P 31-001-3200

352	
04-12-2004	
John Ziemer Property

440	
04-14-2008	
Miss. National Golf Links












SECTION 25.23.	DECLARING A STATE OF EMERGENCY.

Ordinance No. 217, Third Series, adopted April 14, 1997, declares a state of emergency in the City of Red Wing caused by flooding and approved related expenditures.
 
Ordinance No. 297, Third Series, adopted April 23, 2001, declares a state of emergency in the City of Red Wing caused by flooding and approving  related expenditures.



SECTION 25.24.	FEE SCHEDULE AMENDMENTS.

Ordinance No. 434, Third Series, adopted December 10, 2007, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 441, Third Series, adopted April 28, 2008, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 444, Third Series, adopted September 8, 2008, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 445, Third Series, adopted July 14, 2008, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 450, Third Series, adopted December 8, 2008, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 455, Third Series, adopted  February 23, 2009, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule as to Parking Violations.

Ordinance No. 456, Third Series, adopted June 8, 2009, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 464, Third Series, adopted October 12, 2009, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule for Storm Water Utility Fees.

Ordinance No. 471, Third Series, adopted December 14, 2009, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 483, Third Series, adopted December 13, 2010, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 17, Fourth Series,  adopted September  26,  2011,  amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 26, Fourth Series, adopted December 12, 2011, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 28, Fourth Series, adopted January 23, 2012, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.
 
Ordinance No. 35, Fourth Series, adopted June 11, 2012, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 41, Fourth Series, adopted December 10, 2012, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 45, Fourth Series, adopted April 8, 2013, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 51, Fourth Series, adopted December 2, 2013, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 55, Fourth Series, adopted January 27, 2013, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 67, Fourth Series, adopted December 8, 2014, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 80, Fourth Series, adopted July  13, 2015, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 88, Fourth Series, adopted December 14, 2015, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 94, Fourth Series, adopted March 14, 2016, amends the City of Red wing Fee Schedule.

Ordinance No. 96, Fourth Series, adopted March 28, 2016, amends the City of Red Wing Fee Schedule.


SECTION 25.25.	UNPAID FEES ASSESSMENT ORDINANCE.

Ordinance No. 472, Third Series, adopted February 22, 2010, allows specific unpaid fees to be assessed as special assessments against benefited property.

Subd. 1. Unpaid Fees. In addition to the list of unpaid special charges provided in Minn. Stat. § 429.101, subd. 1(a), and the provisions related to unpaid fees already  included in the City Code, the following fees, if not paid when due, may be collected by special assessment against the property benefited:

A.	Refuse collection and disposal fees;

B.	Recycling collection fees;

C.	Roll-off and dumpster fees;
 

D.	Rental housing license fees;

E.	Rental housing inspection fees;

F.	Storm water utility fees;

G.	Front end fuel cleaning fees;

H.	Fuel surcharge fees; and

I.	Nuisance violation fees.

Ordinance No. 70, Fourth Series adopted February 9, 2015, amends Subd. 2, as follows:

Subd. 2. Any special assessment for unpaid fees shall be payable in a single installment, or as the Council may provide. Special assessments shall be subject to an interest rate set by the City Council.

SECTION 25.26   OPT-OUT OF MINNESOTA STATUTES, SECTION 462.3593:

Subd. 1.	Pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593, subdivision 9, the City of Red Wing opts-out of the requirements of Minn. Stat. §462.3593, which defines and regulates Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings.
 
ZONING CODE TABLE OF CONTENTS



ARTICLE I- GENERAL PROVISIONS

 
DIVISION 05:	GENERAL  PROVISIONS
 
Page
 

 
Sec. 05-010
Sec. 05-020
Sec. 05-030
Sec. 05-040
Sec. 05-050
Sec. 05-060
Sec. 05-070
Sec. 05-080
Sec. 05-090
Sec. 05-100
Sec. 05-110

DIVISION 10:

Sec. 10-010
Sec. 10-020
Sec. 10-030
Sec. 10-040






DIVISION 15:

Sec. 15-010
Sec. 15-020

DIVISION 20:

Sec. 20-010
Sec. 20-020
Sec. 20-030
Sec. 20-040

DIVISION 25:

Sec. 25-010
Sec. 25-020
Sec. 25-030
Sec. 25-040
Sec. 25-050

DIVISION 30:

Sec. 30-010
Sec. 30-020
Sec. 30-030
Sec. 30-040
Sec. 30-050
 
Short Title	5-1
Authority	5-1
General Purposes	5-1
Conflicting Regulations	5-2
Applicability to Private Property	5-2
Compliance with Zoning Code	5-2
Minimum Requirements	5-2
Interpretation of Zoning Map	5-2
Essential Services Exempted	5-3
Severability	5-3
Zoning of Annexed Areas	5-3
DEFINITIONS
Rules oflnterpretation for General Zoning Terms	10-1
Definitions of General Zoning Terms	10-1
Rules oflnterpretation for Zoning Use Types and Classifications	10-21
Definitions of Use Types and Classifications	10-21
ARTICLE II- BASE DISTRICT REGULATIONS
ZONING DISTRICTS AND PROVISIONS
General Purposes	15-1
Zoning Districts	15-1
AGRICULTURAL  DISTRICT  REGULATIONS
Agriculture (A) District.	20-1
Agricultural Residential (AR) District.	20-3
Agricultural Conservation (AC) District.	20-6
Agricultural Zoning Districts Use Classification Chart.	20-9
RESIDENTIAL  DISTRICT  REGULATIONS
Single-Family Residential Low Density (R-1) District.	25-1
Two-Family Residential (R-2) District.	25-3
Multiple-Family Residential (RM-1) District.	25-6
Multiple-Family Residential (RM-2) District.	25-10
Residential Zoning Districts Use Classification Chart	25-13
BUSINESS  DISTRICT  REGULATIONS
Neighborhood Business (B-1) District.	30-1
General Business (B-2) District.	30-3
Mixed General and Central Business (B-2A) District.	30-6
Central Business (B-3) District.	30-10
Business Zoning Districts Use Classification Chart	30-13
 

DIVISION 35:

Sec. 35-010
Sec. 35-020
Sec. 35-030

DIVISION 40:

Sec. 40-010
Sec. 40-020
Sec. 40-030
Sec. 40-040
Sec. 40-050
 

INDUSTRIAL  DISTRICT  REGULATIONS
Light Industrial (1-1) District.	35-1
General Industrial (1-2) District.	35-4
Industrial Zoning Districts Use Classification Chart.	35-7
SPECIAL DISTRICT  REGULATIONS
Civic District.	40-1
Mixed Use Industrial/Office Commercial (MC) District.	40-3
Mixed Used Commercial Tourism (MCT) District.	40-6
Riverfront District.	40-9
Special Zoning Districts Use Classification Chart.	40-12
ARTICLE III - OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
 
DIVISION 43:	OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION  OVERLAY DISTRICT
Sec. 43-010	Policy and Administration	43-1
Sec. 43-020	Purpose	43-1
Sec. 43-030	District Jurisdiction and Designation	43-1
Sec. 43-040	Definitions	43-1
Sec. 43-050	Uses Prohibited Within the Open Space Preservation Overlay District.	43-2
 

DIVISION 45:

Sec. 45-010
Sec. 45-020
Sec. 45-030
Sec. 45-040
Sec. 45-050
Sec. 45-060
Sec. 45-070
Sec. 45-080
Sec. 45-090



DIVISION 47:

Sec. 47-010
Sec. 47-020
Sec. 47-030
Sec. 47-040
Sec. 47-050
Sec. 47-060
Sec. 47-070
Sec. 47-080
Sec. 47-090

Sec. 47-100
 

DESIGN  REVIEW  REGULATIONS
Purpose	45-1
Design Review Designation	45-1
Division Provisions.	45-2
Exemptions	45-3
Process	45-3
Minimum Submission Requirements	45-3
Minimum Design Review Standards	45-4
Additional Design Review Standards for Designated Overlay Districts	45-8
Special Exterior Material Regulations for I-1 Zoned Property that Directly
Abuts T.H. 61 and T.H. 63	45-9
PLANNED  UNIT DEVELEOPMENTS
Purpose	47-1
Conditional Use Permit Required	47-1
Unified Control.	47-1
Permitted Uses	47-2
Minimum Requirements for PUD Applications	47-2
Density	47-3
Coordination with Subdivision Regulations	47-3
Procedures for Approving Planned Unit Developments	47-3
Operating and Maintenance  Requirements for PUD Common Open Space/
Facilities Documents	47-6
Revisions and/or Changes in the Planned Unit Development.	47-8
 
DIVISION 50:

Sec. 50-010
Sec. 50-020
Sec. 50-030
Sec. 50-040
Sec. 50-050
Sec. 50-060
Sec. 50-070
Sec. 50-080
Sec. 50-090

DIVISION 52:

Sec. 52-010
Sec. 52-020
Sec. 52-030
Sec. 52-040
Sec. 52-050
Sec. 52-060
Sec. 52-070
Sec. 52-080
Sec. 52-090

Sec. 52-100
Sec. 52-110
Sec. 52-120
Sec. 52-130

DIVISION 53:

Sec. 53-010
Sec. 53-020
Sec. 53-030
Sec. 53-040
Sec. 53-050
Sec. 53-060
Sec. 53-070
Sec. 53-080
Sec. 53-090
Sec. 53-100
 
LAKE AND SHORELAND MANAGEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
 
Purpose	50-1
Statutory Authorization, Policy, and Jurisdiction	50-1
General Provisions and Definitions	50-1
Administration	50-7
Shoreland Classification System and Land Use Districts	50-9
Zoning and Water Supply/Sanitary Provisions	50-12
Nonconformities	50-27
Subdivision/Platting Provisions	50-29
Planned Unit Developments (PUDs)	50-29
FLOODPLAIN  OVERLAY  DISTRICT
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact and Purpose	52-1
General Provisions	52-1
Establishment of Zoning Districts	52-6
Floodway District (FW)	52-7
Flood-Fringe District (FF)	52-10
General Floodplain District.	52-14
Subdivisions	52-15
Public Utilities, Railroads, Roads and Bridges	52-16
Manufactured Home and Manufactured Home Parks and Placement of
Recreational Vehicles	52-16
Administration	52-18
Nonconforming Uses	52-24
Penalties for Violation	52-26
Amendments	52-27
CANNON RIVER MANAGEMENT  OVERLAY  DISTRICT
Policy and Administration	53-1
Purpose	53-1
General Provisions	53-1
Land Use District Provisions	53-5
Uses Within the Land Use Districts	53-7
Sanitary Provisions	53-9
Landscape Alterations.	53-9
Subdivisions	53-11
Administration	53-12
Violation a Misdemeanor	53-17
DIVISION 55:	SPECIAL  PROVISIONS
 
ARTICLE IV -REGULATIONS  APPLYING TO ALL DISTRICTS
Sec. 55-010	Statement of Purpose	55-1
STANDARDS THAT RELATE TO ALL ZONING DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 55-020
Sec. 55-030
Sec. 55-040
Sec. 55-050
Sec. 55-060
Sec. 55-070
Sec. 55-080
Sec. 55-090
 
Lots and Yards	55-1
Setbacks	55-3
Height Exceptions	55-4
Accessory Uses and Structures	55-4
Accessory Parking and Storage	55-6
Fences, Walls	55-8
Access Drives and Private Drives	55-9
Construction on Steep Slopes	55-11
 


















USES
 
Sec. 55-100	Performance Standards	55-12
Sec. 55-110	Building Moving	55-15
Sec. 55-115	Interim Uses	55-18
Sec. 55-117	Outdoor Biomass Burner/Boiler	55-22
Sec. 55-118	Solar Energy Systems	55-24
STANDARDS THAT RELATE TO AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS AND USES
Sec. 55-120	Farming Operations	55-29
Sec. 55-130	Livestock	55-31
Sec. 55-140	Second Farm Dwelling	55-32
STANDARDS THAT RELATE TO THE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Sec. 55-150	Commercial Historic Sites in Residential Districts	55-32
Sec. 55-160	Bed and Breakfast Establishments	55-33
Sec. 55-170	Home Occupations	55-35
Sec. 55-180	Swimming Pools	55-36
STANDARDS  THAT RELATE  TO COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS AND
Sec. 55-190	Drive-In Use	55-37
Sec. 55-200	Vehicle Sales and Showrooms	55-39
Sec. 55-210	Automobile Maintenance  Service and Gasoline Stations	55-40
Sec. 55-220	Hazardous and Infectious Waste	55-41
Sec. 55-230	Adult Entertainment Establishments	55-42
Sec. 55-240	Wireless Communications Facilities	55-44
STANDARDS  THAT RELATE  TO LAND  USES CONCERNING NONMETALLIC  RESOURCES
 
Sec. 55-250
Sec. 55-260

Sec. 55-270

DIVISION 57:

Sec. 57-010
Sec. 57-020
Sec. 57-030
Sec. 57-040
Sec. 57-050
Sec. 57-060
Sec. 57-070
Sec. 57-080
Sec. 57-090
Sec. 57-100
Sec. 57-110

DIVISION 60:

Sec. 60-010
Sec. 60-020
Sec. 60-030
Sec. 60-040
Sec. 60-050
Sec. 60-060
Sec. 60-070
Sec. 60-080
Sec. 60-090
Sec. 60-100
Sec. 60-110
Sec. 60-120
 
Resource Extraction Activities	55-51
Heavy Industrial Land Use - Silica Sand Processing that does not include Resource Extraction	55-71
Silica Sand Motor Freight and Warehousing	55-82
STORMWATER  MANAGEMENT  REGULATIONS
Statutory Authorization	57-1
Findings	57-1
Purpose	57-1
Special Definitions	57-2
Scope and Effect	57-7
Stormwater Management Plan - Submittal Requirements	57-10
Plan Review Procedure	57-13
General Standards	57-15
Lawn Maintenance and Vegetation Removal	57-24
Violation and Penalties	57-24
Other Controls	57-21
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
Statement of Purpose	60-1
General Requirements	60-1
Location of Off-Street Parking	60-2
Utilization of Off-Street Parking Facilities	60-4
Design and Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Areas	60-5
Joint Parking Facilities	60-6
General Criteria for Determining Parking	60-6
Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Facilities	60-7
Alternative Schedule for Off-Street Parking	60-13
Stacking Spaces for Drive Through Facilities	60-14
Off-Street Parking Facility Design Parameters	60-15
Off-Street Loading Requirements	60-16
 
DIVISION 62:

Sec. 62-010
Sec. 62-020
Sec. 62-030
Sec. 62-040
Sec. 62-050
Sec. 62-060
Sec. 62-070
Sec. 62-080
Sec. 62-090
Sec. 62-100
Sec. 62-110
Sec. 62-120
Sec. 62-130
Sec. 62-140
Sec. 62-150
Sec. 62-160
Sec. 62-170

DIVISION 65:

Sec. 65-010
Sec. 65-020
Sec. 65-030
Sec. 65-040
Sec. 65-050
Sec. 65-060
Sec. 65-070
Sec. 65-080
Sec. 65-090
Sec. 65-100
Sec. 65-110
Sec. 65-120
Sec. 65-130
Sec. 65-140
Sec. 65-150
Sec. 65-160
Sec. 65-170
Sec. 65-180
Sec. 65-190

DIVISION 70:

Sec. 70-010
Sec. 70-020
Sec. 70-030
Sec. 70-040
Sec. 70-050
Sec. 70-060
Sec. 70-070
Sec. 70-080
Sec. 70-090
Sec. 70-100
 
BUFFER YARDS, SCREENING, AND LANDSCAPING
Buffer Yards - Purpose	62-1
Buffer Yards -When Required	62-1
Buffer Yards - General Standards	62-2
Screening -When Required	62-3
Screening - General Standards	62-4
Landscaping - Purpose	62-6
Landscaping - When Required	62-7
Landscaping - General Standards	62-7
Tree Replacement Requirements	62-7
Vegetation Coverage Requirements	62-7
Parking Lot Landscaping	62-8
Foundation and Aesthetic Plantings	62-9
Undeveloped Areas	62-9
Undeveloped Areas Next to Public ROW	62-9
Plan Submission	62-10
Landscaping Materials	62-10
Maintenance	62-12
SIGN  REGULATIONS
Purposes and Applicability	65-1
Definitions	65-1
General Information	65-8
General Sign Requirements	65-9
Computations and Area Calculations	65-10
Placing Signs on Public and Private Property	65-10
Sign Permits, Forms and Application Fees	65-11
Sign Application Administration and Enforcement	65-12
Left blank purposely due to amendment	65-13
Prohibited Signs	65-13
Signs and Visual Displays Exempt from Regulation in All Zoning Districts	65-14
Signs Allowed in All Zoning Districts Without a Sign Permit	65-15
Signs Allowed in the R-1 and R-2 Residential Zoned Districts	65-17
Signs Allowed in RM-1 and RM-2 Residential Zoned Districts	65-17
Signs Allowed in A, AC and AR Agriculturally Zoned Districts	65-17
Signs Allowed in Bl, B2a, B3, Civic, MC, and MCT Zoned Districts	65-18
Signs Allowed in B2 Business Zoned Districts	65-20
Signs Allowed in I-1 and I-2 Industrially Zoned Districts	65-23
Sign Chart	65-26
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
Applicability and Intent.	70-1
Nonconforming Uses of Land (Or Land With Accessory Structures Only)	70-1
Nonconforming Uses of Structures	70-1
Preservation of Nonconforming Uses	70-2
Preservation of Nonconforming Buildings or Structures	70-2
Nonconforming Characteristic ofUse	70-3
Nonconforming Lots of Record	70-3
Unlawful Uses, Building, or Structures	70-4
Permit Holders and Permit Applicants	70-4
Change From One Nonconforming Use to Another.	70-4
 




DIVISION 75:

Sec. 75-010	ARTICLE V -ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE   PROVISIONS

Purpose    ........................................................................................................................	




75-1
Sec. 75-020	Concurrent  Review  ......................................................................................................	75-1
Sec. 75-030	Period  of  Decision ........................................................................................................	75-1
Sec. 75-040	Plan   Consistency  ..........................................................................................................	75-1
Sec. 75-050	Pending  Applications  ...................................................................................................	75-1
Sec. 75-060	Substantially  Similar Uses ............................................................................................	75-1

DIVISION 80:	
DUTIES AND DECISION MAKING BODIES AND OFFICIALS	

Sec. 80-010	
Zoning   Administrator ...................................................................................................	
80-1
Sec. 80-020	Building   Inspection ......................................................................................................	80-2
Sec. 80-030	City Planning  Commission ...........................................................................................	80-2
Sec. 80-040	Board  of Adjustments  ..................................................................................................	80-3
Sec. 80-050	City   Council   ................................................................................................................	80-4

DIVISION 85:	
GENERAL APPLICATION  PROCEDURES	

Sec. 85-010	
Application  Procedures  ................................................................................................	
85-1
Sec. 85-020	Public   Hearings ............................................................................................................	85-2
Sec. 85-030	Fees     .............................................................................................................................	85-3

DIVISION 90	
PERMITS,  AMENDMENTS,  APPEALS,  AND VARIANCES	

Sec. 90-010	
Building Permits and the Building Code .......................................................................	
90-1
Sec. 90-020	Certificate  of Occupancy ..............................................................................................	90-1
Sec. 90-030	Certificate  of  Compliance .............................................................................................	90-2
Sec. 90-040	Conditional  Use  Permit ................................................................................................	90-3
Sec. 90-050	Public Improvements and Services ...............................................................................	90-5
Sec. 90-060	Grading and Erosion Control Permit.. ...........................................................................	90-6
Sec. 90-070	Stormwater  Management  Plan ......................................................................................	90-7
Sec. 90-080	Environmental Assessment and Impact Statements .......................................................	90-7
Sec. 90-090	Certificate  of Design Review ........................................................................................	90-8
Sec. 90-100	Septic   Permits  ..............................................................................................................	90-8
Sec. 90-110	Variance     ......................................................................................................................	90-9
Sec. 90-120	Zoning   Appeal  .............................................................................................................	90-11
Sec. 90-130	Zoning  Amendment  .....................................................................................................	90-11

DIVISION 95:	
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES	

Sec. 95-010	
Complaints  Regarding Violations .................................................................................	
95-1
Sec. 95-020	Procedures Upon Discovery of a Violation ...................................................................	95-1
Sec. 95-030	Fees  for  Reinspection ...................................................................................................	95-1
Sec. 95-040	Penalties and Remedies for Violations ..........................................................................	95-2
 
ARTICLEI- GENERAL  PROVISIONS DIVISION 05:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
05-010  Short Title. This Chapter of the Red Wing City Code shall be known and cited as the
Red Wing Zoning Ordinance and may be referred to herein as the Zoning Code.


05-020  Authority. This Chapter hereafter referred to as the Zoning Chapter or Chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Sections 462.351 to 462.365, as amended.

5-30	General Purposes.


A)	The general purposes of this Chapter are to provide for the orderly growth and renewal of the community; to protect and conserve its natural resources, its ecological systems, and its economic stability by fostering appropriate land use so as to preserve and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.

B)	It is hereby determined by the City Council that in order to accomplish the general purposes of this Chapter as set forth above, it is necessary and proper to establish and enforce the regulations contained in this Chapter for the following specific purposes:

I)	To promote and protect the health, safety, comfort, and general welfare of the public.

2)	To encourage development and redevelopment to be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.

3)	To stage development and redevelopment to coincide with orderly growth and the availability of necessary public services.

4)	To divide the community into districts, restricting and regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of buildings, structures, and land for residential, business, retail commercial, industrial, and other specified uses.

5)	To protect the architectural and site planning character and maintain the stability of residential, commercial, business, and industrial areas within the community, and prohibit uses, buildings, or structures which are incompatible with the character of development in such areas.

6)	To provide adequate light, air, privacy, and convenience of access to property.


7)	To limit congestion in public streets and to foster public safety and convenience in travel and transportation.
 
8)	To protect against fire, explosions, obnoxious fumes, loud obnoxious noise and other hazards in the interest of public health, safety, and comfort.

9)	To prevent environmental pollution.


10)	To prevent the destruction or imprudent exploitation of community natural resources.

11)	To preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the community.


12)	To provide for the gradual elimination of those uses ofland, buildings, or structures which do not conform to the standards for the district in which they are located and which may adversely affect the development and the value of property in such area.

13)	To provide for and protect agricultural lands, sensitive natural resource areas and common open space.

14)	To provide for the enforcement of this Chapter and to define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies responsible therefor.

05-040  Conflicting Regulations.  Whenever any provision of this Chapter imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions, or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or City Code provision, then the provisions of this Chapter shall govern.  Whenever the provisions of any other law or City Code provision imposes more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this Chapter, then the provision of such law or City Code shall govern.

05-050  Applicability to Private Property.  This Chapter applies within the municipal limits of the City of Red Wing as now and hereafter established, along with those areas outside the established municipal limits where, through joint legislative agreement with the  appropriate governing body, the Chapter shall be put into effect.

05-060  Compliance With Zoning Code.  Except as herein provided, no building or structure shall be erected, moved, altered, or extended, and no land, building, or structure or part therefor, shall be occupied or used unless in conformity with regulations specified in this Chapter for the district in which it is located.

05-070  Minimum Requirements.  The provisions of this Chapter shall be regarded as the minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare.

5-80	Interpretation of Zoning Map.


A)	Zoning of Vacated Areas.  Whenever any street, alley, or other public way shall be vacated, such street, alley, or other public way or portion thereof, shall
 
automatically be classified in the same zoning district as the property to which it attaches.

B)	Lots Adjoining Alleys. In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins any alley for the purpose of applying lot area requirements of this Chapter, one-half the width of such alley abutting the lot shall be considered as part of such lot.

C)	Zoning District Boundaries.  Zoning district boundary lines of this Chapter follow lot lines, center lines of roads and streets, railroad right-of-way lines, the center of water courses, the mean high waterline of lakes, and corporate limit lines, all as they exist on June 22, 2000.

05-090  Essential Services Exempted.  Essential Services shall be exempt from the regulations of this Chapter.  Provided, however, that the installation shall conform to Federal Communications and Federal Aviation Administration rules and regulations, and shall be subject to obtaining a Certificate of Compliance from the Zoning Administrator.

05-100  Severability.  This Chapter and the various articles and paragraphs thereof are hereby declared to be severable.  If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or phrase of this Chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the Chapter shall not be affected hereby.

05-110  Zoning of Annexed Areas.  On land hereafter annexed to, or consolidated with, the City, no building or structure shall be erected, enlarged, or moved, and no change in the
use of land or existing buildings or structures shall be made until an ordinance designating the zoning district classification of such annexed land is duly adopted by the City Council. Within 60 days of the annexation, the Advisory Planning Commission shall file and take action on an application for an amendment to establish the zoning district classification of such land.  Action shall be taken by the City Council regarding the classification of annexed land within 120 days of the annexation.
 
ARTICLEI- GENERAL  PROVISIONS DIVISION 10:  DEFINITIONS
10-10	Rules oflnterpretation for General Zoning Terms.


A)	The particular shall control the general.


B)	In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.

C)	The word "shall" is mandatory, and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive.


D)	The word "building" shall include the word "structure".


E)	The phrase "used for" includes the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for", and "occupied for".

F)	The word "land", "property", "parcel", "premise", and "tract" are all interchangeable unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary.

G)	Words not specifically defined in this Chapter or other City Code provisions shall utilize the common definition found in Webster's Collegiate Edition Dictionary.

10-20	Definitions of General Zoning Terms.  For the purposes of this Chapter, the following listed specific words and terms are defined as follows:

1.	Accessory Structure or Facility.	Any building or structure on the same lot, or part of the main building subordinate to the principal building and its primary/permitted use.

2.	Accessory Use. A use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and (except in the case of accessory off-street parking spaces or loading) located on the same buildable lot as the principal use to which it is related.

3.	Accessory Equipment Structure. A building or cabinet-like structure located adjacent to, or in the immediate vicinity of, a wireless telecommunication  tower or antenna to house equipment customarily incidental to the receiving or transmitting of wireless broadcasts, cellular telephone calls, voice messaging and paging services.

4.	Adult Book and Media Store. An establishment having as a substantial portion of its stock in trade or stock on display (25 percent) books, magazines, films, videotape or other media for sale or viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or other coin­ operated means, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein.
 
5.	Adult Cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar establishment that regularly features live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities, or films, motion pictures, electronic media, slides, or other photographic reproductions in which a substantial portion of the presentation time is devoted to the showing of material that is characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

6.	Adult Hotel or Motel. An establishment from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein.

7.	Adult Theater. An enclosed building used for presenting live entertainment, motion pictures, electronic media, or videotape having as a dominant theme material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein or offered for sale or rent.

8.	Adult Massage Parlor. A massage parlor that restricts minors by reason of age and/or provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein.

9.	Adult Rap Parlor. An establishment or place primarily in the business of providing nonprofessional conversation or similar services, which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein, for adults.

10.	Adult Sauna. An establishment or place primarily in the business of providing a) a steam bath, and b) massage services.

11.	Alley. A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as a secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a street and not intended for general traffic circulation.

12.	Alteration. Any change, addition, or modification in construction or occupancy of an existing structure.

13.	Alteration, Structural. Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as the addition, removal, or changing of bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or foundations.

14.	Animals, Domestic Pets. (See Household Pet).


15.	Animals, Domestic Farm. Cattle, hogs, horses, queen bees, sheep, goats, chickens, and other animals commonly kept for commercial food producing purposes.
 
16.	Antenna. Equipment used for transmitting or receiving radio frequency signals which is attached to a tower, building, or structure, including but not limited to directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omnidirectional antennas, such as whip antennas.

17.	Antenna, Concealed. Wireless telecommunication  antenna designed to blend into the surrounding environment or integrated into the physical structure to which it is attached.

18.	Apartment. A suite of rooms or a room with permanent cooking facilities in a multiple­ family building arranged and intended for a place of residence of a single family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.

19.	Area, Net Developable. Those lands within a development parcel remaining after the deletion of flood plains, wetlands, open water and slopes greater than 25 percent.

20.	Basement.	Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level. A basement shall not be counted as a story.

21.	Base Transceiver Station. Equipment that provides the link between wireless communications and land-based public telephone switching networks, including radio frequency transceivers, back-up power sources, power amplifiers, and signal processing hardware, typically contained in a small building or cabinet.

22.	Block. The enclosed area within the perimeter of roads, property lines or boundaries of the subdivision or a combination of the above and a lake, stream, or river.

23.	Bluff. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment with an average slope of 25 percent or greater with a vertical rise of 25 feet or greater, excluding road embankments.

24.	Bluffline.  A line along the top of a slope connecting the points at which the slope becomes less than 13 percent.	This applies to those slopes within the land use district(s), which are beyond the setback provisions from the ordinary high water mark.

25.	Boarding House. (See Rooming House). An establishment with lodging for three or more persons where meals are regularly prepared and served for compensation and where food is placed on the table family style, without service or ordering individual portions from a menu.

26.	Boathouse. A structure designed and used solely for the storage of boats or boating equipment.
 
27.	Building. Any structure, either temporary or permanent that has a roof supported by columns or walls, and intended for shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.

28.	Building Height. The vertical distance to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip, gambrel, and all other types of roofs, measured from the average grade level adjoining the building.  For parapet walls with decorative arches, peaks, or other features that vary in height, height shall be determined by calculating the average height between the roof line/lowest point of the parapet wall and the highest point of the parapet wall, measured from the average grade level adjoining the building.

29.	Building Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the building and the lot line.

30.	Building Setback Line. A line within a lot which describes the required nonbuildable portion of the lot because of closeness to a public right-of-way line, a side or rear lot line, a bluffline, or a high-water mark.  Beyond this line toward the interior of the lot,
buildings or structures may be placed when in accordance with this chapter.


31.	Business. Any occupation, employment, or enterprise wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or where services are offered for compensation.

32.	Cellar. (See Basement).


33.	Certificate of Compliance. A permit issued based on an administrative review of an activity or use of the land as designated by this Chapter which because of unique characteristics may require interpretation or review and restrictions or conditions because of the complexity of the proposal or the Chapter.

34.	Certificate of Occupancy. A statement signed by the building inspections service, setting forth that either a structure or zoning lot, or both, may lawfully be employed for specific uses. Such structure(s) and use shall conform to the provisions of this Chapter.

35.	Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water, including, but not limited to streams, rivers, creeks, ditches, drainageways, canals, conduits, culverts, waterways, gulleys, ravines, or washes; and including any area adjacent there to which is subject to inundation from the watercourse by reason of overflow or floodwater.

36.	Clear-cutting. (See Intensive Vegetation Clearing).


37.	Clinic. An establishment where human patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists, or similar professionals.
 
38.	Cluster Development. A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive areas.

39.	Co-location. The location of wireless telecommunications  equipment from more than one provider on one common tower, building, or structure.

40.	Commercial Use. Any activity conducted with the intent ofrealizing a profit from the sale, lease, rental, or trade of products, goods and services.

41.	Commissioner. The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.


42.	Community Center. A place, structure, area, or other facility used for and providing religious, fraternal, social, and/or recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve significant segments of the community.

43.	Compliance Officer. The administration and code enforcement personnel designated by this Chapter or the Council, and shall be known as the Zoning Administrator.

44.	Comprehensive Plan. The established policies, statements, goals, and interrelated plans for private and public land and water use, transportation, and community facilities, including recommendations for planned executions, documented in texts, ordinance and maps, which are recognized and/or adopted as the guide for future development of the community or any portion thereof.

45.	Conditional Use. A use that is not appropriate generally or a use that is not appropriate generally without restriction throughout the zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, is not detrimental to public health, safety, or general welfare.

46.	Condominium. Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of the separate ownership portions.  Real estate is not a condominium unless the individual interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owner.

47.	Deck. A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal use or site, and at any
point extending more than three feet above ground.


48.	Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including a change in use or the creation of a subdivision.

49.	Dormitory. A building other than a motel, hotel, house or apartment where an organization or institution houses students, employees, or patients.  Such buildings are
 
used in connection with an organized activity of the institution, are occupied on a prearranged basis for definite periods, and may provide meals and/or lodging.

50.	Dredging. The process by which soils or other surficial materials, normally transported by surface water erosion into a body of water, are removed for the purpose of deepening the body of water.

51.	Drive-in Use. An establishment which by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicle.  This term includes having "drive-thru"  windows.

52.	Dwelling, Multiple Family. A building, or a portion thereof, designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other.

53.	Dwelling, One Family. A building designed exclusively for and occupied exclusively by one family.

54.	Dwelling, Seasonal. A residential building not capable of year-round occupancy due to non-winterized construction or an inadequate nonconforming year-round on-site sewage treatment system.

55.	Dwelling, Single Family Attached (Townhouse). A residential building containing two or more dwelling units with at least one common wall, each unit so oriented as to have all exits directly to the out-of-doors.

56.	Dwelling, Two Family - (Duplex). A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other.

57.	Dwelling Site. A designated location for residential use by one or more persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational vehicle sites.

58.	Dwelling Unit. Any structure or portion of a structure, or other shelter designed as short or long term living quarters for one or more persons, including rental or time share accommodations such as motel, hotel, and resort rooms and cabins.

59.	Essential Services. Overhead or underground electrical, gas, steam or water distribution structures or collection, communication, supply or disposal systems and structures used by public utilities or governmental departments or commissions or as are required for the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, and accessories in connection therewith.

60.	Exterior Storage. The storage of goods, materials, equipment, manufactured products and similar items not fully enclosed by a building.
 

61.	Family. One or more individuals related by blood, marriage, or adoption, including foster children, or a group of not more than five persons (excluding servants), some or all of whom are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption, occupying a single dwelling unit or manufactured home.

62.	Farm, Rural. (See Agriculture).


63.	Farm, Suburban. A non-commercial food processing use primarily intended for the use of the residents, and usually on less than 10 contiguous acres.  Suburban Agriculture uses may include the production of crops such as fruit trees, shrubs, plants, flowers, vegetables, and domestic pets.

64.	Feed Lot. The place of housing or feeding of livestock or other animals for food, fur, pleasure, or resale purposes in yards, lots, pens, buildings, or other areas not normally used for pasture or crops and in which substantial amounts of manure or related other wastes may originate by reason of such feeding of animals.

65.	Fence. An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.

66.	Fill. A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.


67.	Final Plat. A drawing or map of an approved subdivision, meeting all requirements of Chapter 12, and in such form as required by the community for purposes of recording.

68.	Equal Degree of Encroachment. A method of determining the location of floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.

69.	Flood. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.

70.	Floodplain . . The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.

71.	Floodway. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.

72.	Flood Frequency. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
 
73.	Flood Fringe. - That portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway.  Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the Flood Insurance Study for Goodhue County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas.

74.	Flood Proofing. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.

75.	Floor Area, Gross. The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building measured from the outside faces of the walls or the centerline of party walls separating two buildings, but not including any interior parking spaces, loading spaces, any space where the floor to ceiling height is less than 6 feet, any space devoted to mechanical equipment, terraces, breezeways, or screened porches, or basement or other subterranean area not intended for human habitation or service to the public.  The floor area for enclosed space having a floor to ceiling height in excess of 20 feet shall be computed on the basis that each 15 feet of height shall be equal to one floor.

76.	Floor Area Ratio. The ratio of the floor area of a building to its lot area.  For example: when a floor-area ratio of 0.5 is specified, the floor area of a building constructed on a lot of 10,000 square feet in area is limited to a maximum of 5,000 square feet.  The number of stories being optional, the building area may be 5,000 square feet for one story; 2,500 square feet for each of two stories, and so forth.  The purpose of this ratio is to control the bulk of buildings and encourage the development of open space or plazas about structures in the intensely developed portions of the City.

77.	Floor Area, Residential. (See Gross Floor Area).


78.	Floor Area, Usable. (For the purposes of computing parking). That area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients, or customers.  Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways, or for utilities or sanitary facilities, shall be excluded from this computation of "Usable Floor Area".  Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls.

79.	Forest Land Conversion. The clear cutting of forested lands to prepare for a new land use other than reestablishment of a subsequent forest stand.

80.	Garage, Private. An accessory building or portion of a main building designed or used for the storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats, and similar vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory.

81.	Grade. The ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height of buildings.  The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade is level.  If the ground is not
 
entirely level, the average grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground of the highest and lowest grades adjacent to the building.

82.	Greenhouse. A glass or transparent plastic covered building solely used to grow plants.


83.	Historic Site (Commercial). A structure or site designated as a historical site by the State of Minnesota Historical Society, the National Register of Historical Places, the City of Red Wing Heritage Preservation Commission, or City Council in which limited commercial activity for historical or artistic items may occur.

84.	Hotel. (See also Motel). A building or part of a building, with a common entrance or entrances, in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for transient occupancy, and in which one or more of the following services are offered: (a) maid service; (b) furnishing of linens; (c) telephone, secretarial, or desk service; (d) bellboy service.  A hotel may include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballrooms, or meeting rooms.

85.	Household Pet. Animals that are customarily kept for personal use or enjoyment within the home.  Household pets shall include but not be limited to domestic dogs, domestic cats, domestic tropical birds, and rodents.

86.	Industrial Park. (See also Planned Unit Development). A planned coordinated development of a tract of land with two or more industrial buildings.  Such development is planned, designed, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis with special attention given to on-site vehicular circulation, parking, utility needs, building design and orientation and open space.

87.	Intensive Vegetation Clearing. The removal of greater than 30 percent of the trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.

88.	Land Alteration. The extraction or grading of land involving movement of earth and materials in excess of 50 cubic yards, exclusive of normal yard landscaping.

89.	Land Reclamation. The reclaiming of land by depositing material so as to elevate the grade.  Depositing a total of more than 50 cubic yards of material per lot or parcel, either by hauling in or regrading the area.

90.	Landscaping. Planting trees and turf cover such as grasses and shrubs.


91.	Loading Space. An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials.

92.	Lodging Room Establishment. An establishment with three or more lodging rooms with sleeping and living quarters, but without cooking facilities and meals are not provided.  In
 
a suite of rooms, without cooking facilities, each room, which provides sleeping accommodations, shall be counted as one lodging room.

93.	Lot. A parcel of land legally subdivided by plat, metes and bounds, registered land survey, auditors plot, or other accepted means and separated from other parcels or portions by said description for the purpose of sale, leased, or operation.

94.	Lot Area. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot.


95.	Lot, Buildable. A single tract ofland, under separate ownership, which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon.  Said buildable lot shall meet or exceed all of the requirements of this Chapter as it relates to area, size, dimensions, and access frontage as required for a new lot located in the same zoning district.

96.	Lot, Corner. A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees.  A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be
considered a comer lot for the purposes of this Chapter if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle ofless than 135 degrees.

97.	Lot Coverage. The part or percent of the lot occupied by a building including accessory buildings, and other non-porous surfaces such as driveways and parking areas.

98.	Lot Depth. The average horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines.


99.	Lot Lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.


100.	Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).  An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor.

I 01.  Lot Line-Front. In the case of an interior lot, that line separating said lot from the street.
In the case of a comer lot or double frontage lot, that line separating said lot from either street.

102.	Lot Line-Rear. That lot line opposite the front lot line.  In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, no less than
I 0 feet long lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot.


103.	Lot Line-Side. Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line.  A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line.
 
104.	Lot, Interior. Any lot other than a comer lot.


105.	Lot, Non-Riparian. Any lot that does not border on public waters.


106.	Lot, Riparian. Any lot that borders on public waters.


107.	Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Goodhue County; or a parcel of land, the deed to which was recorded in the office of the County Recorder prior to the adoption of this Chapter.

108.	Lot Through. Any interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a comer lot.  In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all yards of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yard setbacks shall be provided as required.

109.	Lot Width. The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at the required front setback line.:.

110.	Major Thoroughfare. An arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate municipal area and the region beyond, and is
designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway, or equivalent term on the major thoroughfare plan to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the major thoroughfare.

111.	Manufactured Home.  Means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and contains the  plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems in it. Manufactured home includes any accessory structure that is an addition or supplement to the manufactured home and, when installed, becomes a part of the manufactured home.

112.	Master Plan Map. (See Comprehensive Plan).


113.	Mining. The extraction of sand, gravel, rock, soil, or other material from the land and the removal thereof from the site.  For the purposes of this Chapter, mining shall not include: the removal of materials associated with the construction of a building, the removal of excess materials in accordance with approved plats, or on the site of utility highway construction, minor agricultural, and sod removal.

114.	Mobile Home. (See Manufactured Home).


115.	Modular or Prefabricated Home. (See Manufactured Home).
 
116.	Motel. (See Hotel). A series of attached, semi-detached or detached rental units containing a bedroom, bathroom and closet space.  Units shall provide for overnight lodging and are offered to the public for compensation, and shall cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle.

117.	Nonconforming Use. A lawful use ofland that does not comply with the use regulations for its zoning district but which complied with applicable regulations at the time the use was established.

118.	Nonconformity. Any legal use, structure or parcel of land already in existence, recorded, or authorized before the adoption of official controls or amendments thereto that would not have been permitted to become established under the terms of the official controls as now written, if the official controls have been in effect prior to the date it was established, recorded or authorized.

119.	Nuisance Factors. An offensive, annoying, unpleasant, or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as: noise, dust, smoke, odor, glare, fumes, flashes, vibration, shock waves, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, objectionable effluent, noise of congregation, passenger traffic, water, or excessive runoff

120.	Obstruction. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.

121.	Official Map. A map adopted in accordance with Section 462.359 of the Minnesota State Statutes which may show existing county roads and county-state aid highways, proposed future county roads and highways and the area needed for widening existing county roads and highways.  An official map may also show the location of existing public land and facilities, and other land needed for future public purposes, including public facilities
such as parks, playgrounds, schools, and other public buildings, civic centers, and travel service facilities.

122.	Off-Street Parking Lot. A facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than three vehicles.

123.	Open Space Recreation.  Recreation particularly oriented to and utilizing the outdoor character of an area; including hiking and riding trails, primitive campsites, campgrounds, waysides, parks and recreational areas.
 
124.	Open Storage. (See Exterior Storage).


125.	Ordinary High Water Level. The boundary of public waters and wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.

126.	Out-Lot. A non-buildable lot included within the boundary of a recorded plat which has been set aside for future use as a park or other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use. Such land may be subdivided in the future for buildable purposes.

127.	Outdoor Biomass Burner/Boiler. A freestanding outdoor device designed for solid fuel combustion so that useable heat is derived for the interior of an adjacent building, its domestic water supply, or a pool/spa.  An Outdoor Biomass Burner/Boiler shall include units that are placed in an accessory building.

128.	Parking Space. An area of definite length and width, said area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles, or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles.

129.	Parkway. A through street or road with a wide right-of-way and larger than normal structural setbacks.  It is usually well landscaped and preserves as much as possible the natural vegetation and contour of the land in a more curvilinear pattern than normal thoroughfares.  Such a wide right-of-way may include trails, landscaping, scenic overlooks, picnic facilities and other recreation attractions. A parkway may connect, be part of, or be adjacent to other public open space.

130.	Permitted Use. A use that may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts provided it conforms to all requirements, regulations, and standards of such district.

131.	Planned Cluster Development.  A pattern of subdivision development which places  dwelling units into compact groupings while providing a commonly owned or dedicated open space.

132.	Principal Building. A building in which is conducted the main or primary use of the lot upon which it is situated.

133.	Practical Difficulties. As used in connection with the granting of a variance, means that the property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by this  Chapter; the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.  Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical
 
difficulties.  Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.

134.	Primitive Campsites.  An area that consists of individual remote campsites accessible only by foot or water.

135.	Principal Use. The main or primary use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist.

136.	Property Line. The line bounding a lot as defined herein.


137.	Protective or Restrictive Covenant. A contract entered into between private parties which constitutes a restriction of the use of a particular parcel of property.

138.	Public Facade Any facade of a building that is visible from a public street, a public area, or provides access to the general public.

139.	Public Waters. Any waters as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 103 G.005, and subdivisions  14 and 15.

140.	Reach. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction.  In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.

141.	Recreation Equipment. Play apparatus such as swing sets and slides, sandboxes, poles for nets, unoccupied boats and trailers not exceeding 25 feet in length, picnic tables, lawn chairs, barbecue stands, and similar equipment or structures, but not including tree houses, swimming pools, playhouses exceeding 25 square feet in floor area, or sheds utilized for storage of equipment.

142.	Recreational Vehicle. Any vehicle or structure designed and used for temporary, seasonal human living quarters which meets all of the following qualifications: (a) is not used as the permanent residence of the owner or occupant; (b) is used for temporary living quarters by the owner or occupant while engaged in recreational or vacation activities; (c) is towed or self-propelled on public streets or highways incidental to such recreational or vacation activities; (d) examples of such vehicles include van campers, tent camping trailers, self-contained travel trailers, pickup campers, camping buses, and self-contained, self-propelled truck chassis mounted vehicles providing living accommodations.

143.	Recreation Vehicle Parks. A park, court, campsite, lot, parcel, or tract ofland used for the purpose of supplying the location or accommodations for any recreation vehicles as defined herein, and upon which said recreation vehicles are parked.  The term "Recreation
 
Vehicle Park" shall include all buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment thereof whether a charge is made for the use of the park and its facilities or not.

144.	Regional Flood. A flood which is representative oflarge floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval.  Regional Flood is synonymous with the term "base flood" used in the Flood Insurance Study.

145.	Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.  Within the AO Zone shown on Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel number 27049C0190E, as adopted in Section 2.2, the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than two feet above the highest adjacent grade of an existing structure, or a proposed structure, or a proposed structural addition.

146.	Resort. Any structure or group of structures containing more than two dwelling units or separate living quarters designed or intended to serve as seasonal or temporary dwellings on a rental or lease basis for profit with the primary purpose of said structure or structures being recreational in nature.  Uses may include a grocery for guests only, fish cleaning house, marine service, boat landing and rental, recreational area, and equipment, and similar uses normally associated with a resort operation.

147.	Retreat CenterNacation Home. A single family detached residential structure/property with sleeping and living quarters including cooking facilities, but which meals are not provided, that is wholly rented to one family or one common party for the purpose of overnight lodging for one night or longer, but less than one month.  Retreat centers and vacation homes shall not be rented to more than one family or common party at a time, the premises shall not be the primary residence of the owner, the owner or a
representative of the owner shall not occupy the premises during the rental period, and the number of guests shall be limited to two per bedroom with a maximum of twelve guests
at any one time.


148.	Room. For the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a multiple family district, a room is a living room, dining room or bedroom, equal to at least 70 square feet in area.  Plans presented showing one, two, or three bedroom units and including a den, library, or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density.

149.	Rooming House. A building that is the primary residence of the owner and in which rooms are provided by the owner for compensation to three or more adult persons not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner.
 
150.	School. A facility that provides a curriculum of elementary and secondary academic instruction, including kindergartens, elementary schools, middle schools, and high schools.

151.	Screening. The method by which a view of one site from another adjacent site is  shielded, concealed, or hidden.  Screening techniques include fences, walls, hedges, berms, or other features. In reference to Division 53, screening means that when a structure is built or placed on a lot or vegetation is planted such that when the structure is built, it is visually inconspicuous as viewed from the river during the summer months. Visually inconspicuous means difficult to see or not readily noticeable in summer months as viewed from the river.

152.	Selective Cutting.  The removal of single scattered trees, provided a continuous tree cover is maintained within the structure setback areas.

153.	Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage treatment
system, or other facility and an ordinary high water level, sewage treatment system, top of a bluff, road, highway, property line or other facility.

154.	Sewage Treatment System.  Any system for the collection, treatment and dispersion of sewage including but not limited to septic tanks, soil absorption systems and drain fields.

155.	Sewer System. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main, and all other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal.

156.	Shore Impact Zone. Land located between the ordinary high water level of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50 percent of the structure setback.

157.	Shoreland. Land located within the following distances from public waters: 1000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond, or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a floodplain designated by ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances and when approved by the commissioner.

158.	Shoreland Bluff. That part of a bluff which faces a river or lake designated as in the shoreland zone having a part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area and the slope must drain toward the waterbody.

159.	Shoreland Bluff Impact Zone. A shoreland bluff and land located within 30 feet from the top of the bluff.

160.	Significant Historic Site. Any archaeological site, standing structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of Historic Places or is listed
 
in the State Register of Historic Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions of Minnesota Statutes section 307.08 as amended. A historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the Minnesota state archaeologist or the director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be significant historic sites.

161.	Steep Slope. Land where agricultural activity or development is not recommended or poorly suited based on slope steepness or soil site characteristics as found mapped and described in available county soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of this Division. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are lands having average slopes over 12 percent, as measured over horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, that are not bluffs.

162.	Sign. A structure or device designed or intended to convey information to the public in written or pictorial form.

163.	Site Plan. A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses, and principal
site development features proposed for a specific parcel of land.


164.	Specified Anatomical Areas. Anatomical areas consisting of: a) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and b) Human male genitals in a discemable turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

165.	Specified Sexual Activities. Activities consisting of the following: a) Actual or  simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direst physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty,  pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; orb) Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or c) Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation, or other sexually explicit contact.

166.	Story. That part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein, included between
the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above.  A story thus defined shall not be counted as a story when more than 50 percent, by cubic content, is below the height level of the adjoining ground.

167.	Story, Half. An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an area of at least 200 square feet with a clear height of 7 feet 6 inches.  For the purposes of this Chapter, the
 
usable floor area is only that area having at least 4 feet of clear height between floor and ceiling.

168.	Street. A public dedicated right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.

169.	Structure. Anything constructed or erected the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground, except aerial or underground utility lines, such as sewer, electric, telephone, telegraph, gas lines, towers, poles, and other supporting facilities.

170.	Subdivision. The division of a parcel of land after the effective date of this Chapter into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development.  This term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.

171.	Substandard Building. (Substandard Structure). Any building or structure lawfully existing on June 22, 2000 or any amendment thereto, which building or structure does not conform with regulations, including dimensional standards, for the district in which it is located after June 22, 2000 or such amendment.

172.	Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the estimated market value, as indicated in the records of the County Assessor, of the structure before the damage occurred.

173.	Substantial Improvement. Within any consecutive 365-day period, reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the estimated market value, as indicated in the records of the County Assessor, of the
structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement.   This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term does not, however, include either:

a)	Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

b)	Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure."  For the purpose of this Division, "historic structure" shall be as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1.
 
174.	Surface Water-Oriented Commercial Use. The use ofland for commercial purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants with transient docking facilities are examples of such use.

175.	Temporary Recreational Shelter. A temporary seasonal tent, gazebo, or similar shelter or structure that is constructed of fabric, nylon, canvas, plastic, or other similar material that is draped over or attached to a frame of poles or attached to supporting ropes that is intended for recreational use.

176.	Temporary Storage Container/Portable  Storage Unit (POD). A transportable
container unit designed and used primarily for temporary storage of personal property and other household goods and materials.  A temporary storage container/portable storage unit (PODS) shall not be considered an accessory structure or building as defined in this Division and may not be used as an accessory structure or building.

177.	Toe of Bluff. The point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from gentler to steeper slope above. If no break in the
slope is apparent or if there is disagreement in the breaking point, the toe of the bluff shall be the lowest end of the lowest 50-foot segment, as measured on the ground, indicating an average slope exceeding 18 percent.

178.	Top of Bluff. The point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from steeper to gentler slope above. If no break in the slope is apparent or if there is disagreement in the breaking point, the top of the bluff shall be the highest end of the highest 50-foot segment, as measured on the ground, indicating an average slope exceeding 18 percent.

179.	Tower. Any ground-mounted or roof-mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade.

180.	Tower, Lattice. Three-or four-legged steel girded structures typically supporting multiple communications users and services generally ranging from 60 to 200 feet in height.

181.	Tower, Monopole. Single pole design, approximately 3 feet in diameter at the base narrowing to approximately  1-1/2 feet at the top and generally ranging from 25 to 190 feet in height.

182.	Use. Any purpose for which a structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; or any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or other structure on a tract of land.
 
183.	Utility Pole. Pole used to support essential services such as power, telephone, or cable TV lines; or used to support street or pedestrian way lighting, typically located in public rights-of-way or boulevards.

184.	Variance. A relaxation by the Board of Adjustments of the dimensional regulations of this Chapter  where such action will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of actions or the situation of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this Chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.

185.	Vehicle (Motorized). Any car, truck, bus, motorcycle, boat, trailer, recreational motor home and other motorized equipment used in the transportation of individuals, animals, commodities or other materials.

186.	Warehousing. The storage, packing, and creating of materials or equipment within an enclosed building or structure.

187.	Water-Oriented Accessory Structure or Facility. A small, aboveground building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks, and retaining walls, which, because  of the relationship of its use to a surface water feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the normal structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities include boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, and detached decks.

188.	Watershed Management or Flood Control Structure.  A dam, floodwall, wingdam, dike, diversion channel, or an artificially deepened or widened stream channel following the same or approximately the same course as the natural channel, or any other structure for altering or regulating the natural flow condition of a river or stream.   The term "watershed management or flood control structure" does not include pilings, retaining walls, gabion baskets, rock riprap, or other facilities intended primarily to prevent erosion and which must be authorized by permit from the Commissioner of Natural Resources.

189.	Wetland. A surface water feature classified as a wetland in the United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition).

190.	Wireless Telecommunications  Services. Licensed or unlicensed wireless telecommunication  services including digital cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), commercial or private paging services, or similar services marketed or provided to the general public.

191.	Yard. An open space on the same zoning lot with a building or structure, unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise permitted.  A yard extends along a lot line and to a depth or width specified in the yard requirements for the zoning district in which such zoning lot is located.
 

192.	Yard, Front. A yard extending along the full length of the front lot line between the side lot lines and on which the main entrance of the structure may be located.

193.	Yard, Rear. A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot lines.

194.	Yard, Side. A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard.


195.	Yard, Corner Side. A side yard which adjoins a public street.


196.	Yard, Interior Side. A yard that is located immediately adjacent to another zoning lot or to an alley separating such side yard from another zoning lot.

10-30	Rules oflnterpretation  for Zoning Use Types and Classifications.


A)	Purpose of Use Types.  The purpose of the Use Types is to establish a classification system for land uses and a consistent set of terms defining uses permitted within various zoning districts. The Use Types section also facilitates the process of determining the applicable use type of any activity not clearly within any defined use type.

B)	Interpretation.  In the event of any question as to the appropriate use type of any existing or proposed use or activity, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to determine the appropriate use type. In making such determination, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the operational and physical characteristics of the use in question and shall consider the classification contained in the most recent
edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual published by the U. S. Office of Management and Budget. In addition, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the specific requirements of the use in common with those included as examples of Use Types. Those examples, when included in use type descriptions, are intended to be illustrative, as opposed to exclusive lists. The Zoning Administrator may also determine that a proposed use or activity is sufficiently different from any use type listed below and will require an amendment to the text of this Chapter.

C)	Determinations In Writing.  The Zoning Administrator shall make such determinations of appropriate Use Types in writing, which shall include an explanation of the reasons for the determination.

D) Appeal.  A determination of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustments pursuant to the procedures for administrative appeals outlined in Section 90-120 of this Chapter.

10-40	Definitions of Use Types and Classifications.  For the purposes of this Chapter, the words and phrases listed below in this section shall have the meanings described below.
 

1.	Accessory Commercial Apartment (Upper Level). A suite of rooms or a room with permanent cooking facilities arranged and intended for a place of residence of a single family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit that is located above the main level of a commercially used or zoned building, and which is accessory to the main use of the building.

2.	Accessory Commercial Apartment (Main Level or Lower Level). A suite of rooms or a room with permanent cooking facilities arranged and intended for a place of_residence of a single family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit that is located on or below the main level of a commercially used or zoned building, and which is accessory to the main use of the building.

3.	Adult Establishment. A business engaged in any of the  following  activities, which utilizes any of the following business procedures or practices: Adult Book and Media Store, Adult Cabaret, Adult Hotel or Motel, Adult Theater, Adult Massage Parlor, Adult Rap Parlor, and Adult Sauna.

4.	Agricultural Production. Establishments engaged in the production of crops, plants or vines, including forestry, and the incidental sale of produce raised on the premises to individuals, or establishments in existence on June 22, 2000 which are engaged in the keeping, grazing, or feeding of livestock for sale, value increase, or livestock increase.

5.	Agricultural Services. Establishments that perform services which support or assist the agricultural community, such as soil preparation services, crop services, farm management services, or breeding services on a fee or contract basis, along with experimental farms for research or educational purposes.  This category is intended to apply where agricultural land is located and may include buildings and other structures that provide office, warehouse, and storage areas for these establishments.

6.	Agricultural Support. Establishments engaged in farm equipment sales and repair, farm produce sales and supply (feed grain, elevators) and small-scale farm product processing, such as cidermills, dairies, poultry or meat processing.

7.	Air Transportation. Establishments engaged in domestic, emergency, or foreign transportation of passengers or goods by air, including airports, flying fields, rotocraft terminals, as well as any associated terminal facilities.

8.	Animal Grooming Facility-An establishment  engaged in the grooming and aesthetic enhancement of four or less domestic animals at any given time and that does not include medical or surgical treatment, boarding, breeding, raising, or training services.
 

9.	Animal Husbandry. The keeping of domestic animals, such as horses, dogs, cats, bees, etc., not primarily for produce or value increase, but rather for show, sport, or as pets.

10.	Automobile Maintenance Service. Repair of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including the sale, installation, and servicing of equipment and parts.  Typical uses include tire sales and installation, wheel and brake shops, oil and lubrication services and similar repair and service activities where minor repairs and routine maintenance are conducted.

11.	Automobile Parts/Supply. Retail sales of automobile parts and accessories.
Typical uses include automobile parts and supply stores which offer new and factory rebuilt parts and accessories, and include establishments which offer minor automobile repair services as an accessory use.

12.	Bed and Breakfast. A private, owner-occupied residence, that contains no more than eight guestrooms where lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation.

13.	Broadcasting or Communication Tower. Any unstaffed facility for the transmission and/or reception of radio, television, radar, cellular telephone, personal paging device, specialized mobile radio (SMR), and similar services.  A Broadcasting or Communication Facility usually consists of an equipment shelter or cabinet, a support tower or other structure used to achieve the necessary elevation, and the transmission or reception devices or antenna.

14.	Business Center. A building or group of buildings planned, constructed, and managed as a total entity, with common on-site parking for a group of commercial service establishments, with office uses also permitted.  In the central business district (B-3), the requirement for common on-site parking need not be met in order to classify a development as a business center.

15.	Business Services. Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as advertising and mailing, building maintenance, office equipment rental and leasing, photo finishing, business supply services, and computer programming/data processing services.

16.	Campgrounds and Trailering. Establishments engaged in providing overnight or short-term sites for the placement of recreational vehicles or temporary housing, with or without facilities such as water and electricity.
 
17.	Car Wash. Washing and cleaning of vehicles.  Typical uses include automatic conveyor machines and self-service car washes.

18.	Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.

19.	Colleges and Universities. Institutions of higher learning which offer courses of general or specialized study leading to a degree.  They are certified by the State Board of Higher Education or by a recognized accrediting agency.  Colleges tend to be in campus-like settings or on multiple blocks.  Accessory uses include offices, housing for students, food service, laboratories, health and sports facilities, theaters, meeting areas, parking, maintenance facilities, and support commercial.  Examples include universities, liberal arts colleges, community colleges, nursing and medical schools not accessory to a hospital, and seminaries.

20.	Commercial Kennel. The boarding, breeding, raising, grooming or training of two or more dogs, cats, or other household pets of any age not owned by the owner or occupant of the premises, and/or for commercial gain.

21.	Commercial Stable. The boarding, breeding or raising of horses or ponies not owned by the owner or occupant of the property or riding of horses by other than the owner or occupant of the property and their nonpaying guests. Included in this definition are riding academies.

22.	Commercial Vehicle Repair. Repair of construction equipment, commercial trucks, agricultural implements and similar heavy equipment, including automobiles, where major engine and transmission repairs are conducted.  Typical uses include automobile and truck repair garages, transmission shops, radiator shops, body and fender shops, equipment service centers, machine shops, and other similar uses where major repair activities are conducted.

23.	Communication Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephone mechanisms.  Excluded from this use type are facilities classified as Essential Services or Broadcasting and Communications Towers. Typical uses include television studios, telecommunications  service centers, telegraph service offices or film and sound recording facilities.

24.	Community Services. Establishments of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature generally providing a local service to people of the community.  Generally, they provide the service on the site or have employees at the site on a regular basis.
The service is ongoing, not just for special events.  Community centers or
facilities that have membership provisions are open to the general public to join at
 
any time (for instance, any senior citizen could join a senior center).  The use may also provide special counseling, education, or training of a public, non-profit, or charitable nature.  Accessory uses may include offices, meeting areas, food preparation areas, parking, health and therapy areas, day care uses, and athletic facilities.  Examples include libraries, museums, senior centers, community centers, police stations, fire stations, social service facilities, post offices, and environmental centers.

25.	Concessions. A business outlet with an official license or business agreement by a landowner or public entity that allows an establishment to be primarily engaged in the preparation of food and beverages, for takeout or table service.  This type of use does not employ a drive-up or drive-through service facility, and does not
offer curb service.


26.	Congregate Housing. A dwelling providing shelter and services for the elderly, which may include meals, housekeeping, and personal care assistance and minor medical services, but not intermediate, longterm, or extended nursing care for residents.

27.	Correctional Facilities. A public or privately operated use providing housing and care for individuals legally confined, designed to isolate those individuals from a surrounding community.

28.	Day Care Center. Any facility operated for the purpose of providing care, protection, and guidance to 15 or more individuals during only part of a 24-hour day.  This term includes nursery schools, preschools, day care centers for individuals, and other similar uses but excludes public and private educational facilities or any facility offering care to individuals for a full 24-hour period.

29.	Drinking and Entertainment. Establishments primarily engaged in the selling of drinks for consumption on the premises, where entertainment may be provided
and the incidental sale of prepared food for consumption on the premises is permitted.  These establishments may often charge a fee or admission charge for the entertainment provided.  Included in this category are bars, beer gardens, discotheques, nightclubs, taverns, and dance halls.

30.	Drive-in Restaurant. An establishment primarily engaged in the preparation of food and beverages, for either takeout, delivery, or table service, served in disposable containers at a counter and a drive-up or drive-through service facility or which offers curb service.

31.	Duplex. A building on a single lot containing two dwelling units.


32.	Educational Service. Establishments engaged in furnishing specialized academic or technical courses, normally on a fee basis, such as vocational or
 
correspondence schools, barber college, data processing schools, or secretarial schools, along with non-degree granting schools such as post secondary colleges and universities, martial arts, music, art, ceramic, dramatic, charm schools, and dance instruction.

33.	Family Day Care. A residence licensed by the Minnesota Department of Human Services in which no more than 12 children at any one time receives care, maintenance and supervision by someone other than their relatives or legal guardians for less than 24 hours per day.

34.	Farm Employee Housing. A dwelling located on a farm for the purpose of housing an employee of that farm operation and his/her family.  Also included in this use type would be multi-family dwelling(s) for seasonal employees in connection with an orchard or other agricultural use that relies on seasonal employees who must be housed.

35.	Fast Food Restaurant. An establishment primarily engaged in the preparation of food and beverages, for either takeout, delivery, or table service, served in disposable containers at a counter.  This use type does not employ a drive-up or drive-through service facility, and does not offer curb service.

36.	Financial Institution. Provision of financial and banking services to consumers or clients.  Walk-in and drive-in services are generally provided on site.  Typical uses include banks, savings and loan associations, savings banks, credit unions, lending establishments, and automatic teller machines (ATM's).

37.	Forestry Operations. The use ofland for the raising and harvesting of timber, pulp woods and other forestry products for commercial purposes, including the temporary operation of a sawmill and/or chipper to process the timber cut from that parcel or contiguous parcels. Excluded from this definition shall be the cutting of timber associated with land development approved by the City which shall be considered accessory to the development of the property.

38.	Funeral Home. Establishments engaged in undertaking services such as preparing the dead for burial, and arranging and managing funerals.  Typical uses include funeral homes, crematories, or mortuaries.

39.	Garden Center (Retail Agriculture). Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in retail or wholesale (bulk) sale, from the premises of trees, shrubs, seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, plants, and plant materials primarily for agricultural, residential, and commercial consumers.  Such establishments typically sell products purchased from others, but may sell some material which they grow themselves.  Typical uses include nurseries, greenhouses, plant stores, and lawn and garden centers.
 
40.	Gasoline Station. Any place of business with fuel pumps and underground storage tanks which provides fuels and oil for motor vehicles.  A neighborhood convenience store associated with automobile fuel sales shall be considered a gasoline station.

41.	Golf Course. A tract of land for playing golf, improved with tees, greens, fairways, hazards, and which may include clubhouses and shelters.  Included would be executive or par 3 golf courses.  Specifically excluded would be independent driving ranges or miniature golf facilities, which are classified as Outdoor Recreation Facilities.

42.	Group Family Day Care. A residence licensed by the Minnesota Department of Human Services in which at least 13 but not more than 14 children receive care, maintenance and supervision by someone other than their relatives or legal guardians for less than 24 hours per day.

43.	Group Home. A residence shared by six or fewer handicapped persons including resident staff, who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education, and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the resident to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential.

44.	Group Residential Facility. A licensed public or private establishment, which, for gain or otherwise, regularly provides one or more dependents with 24 hours a day substitute for the care, food, lodging, training, education, supervision, rehabilitation, and treatment they need, but which for any reason cannot be furnished in the dependent's own home.  This term includes, but is not limited to, state institutions under the control of the Commissioner of Public Welfare, foster homes, maternity shelters, group homes as defined herein with seven or more residents, schools for handicapped children, and homes for battered children or battered spouses.

45.	Halfway House. An establishment providing accommodations, rehabilitation, counseling, and supervision to persons suffering from alcohol or drug addition, to persons reentering society after being released from a correctional facility or other institution, or to persons suffering from similar disorders.

46.	Heavy Industrial. Establishments involved in the manufacture, fabrication, processing, compounding, or assembling of materials from raw material or previously processed material.  These uses have severe potential for adversely affecting surrounding land uses due to potential environmental impacts related to noise, smoke/particulate emissions, vibration, noxious gases, odor, glare/heat, fire/explosion hazards and waste disposal.  In addition, these uses may generate large amounts of truck or auto traffic, may involve the use of large unenclosed
 
production areas, or may require large, tall structures that are unsightly.  Heavy industrial uses typically involve primary production processes in the area of paper products (pulp mills), food processing (slaughterhouse, meat packing plant), chemicals (manufacture of inorganic chemicals, resins, plastics, paints, fertilizers, explosives, ink), petroleum products (refineries, bulk storage), primary metals (blasting, smelting, rolling), machinery and equipment manufacture (auto assembly, engines, construction equipment), leather (storing, curing, tanning), gravel based products (manufacture of bricks, concrete, abrasives), lumber products (saw mills), and silica sand processing. Heavy industrial land uses may be subject to Special Provisions as set forth in Division 55 of this Chapter.

47.	Home Occupations. Any gainful occupation or profession engaged in by the occupant of a dwelling at or from a dwelling unit when carried on in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

48.	Indoor Athletic Facility. A commercial recreation facility that provides completely enclosed or indoor recreation space, such as racquet clubs, indoor skating rinks, swimming pools, or gymnasiums.

49.	Indoor Recreation. Establishment primarily engaged in activities intended to provide personal amusement, with the largest number of patrons typically during the evening hours or on weekends, and where food and refreshments may be provided as an incidental service, including such uses as bowling alleys, billiard, pool, or bingo parlors, amusement arcades, and indoor theaters (live or motion picture).

50.	Interim Uses. A use, which does not conform to the regulations of the applicable zoning district, established for a fixed period of time with intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time.  An interim use shall not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent building or structure (see provisions in Section 55-115).

51.	Landfill. A disposal site employing an engineering method of disposing solid wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest volume, and applying cover material over all exposed waste at the end of each operating day.

52.	Laundry Plants. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, cleaning, or dyeing services other than those classified as Personal Services.  Typical uses include bulk laundry and cleaning plants, diaper services, and linen supply services.

53.	Light Industrial. Establishments involved in the processing, fabrication, assembly, or compounding of products where the process involved is relatively clean and nuisance free, usually completely enclosed, and without adverse
 
environmental effects.  These uses can be made compatible with surrounding areas through buffering and through separation required by yard and height limitations.  Typically, these uses result in the creation of finished products for sale on a wholesale basis to retailers or directly on a retail basis, and include uses in the following areas: lumber products (millwork, cabinet making), textiles,
printing and publishing services, bottling works, carpet and rug cleaning, furniture manufacture, paper (final processing of stationery, bags, etc., from purchased bulk stock), rubber and plastics (compounding processed resins, molding plastics), gravel based products (pottery, cutting, finishing granite, firing and decorating
clay products), and ice manufacturing.


54.	Local Transit. Establishments primarily engaged in furnishing local and suburban passenger transportation, including taxicabs, passenger charter services, school buses, and terminals (including service facilities) for motor vehicle passenger transportation.

55.	Manufactured Home Park. A development on a site under a single ownership which consists of two or more spaces for the placement of manufactured homes
for dwelling or sleeping purposes, regardless of whether or nor a fee is charged for the utilization of such space.

56.	Marina. A facility for storing, servicing, fueling, berthing, and securing and launching of private pleasure craft that may include the sale of fuel and incidental supplies for the boat owners, crews, and guests.

57.	Maritime Commercial Use. A riverfront business or a mix of business uses that includes:  restaurant, retail, office, and professional services.

58.	Medical Facilities. Establishments engaged in providing diagnostic services, extensive medical treatment (including surgical services), and other hospital services, as well as continuous nursing service, including general medical and surgical hospitals, specialty hospitals, medical laboratories, biomedical research and development, outpatient care facilities, medical schools and associated dormitories, medical appliance sales, and similar uses, but not including animal hospitals.

59.	Membership Organization. Organizations operating on a membership basis for the promotion of the interests of the members including such uses as trade associations, business associations, professional membership organizations, labor unions, civic or fraternal organizations, but not including churches, hospitals, golf and country clubs, or credit unions.

60.	Motor Freight and Warehousing. Establishments engaged primarily in either the storage or shipment of goods and materials, including terminal facilities for handling freight and maintenance facilities in which the truck (including tractor
 
trailer units) involved with the operation of the business are stored, parked and serviced.  Materials within a warehouse or terminal facility may be combined, broken down, or aggregated for transshipment or storage purposes where the original material is not chemically or physically changed. Motor Freight and Warehousing land uses may be subject to Special Provisions as set forth in Division 55 of this Chapter.

61.	Multi-Family Residential. A building containing three or more dwelling units.
The term includes cooperative apartments, condominiums, and the like.  For the purposes of these regulations, regardless of how rental units are equipped, any multifamily dwelling in which units are available for rental periods of one week or less shall be considered a hotel.

62.	Neighborhood Convenience Store. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of frequently or recurrently needed goods for household consumption, such as prepackaged food and beverages, and limited household supplies and hardware.  Convenience stores shall not include fuel pumps or the selling of fuel for motor vehicles.  Typical uses include neighborhood markets and country stores.

63.	Non-production Industrial. Establishments that normally are considered industrial in character even though they are not involved in the manufacturing or processing of products.  These uses generate negative impacts largely through their need for outside storage of equipment and materials, the large expanse of land needed for this storage, and the creation of dirt, dust and noise, along with intermittent truck traffic.  These uses generally can be made compatible through screening and the imposition of limited performance standards and, thus, are not objectionable in most industrial or commercial districts.  The types of uses categorized here include contractors' yards, lumberyards, utility yards, and public maintenance shops and yards.

64.	Nursing and Personal Care. Establishments primarily engaged in providing intermediate or long-term nursing and health related care to individuals, typically classified as nursing homes.

65.	Offices. A building or portion of a building use for office purposes by a business, service, professional, or institutional establishment, including medical offices or clinics, studios for those involved in art, sculpture, music, and the like, and all other establishments similar in character.

66.	Outdoor Entertainment. An outdoor facility developed for entertainment, amusement, or tourist purposes which typically involve sizable areas of land and concentrated traffic peaks oriented towards events at the facility, including drive­ in theaters, amphitheaters, outdoor concert halls, or theme parks.
 
67.	Outdoor Recreation Facility. A commercial recreation facility that is primarily an open air facility, such as baseball fields, swimming pools, skating rinks, golf driving ranges, or miniature golf facilities.

68.	Parking Facility. Any structure associated with a use whose purpose is to provide the required off-street parking spaces for a principal use, or any site utilized for parking which constitutes the principal use on a parcel of land.  This category also includes community lots, which are established to meet the parking needs in a residential area.

69.	Parks and Open Areas. Uses of land focusing on natural areas, large areas consisting mostly of vegetative landscaping or outdoor recreation, community gardens, or public squares.  Lands tend to have few structures.  Accessory uses include clubhouses, maintenance facilities, concessions, caretakers' quarters, and parking.  Examples include parks, public squares, plazas, recreational trails, botanical gardens, boat launching areas, nature preserves, and land used for grazing that is not part of a farm or ranch.

70.	Personal Services. Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her apparel, such as barber shops, clothing rental, reducing salons and health clubs, photographic studios, cleaning and garment services (but not including power laundries or dry cleaning plants) or coin operated laundries.

71.	Planned Unit Development. Developments which may have one or more main uses or structures on a single parcel or contiguous parcel of land, controlled by a single landowner or development group, upon which the developer may be granted relief or design flexibility from specific City Code provisions relating to land use, subdivision, and other similar regulations.  This relief or design flexibility may be granted by the City in return for assurances of an overall innovation and/or quality of development, which will be of exceptional benefit to the community as a whole.

While construction of the entire project may occur in planned stages, the entire project must create an environment compatible with adjacent uses and structures.

72.	Private Kennel. The keeping, breeding, raising, showing or training of four or more dogs over six months of age for personal enjoyment of the owner or occupants of the property, and for which commercial gain is not the primary objective.

73.	Private Stable. The keeping, breeding, or raising of horse or ponies exclusively for the personal use and enjoyment of the owner or occupant of the property or the riding of horses or ponies by the owner or occupant of the property and their guests.
 

74.	Public and Private Schools. Establishments at the primary, elementary, middle, junior high, or high school level that provide state-mandated basic education. Accessory uses include play areas, cafeterias, recreational and sport facilities, auditoriums, and before or after school daycare.  Examples include public and private daytime schools, boarding schools, and military academies.  Exemptions:
I)	Preschools are classified as Day Care Facilities, and 2) Business and Trade Schools are classified as Educational Services.

75.	Public Assembly. Facilities owned and operated by a public or quasi-public agency accommodating public assembly for non-recreation purposes.  Typical uses include auditoriums, convention facilities, exhibition facilities, convention halls, or armories.

76.	Public Works Maintenance Shops and Yards. A publicly owned repair, storage, or material processing facility or public works yard, which may include offices, used to provide public works services to the community.  These uses may generate negative impacts largely through their need for outside storage of equipment and materials, the  large expanse of land needed for this storage, and the creation of dirt, dust and noise, along with intermittent truck traffic.  These uses generally can be made compatible through screening, and the imposition of limited performance standards, and thus are not objectionable in most industrial, agricultural, or commercial districts.

77.	Railroad Transportation. Establishments engaged in domestic freight and passenger transportation by rail, and including railroad yards, freight stations and switching yards.

78.	Religious Institutions. Establishments that are intended to primarily provide meeting areas for religious activities.  Accessory uses include Sunday school facilities, parking, caretaker's housing, and group living facilities such as convents.  Examples include churches, temples, synagogues, and mosques.

79.	Repair and Maintenance Shop. Establishments engaged in miscellaneous repair services, primarily of household oriented products such as radios, televisions, washers and dryers, furniture (including reupholstery), small engine repair, bicycles, or locksmiths.

80.	Research and Testing. Establishments or other facilities for carrying on investigation in the natural or physical sciences, or engineering and development as an extension of investigation with the objective of creating end products, on a contract or fee basis, and including pilot plant operation.

81.	Resource Extraction. A use involving on-site extraction of surface or subsurface mineral products or natural resources.  Typical uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand
 
and gravel operations, mining, and soil mining.  Specifically excluded from this use type shall be grading and removal of dirt associated with an approved site plan or subdivision.

82.	Restricted Recreation. Commercial recreation facilities that are of greater nuisance than conventional outdoor athletic facilities because of 1) the noise and traffic volumes they may generate; 2) the glare they produce; or 3) the potential danger they may create from flying objects or the use of weapons.  This category includes such uses as amusement parks, racetracks (auto, go-cart, motorcycle) or ranges (skeet, rifle, or archery).

83.	Retail Trade. Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.  These establishments are characterized by the following: 1) they buy and receive as well as sell merchandise; 2) they may process some products, but such processing is incidental or subordinate to the selling activities; and 3) they predominantly sell to customers for their own personal or household use.

84.	Sales and Storage Lots. Establishments engaged in the display for sale or lease of automobiles, trucks, farm machinery, recreational vehicles and manufactured homes, including auto dealerships or the commercial storage of privately owned trailers, boats, campers, or similar vehicles.

85.	Scrap and Salvage Services. Any lot, land, parcel, building, or structure or part thereof used for the storage, processing, or abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap of discarded goods, materials, or machinery, or two or more unregistered, inoperable motor vehicles.

86.	Self Service Storage Facility. An establishment designed and utilized for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to tenants whom have sole private access to such space for storing personal property.

87.	Semi-Transient Accommodations.  Semi-transient accommodations  include boarding houses, rooming houses, retreat centers/vacation homes, fraternity and sorority houses, or lodging rooms, as defined by this Chapter.

88.	Shopping Center. A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed, and managed as a total entity with shared access, customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision of goods delivery separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements.

89.	Single Family Attached. A building containing one dwelling unit attached to another building containing only one dwelling unit, with each building on a separate lot.
 

90.	Single Family Detached. A building containing only one dwelling unit, surrounded by landscape area or yards on all sides.

91.	Standard Restaurant. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or beverage to customers in a ready-to-consume  state, and whose principal method of operation includes one or both of the following: I) customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are served their food and beverage by restaurant employees at the same table or counter at which the food and/or beverage are consumed; 2) a cafeteria-type operation where food and beverage generally are consumed within the restaurant building.

92.	Trade Shop. Any lot, land, building, or structure that serves as the headquarters for contractors involved in specialized activities such as plumbing, painting, plastering, masonry, carpentry, roofing, well drilling, and the like, where tools, equipment and materials used in the business are stored.  The category also includes establishments involved in specialized trades such as sheet metal, sign painting, drapers, and exterminators.

93.	Transient Accommodations. Hotels or Motels as defined by this Chapter.


94.	Transportation Services. Establishments furnishing services related to the arrangement of persons and goods movements, such as freight forwarding, parking services or the rental/leasing of automobiles or two-axle trucks.

95.	Truck Fleeting Area. An off-street parking area used for the purpose of parking freight-carrying trucks and related equipment, during a waiting period before the freight trucks are loaded or unloaded at a nearby facility.  Example:  grain trucks parked in an area while waiting to be loaded or unloaded for a grain shipment. This area shall not be a parking structure and may be used seasonally for truck fleeting and at other times for other principal uses.

96.	Veterinary Service. Establishments engaged in the practice of veterinary medicine, dentistry or surgery, along with those providing animal related services such as kennels, grooming, or breeding services.

97.	Wayside Stand. An establishment for the seasonal retail sale of agricultural goods and merchandise primarily produced by the operator on the site or on a nearby property.	Agricultural goods produced on other properties owned or leased by the operator may also be allowed provided a majority of the produce comes from land surrounding the wayside stand.  This use type shall include agricultural products picked by the consumer.

98.	Wholesaling. Establishments engaged primarily in selling merchandise to retailers, or to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business
 
customers, or to other wholesalers, or on a mail order basis to individuals or firms, or which serve as agents or brokers buying merchandise for, or selling
merchandise to, individuals and companies.
 
ARTICLEI- BASE DISTRICT  REGULATIONS DIVISION 15:  ZONING DISTRICTS AND PROVISIONS
15-010 General Purposes.  The Zoning Districts are so designed as to assist in carrying out the
intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan and are based upon the Comprehensive Plan, which has the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the City of Red Wing's citizens.

15-020 Zoning Districts.  For the purposes of this Chapter, the City of Red Wing is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:

SYMBOL	NAME
A	Agriculture
AR	Agricultural Residential
AC	Agricultural Conservation
R-1	Single Family Residential
R-2	Two Family Residential
RM-1	Multiple Family Residential (Low Density)
RM-2	Multiple Family Residential (High Density)
B-1	Neighborhood Business District
B-2	General Business
B-2A	Mixed General and Central Business
B-3	Central Business
CIVIC	Civic
MC	Mixed Use Industrial/Office Commercial
MCT	Mixed Use Commercial Tourism
RF	Riverfront District
1-1	Light Industrial
1-2	General Industrial
F	Floodplain Overlay District
DR	Design Review Overlay District
CR	Cannon River Management Overlay District
LS	Lake and Shoreland Management Overlay District
 
ARTICLE II- BASE DISTRICT REGULATIONS DIVISION 20: AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
20-10	Agriculture Zoning (A) District.


A)	Purpose.  The A-Agriculture district is designated to preserve land for agricultural uses located outside the area of urban development and discourage scattered non­ farm uses from developing in these areas.

B)	Permitted Principal Uses.

1)	Agricultural Production
2)	Agricultural Services
3)	Animal Husbandry
4)	Commercial Kennel
5)	Commercial Stable
6)	Family Day Care
7)	Farm Employee Housing
8)	Forestry Operations
9)	Group Family Day Care
10)	Group Home
11)	Parks and Open Areas
12)	Private Kennel
13)	Private Stable
14)	Single Family Detached
15)	Wayside Stand


C)	Uses Requiring A Certificate of Compliance.

1)	Broadcasting or Communication Tower (As provided in Division 55-240 C)2) of this Chapter)
2)	Home Occupation (Meeting Criteria)
3)	Interim Use
4)	Marina


D)	Conditional Uses.

1)	Agricultural Support
2)	Air Transportation
3)	Bed and Breakfast
4)	Broadcasting or Communication Tower (As provided in Division 55-240 C)3) of this Chapter)
5)	Campgrounds and Trailering
6)	Cemetery
7)	Garden Center
 
8)	Golf Course
9)	Home Occupation (Not Meeting Criteria)
10)	Landfill
11)	Public Works Maintenance Shop and Yards
12)	Railroad Transportation
13)	Religious Institutions
14)	Resource Extraction
15)	Restricted Recreation
16)	Scrap and Salvage Services
17)	Veterinary Service


E)	Dimensional Requirements.

1)	Principal Structure


Lot Width
At Building Line 160 feet Frontage on Existing Roads  160 feet



Front Yard Setback 50 feet Side Yard Setbacks
Interior  30 feet
Comer 50 feet
Rear Yard Setback 50 feet

A-Agriculture district Lot Area  40 acres





2)	Other Density Requirements

Maximum Lot Coverage ................. 10 percent
Maximum Height ............................ 30 feet (except ag buildings 90 feet)

Two Family Structure ................... 80 acres


3)	Accessory Buildings (Except Agricultural Buildings)

Maximum Height Above Grade .................... 20 feet Maximum Door Height ................................ 14 feet Distance to Principal Structure ..................... 10 feet

Front Yard Setback ...................................... 50 feet
Side Yard Setback ....................................... 30 feet
Street Side - Side Yard Setback ................... 30 feet Rear Yard Setback ....................................... 50 feet

Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings ... 3 (No Limit for Agricultural Buildings)
Maximum Total Accessory Buildings SF .....1500 SF for lots up to 3 acres
1750 SF for lots up to 4 acres
 
2000 SF for lots 4-5 acres
2250 SF for lots over 5 acres
(plus 100 SF per each additional 1 acre over 5 acres, with a maximum of 3500 SF)
New Animal Building Setback ...................... 100 feet


F)	Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be required for all permitted uses according to the following schedule.  All parking areas shall conform  to the design requirements as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter.

A8E <?l!l!l!Ti:ll  Tc:>41!<?! c:>l'l	'  !"Ye:>  Pi:l<?   P E l'l "Y 41.Y lli]'lg 1!1'1 !
Agricultural  Service	<?!ic:>J'l (')Q Q?Q
bJ'lilp<:t  lil! Q<:tl'l4ry	I  c:> E ql!iT 11?: 1'1!
Commercial Stable	!    One space per employee on the largest work
I hif1:, pll! 21'1 Pi:l<? fc:>T  y ryf c:>l!T <:tJ'lilp<:t Farm Employee  Hou  ]'lg	I !"Ye:> Pi:l<? P T 41.Y lli]'lg l!J'li!
Rc:>E !ryQp E<:t!ic:>J'l	'  c:>E ql!iE 11?: 1'1!
Private Kennel	, c:>E ql!iE 11?: 1'1!
Private Stable	[     c:>E ql!iE 11?: 1'1!
Wayside Stand	[      One space per  100 square feet of gross floor
I i:lE <:t !hT    Pi:l<?   11?: 1'1 11?:1!11?:
Family Day Care	!    One space per employee on the largest work
I  hif1:, pll! 21'1  Pi:l<? fc:>T lc:><:t4 J'lg <:tl'l4 l!l'llc:><:t4 1'18
Group Home	[      One space per employee on the largest work

...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Single Family Detached	!   Two spaces per dwelling unit, one per unit
[   11?:1! ! 1> lc:><?<:t! 4   l'l  i:l 8i:lTi:l8
Parks and Open Areas	I c:>E ql!iE 11?: 1'1!
Commercial Kennel	!    One space per 500 square feet of gross floor
I   area


20-20	Agricultural Residential (AR) District.


A)	Purpose.  The AR-Agricultural Residential District is designed to provide for limited large lot, low density residential development in a rural lifestyle, where agricultural uses can be continued and where orderly growth and sanitary facilities may be extended with zoning district changes at some future date, but which at present is considered a rural service area with limited city facilities.

B)	Permitted Principal Uses.

1)	Animal Husbandry
2)	Commercial Kennel
3)	Community Services
 
4)	Family Day Care
5)	Group Family Day Care
6)	Group Home
7)	Parks and Open Areas
8)	Private Kennel
9)	Private Stable
10)	Single Family Detached
11)	Wayside Stand


C)	Uses Requiring A Certificate of Compliance.

1)	Agricultural Production
2)	Agricultural Services
3)	Broadcasting or Communication Tower (As provided in Division 55-240 C)2) of this Chapter)
4)	Home Occupation (Meeting Criteria)
5)	Interim Use


D)	Conditional Uses.

1)	Air Transportation
2)	Bed and Breakfast
3)	Broadcasting or Communication Tower As provided in Division 55-240 C)3) of this Chapter
4)	Campgrounds and Trailering
5)	Cemetery
6)	Colleges and Universities
7)	Commercial Stable
8)	Congregate Housing
9)	Correctional Facilities
10)	Day Care Center l l)Duplex
12)	Farm Employee Housing
13)	Forestry Operations
14)	Garden Center
15)	Golf Course
16)	Home Occupation (Not Meeting Criteria)
17)	Landfill
18)	Manufactured Home Park
19)	Nursing and Personal Care
20)	Outdoor Entertainment
21)	Outdoor Recreation Facility
22)	Planned Unit Development
23)	Public Works Maintenance Shop and Yards
24)	Railroad Transportation
25)	Religious Institutions
 
26)	Veterinary Service


E)	Dimensional Requirements.

2)	Principal Structure

Lot Width
At Building Line ........................... 160 feet Frontage on Existing Roads .......... 160 feet

Front Yard Setback ......................... 50 feet Side Yard Setbacks
Interior ......................................... 30 feet
Comer .......................................... 50 feet
Rear Yard Setback .......................... 50 feet

Maximum Lot Coverage ................. 20 percent
Maximum Height ............................ 30 feet (except Ag Buildings 90 feet)

1)	Lot Area per Dwelling Unit

One Family Detached ...................... 5 acres
Two-Family Structure ..................... 5 acres Cluster Lot - Detached Dwelling ..... 2.5 acres Lot with Septic System ................... 2.5 acres



3)	Accessory Buildings (Except Agricultural Buildings)

Maximum Height Above Grade ................... 20 feet Maximum Door Height ............................... 14 feet Distance to Principal Structure .................... 10 feet

Front Yard Setback ..................................... 50 feet
Side Yard Setback ...................................... 30 feet
Street Side - Side Yard Setback .................. 30 feet Rear Yard Setback ...................................... 50 feet

Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings ..2 (No limit for Agricultural
Buildings)
Maximum Total Accessory Buildings SF ...  1500 SF for lots up to 3 acres
1750 SF for lots up to 4 acres
2000 SF for lots 4-5 acres
2250 for lots over 5 acres
(plus 100 SF per each additional 1 acre over 5 acres, with a maximum of 3500 SF)
New Animal Building Setback ..................... 100 feet
 
F)	Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be required for all permitted uses according to the following schedule.  All parking areas shall conform  to the design requirements as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter.


bJ?:iip<1)Ji Q J?:4ry	,    <? E q iE IP l?:
Private Kennel	,    <? E q iE IP l?:
Private Stable	[      <?E q iE IP l?:
Wayside Stand	[      One space per  100 square feet of gross floor
I  E	hE	P <?  lp J?: lp lp
Family Day Care	!    One space per employee on the largest work
I   hif1:, pl  <?1?:    P <? f()E lg 4 J?:g   1?:4   J?:l<::J 4 J?:g
Group Home	[      One space per employee on the largest work
I
...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Single Family Detached	!   Two spaces per dwelling unit, one per unit
[   ip	1> 1()<:; 4)1?:	8 E 8
G()JPJP l?: y   i:yi<:;	,  91?:   P <? P E ?QQJ	()f8E()   fl()()E     E
Ek  1?:49P 1?:AE	,     ()E q iE IP l?:
Commercial Kennel	!    One space per 500 square feet of gross floor
I   area



20-30	Agricultural Conservation (AC) District.


A)	Purpose.  The AC-Agriculture Conservation District is designed to protect and preserve the open-space character and natural state of certain land by reducing development pressures.  Such land may be owned by a governmental agency or group, organization, or private individual and shall include such lands as marshlands,
drainage ways, steep bluffs, river frontage, woodlands and other areas with significant environmental and aesthetic value. In many instances, it may be appropriate to use land within this district for agricultural crop and livestock purposes.

B)	Permitted Principal Uses.

1)	Agricultural Production
2)	Parks and Open Areas
3)	Private Stable
4)	Wayside Stand


C)	Uses Requiring a Certificate or Compliance.

1)	Agricultural Services
2)	Interim Use




D)	Conditional Uses.
 

1)	Animal Husbandry
2)	Campgrounds and Trailering
3)	Cemetery
4)	Commercial Stable
5)	Commercial Kennel
6)	Farm Employee Housing
7)	Forestry Operations
8)	Golf Course
9)	Marina
10)	Private Kennel
11) Railroad Transportation

E)	Dimensional Requirements.

1)	Principal Structures

Lot Width
At Building Line ........................... 300 feet Frontage on Existing Roads .......... 300 feet

Front Yard Setback ......................... 50 feet Side Yard Setbacks
Interior ......................................... 30 feet
Comer .......................................... 50 feet
Rear Yard Setback .......................... 50 feet

Maximum Lot Coverage ................. 20 percent
Maximum Height ............................ 30 feet (two stories)


2)	Other Density Requirements

Two Family Structure: Not Permitted
Cluster Lot - Detached Dwelling: Not Permitted


3)	Accessory Buildings (Except Agricultural and Golf Course Buildings)

Maximum Height Above Grade ................... 20 feet Maximum Door Height ............................... 14 feet Distance to Principal Structure .................... 10 feet

Front Yard Setback ..................................... 50 feet
Side Yard Setback ...................................... 30 feet
Street Side - Side Yard Setback .................. 30 feet Rear Yard Setback ...................................... 50 feet

Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings ..2
Maximum Total Accessory Buildings SF ..... 1000 SF for lots up to 5 Acres
 
(200 SF per each additional 5 Acres) New Animal Building Setback ..................... 100 feet

F)	Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be required for all permitted uses according to the following schedule.  All parking areas shall conform  to the design requirements of as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter.

A8E <?l!l!l!E<:tl  Ec:>41!<?! c:>l'l	'      !"Y2  Pi:l<?    P E l'l "Y  4"Y lli]'lg  l!J'li! Private     Stable	,	2 E  ql!iE  J'l'l  l'l!
Wayside Stand	I   One space per  100 square feet of gross floor
,  i:lE <:t !hE    Pi:l<?   J'l'l l'l J'l'll!J'l'l
Parks and Open Areas	I  No requirement
 
20-040  Agriculture Zoning Districts Use Classification Chart.



Agricultural Use Classifications	NP
p
c	Not Permitted Permitted
Conditional Use Permit
Certificate of Compliance


Use	I I	 	Zoning    District	I  Additional  Use
A	I	AC	I	AR	I	Regulations


Agricultural Agricultural Production Agricultural Services Agricultural Support Animal Husbandry Commercial Stable	

p p
c
p
p	

p cc NP
c	

cc

NP
p
c	

55-120



55-130
Farm Employee Housing Forestry  Operations	p p	c	c	55-140
Private Kennel	p	c	p	
Private Stable	p	p	p	
Wayside Stand	p	p	p	

Residential
Congregate Housing	

NP	

NP	
c	
Duplex	NP	NP		
Family Day Care	p	NP	p	
Group Family Day Care	p	NP	p	
Group Home
Home Occupation (Meeting Criteria)	p
cc	NP
cc	p
cc	
55-170
Home Occupation (Not Meeting Criteria)	c	c	c	55-170
Manufactured Home Park	NP	NP		
Single Family Detached	p	NP	p	

Institutional and Public Uses Campgrounds and Trailering Cemetery
Colleges and Universities	
c

NP	
c

NP	
c c	
Community  Services
Correctional  Facilities Golf Course	NP NP
c	NP NP
c	p
c	
Marina
Outdoor Recreation Facility	cc
NP	c
NP	NP
c	
Parks and Open Areas
Religious  Institutions	p
c	p
NP	p
c	

Commercial Uses
Bed and Breakfast	
c	

NP	
c	

55-160
Broadcasting and Communication
Commercial Kennel Day Care Center Garden Center
Nursing and Personal Care	CC/C
p
NP
c
NP	NP
c
NP NP NP	CC/C
c c	55-240
Outdoor Entertainment	NP	NP		
Restricted  Recreation	c	NP	NP	
 
Veterinary Service	c	NP	c


Agricultural Use Classifications	NP	Not Permitted p	Permitted
c	Conditional Use Permit
cc	Certificate of Compliance
I	Zoning District	I  Additional  Use
Use	I	A	I	AC	I	AR	I	Regulations

Industrial Uses
Landfill	c	NP	c 	55-220
Railroad Transportation	c	c	c
Resource Extraction	c	NP	c 	90-060
Scrap and Salvage Services	c	NP	NP

Special Uses
Air Transportation	c	NP	c
Interim Use	cc	cc	cc 	55-115
Planned Unit Development	NP	NP	c 	47-010

 
ARTICLE II- BASE DISTRICT REGULATIONS DIVISION 25: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
25-10	Single Family Residential Low Density (R-1) District.

A)	Purpose.  The R-1 Single Family District is designed to be the most restrictive of the residential districts.  The intent is to provide for an environment of predominately low density one-family detached dwellings along with other residential facilities which serve the residents in the district or local neighborhood.  Densities should range from three to five units per acre.

B)	Permitted Principal Uses.

1)	Family Day Care
2)	Group Family Day Care
3)	Group Home
4)	Parks and Open Areas
5)	Single Family Detached


C)	Uses Requiring A Certificate of Compliance.

1)	Home Occupation (Meeting Criteria)
2)	Interim Use
3)	Public and Private Schools


D)	Conditional Uses.

1)	Bed and Breakfast
2)	Cemetery
3)	Colleges and Universities
4)	Commercial Historic Site
5)	Day Care Center
6)	Duplex
7)	Golf Course
8)	Group Residential Facility
9)	Home Occupation (Not Meeting Criteria)
10)	Manufactured Home Park
11)	Nursing and Personal Care
12)	Outdoor Recreation Facility
13)	Planned Unit Development
14)	Religious Institutions
15)	Single Family Attached
16)	Interim Use (Requiring a Conditional Use Permit)


E)	Dimensional Requirements.
 
1)	Single Family Detached Dwellings
Lot Area	7,200 SF per dwelling unit
Lot Width - At Building Line
- Frontage on Existing Roads	60 feet
	60 feet
Front Yard Setback	24 feet
Side Yard Setbacks - Interior
-Comer	8 feet
	20 feet
Multi-family 1,200 sq. ft. per unit
Rear Yard Setback	25 feet
Maximum Height	30 feet (two stories)

Homes with attached garages are encouraged to set the garage at least 4 feet behind the front facade or front porch or be side- or rear-loaded (except houses with tuck under garages). The front yard may be reduced to 20 feet when garages are set back or side- or rear-loaded.

2)	Other Density Requirements
Single Family Attached/Duplex	Lot Area 3,900 SF per unit
Single Family Attached	Lot Width at Building Line - 50 feet per unit Frontage on Existing Roads - 50 feet per unit
Planned Unit Development	8 units per acre
Lot with Septic System	2.5 acres

3)	Accessory Buildings
Maximum Height Above Grade	16 feet (unless approved by a CUP for projects that involve the replacement of an existing historic carriage house or proposes to match the roof design/pitch to the property's primary structure)
Maximum Door Height	12 feet
Distance to Principal Structure	10 feet
Front Yard Setback	24 feet
Side Yard Setback	8 feet
Street Side - Side Yard Setback	20 feet
Rear Yard Setback	10 feet (unless alley - 8 feet)
Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings	2
Maximum Total Accessory Buildings SF	1,200 SF

Detached garages must be set back four feet behind the front facade or front porch or must be side- or rear-loaded.

Exceptions shall be allowed in the following situations upon approval by the Zoning Administrator of a certificate of compliance and shall apply only to one-
 
and two-car garages.  In the case of the replacement of an existing garage that does not meet accessory building setback requirements or in the case of the construction of a new garage on an existing lot of record that has not had a garage in place with the primary residential building, every reasonable effort shall be made to meet the dimensional setback requirements, but the Zoning Administrator shall be allowed to approve lesser setback requirements if it is shown that there is no reasonable alternative.  In no case shall the Zoning Administrator approve a building setback of less than two feet.  In these cases where the Zoning Administrator approves a lesser setback, the Zoning Administrator shall send a written notice to all abutting property owners making them aware of the Zoning Administrator's decision and providing them an opportunity to object in writing to this decision within 20 calendar days of the date that the notification is mailed.  Ifno objection is received by the Zoning Administrator within that 20-day calendar period, the application shall be approved and valid on the following day.  In such cases where a written objection is received within 20 calendar days, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule a public hearing with the Advisory Planning Commission at the next available meeting date and said application shall be treated as a conditional use permit application.

F)	Off-Street Parking Requirements.  Off-street parking spaces shall be required for all permitted uses according to the following schedule.  All parking areas shall conform to the design requirements as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter.

Family Day Care	One space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space for loading and unloading
Group Home	One space per employee on the largest work shift
Single Family Detached	Two spaces per dwelling unit, one per unit must be located in a garage
Parks and Open Areas	No requirement

25-20	Two Family Residential (R-2) District.

A)	Purpose.  The R-2 Two Family Residential District is intended to provide for moderate to medium density residential development (approximately four to eight units/acre) with an emphasis on two family and single family residential uses.  This district is also intended to provide for alternative development types and for in-filling opportunities for parcels, which for various reasons have been bypassed by development.

B)	Permitted Uses.

1)	Duplex
2)	Family Day Care
3)	Group Family Day Care
4)	Group Home
 
5)	Parks and Open Areas
6)	Single Family Detached

C)	Uses Requiring A Certificate of Compliance.


1)	Home Occupation (Meeting Criteria)
2)	Interim Use
3)	Public and Private Schools
4)	Religious Institutions

D)	Conditional Uses.

1)	Bed and Breakfast
2)	Cemetery
3)	Colleges and Universities
4)	Commercial Historic Site
5)	Community Services
6)	Congregate Housing
7)	Day Care Center
8)	Golf Course
9)	Group Residential Facility
10)	Halfway House
11) Home Occupation (Not Meeting Criteria)
12)	Manufactured Home Park
13)	Medical Facilities
14)	Multiple Family Residential (3-4 Units)
15)	Neighborhood Convenience Store
16)	Nursing and Personal Care
17)	Outdoor Recreation Facility
18)	Planned Unit Development
19)	Semi-Transient Accommodations
20)	Single Family Attached
21)	Multiple-Family Residential (5+ Units) as Part of a PUD Involving the Reuse of an Existing Institutional/Commercial Building.
22)	Interim Use (Requiring a Conditional Use Permit)

E)	Dimensional Requirements.

1)	Single Family and Duplex Dwellings - Lot Area
Single Family Detached	7,200 SF per dwelling unit
Single Family Attached/Duplex	3,600 SF per dwelling unit

2)	Multiple Family Structures with three Families or More - Lot Area
One Bedroom Multifamily or Efficiency	1,200 SF
Two Bedroom Multifamily	2,400 SF
Three Bedroom Multifamily	3,600 SF
 
I  Four Bedroom Multifamily	I   4,800  SF


3)	All Principal Structures
Lot Width - At Building Line
- Frontage on Existing Roads	60 feet
	60 feet
Front Yard Setback	24 feet
Side Yard Setbacks - Interior
-Comer	8 feet
	20 feet
Rear Yard Setback	20 feet
Maximum Height	30 feet (two stories)

Homes with attached garages are encouraged to set the garage at least 4 feet behind the front fa<;ade or front porch or be side- or rear-loaded (except houses with tuck under garages). The front yard may be reduced to 20 feet when garages are set back or side- or rear-loaded.

4)	Other Density Requirements
Single Family Attached	Lot Width at Building Line
- 50 feet per unit Frontage on Existing Roads - 50 feet perunit
Planned Unit Development	Up to 10 units per acre
Lot with Septic System	Not Permitted

5)	Accessory Buildings
























Detached garages must be set back at least four feet from the front facade or front porch or be side- or rear-loaded
 
Exceptions shall be allowed in the following situations upon approval by the Zoning Administrator of a certificate of compliance and shall apply only to one­ and two-car garages.  In the case of the replacement of an existing garage that does not meet accessory building setback requirements or in the case of the construction of a new garage on an existing lot of record that has not had a garage in place with the primary residential building, every reasonable effort shall be made to meet the dimensional setback requirements, but the Zoning Administrator shall be allowed to approve lesser setback requirements if it is shown that there is no reasonable alternative.  In no case shall the Zoning Administrator approve a building setback of less than two feet.  In these cases where the Zoning Administrator approves a lesser setback, the Zoning Administrator shall send a written notice to all abutting property owners making them aware of the Zoning Administrator's decision and providing them an opportunity to object in writing to this decision within 20 calendar days of the date that the notification is mailed.  Ifno objection is received by the Zoning Administrator within that 20-day calendar period, the application shall be approved and valid on the following day.  In such cases where a written objection is received within 20 calendar days, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule a public hearing with the Advisory Planning Commission at the next available meeting date and said application shall be treated as a conditional use permit application.

F)	Off-Street Parking Requirements.  Off-street parking spaces shall be required for all permitted uses according to the following schedule.  All parking areas shall conform to the design requirements as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter.

Duplex	Two spaces per dwelling unit, one per unit must be located in a garage
Family Day Care	One space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space for loading and unloading
Group Home	One space per employee on the largest work shift
Single Family Detached	Two spaces per dwelling unit, one per unit must be located in a garage
Parks and Open Areas	No requirement

25-30	Multiple Family Residential (RM-1) District.


A)	Purpose. The RM-I Multiple Family Residential District is designed to provide sites for multiple family dwelling structures and related uses which will generally serve as zones of transition between the non-residential districts and moderate density single family districts.  A RM-I district allows moderate density apartments of up to three stories with a floor area not to exceed 50 percent of the lot area. Densities should range from 8 to 16 units per acre.
 
B)	Permitted Uses.

1)	Duplex
2)	Family Day Care
3)	Group Family Day Care
4)	Group Home
5)	Parks and Open Areas
6)	Single Family Attached
7)	Single Family Detached


C)	Uses Requiring A Certificate of Compliance.

1)	Broadcasting and Communication (Meeting Criteria)
2)	Colleges and Universities
3)	Congregate Housing
4)	Funeral Home
5)	Group Residential Facility
6)	Home Occupation (Meeting Criteria)
7)	Interim Use
8)	Nursing and Personal Care
9)	Offices
10)	Public and Private Schools
11)	Religious Institutions
12)	Semi-Transient Accommodations


D)	Conditional Uses.

1)	Bed and Breakfast
2)	Broadcasting and Communication
3)	Community Services
4)	Cemetery
5)	Commercial Historic Site
6)	Day Care Center
7)	Halfway House
8)	Home Occupation (Not Meeting Criteria)
9)	Medical Facilities
10)	Multiple Family Residential (3-4 Units)
11)	Multiple Family Residential (5 + Units)
12)	Neighborhood Convenience Store
13)	Outdoor Recreation Facility 14)Parking Facility
15)	Planned Unit Development
16)	Interim Use (Requiring a Conditional Use Permit)


E)	Dimensional Requirements.
 
1)	Lot Area per Dwelling Unit
Single Family Detached	7,200 SF
Duplex/Single Family Attached	3,600 SF
One Bedroom Multifamily or Efficiency	1,300 SF
Two Bedroom Multifamily	2,600 SF
Three Bedroom Multifamily	3,900 SF
Four Bedroom Multifamily	5,200 SF

2)	Principal Structures















Housing with attached garages are encouraged to set the garage at least 4 feet behind the front fa<;ade or front porch or be side- or rear-loaded (except houses with tuck under garages). The front yard may be reduced to 20 feet when garages are set back or side- or rear-loaded.

Maximum Lot Coverage	70 percent
Maximum Height	40 feet (three stories)


3)	Other Density Requirements   	
Single Family Attached	Lot Width at Building Line - 50 feet per unit Frontage on Existing Roads - 50 feet per unit
Planned Unit Development	Up to 18 units per acre
Lot with Septic System	Not Permitted

4)	Lot Depth.  The minimum lot depth for buildable land is 110 feet, and the maximum lot depth on all lots less than 5 acres will be three times the lot width.

5)	Accessory Buildings
Maximum Height Above Grade		16 feet (unless approved by a CUP for projects that involve the replacement of an existing historic carriage house or proposes to match the roof design/pitch to the property's primary structure)
 
Maximum Door Height	10 feet
Distance to Principal Structure	10 feet
Front Yard Setback	24 feet
Side Yard Setback	5 feet
Street Side - Side Yard Setback	20 feet
Rear Yard Setback	8 feet
Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings	2
Maximum Total Accessory Buildings SF	500 SF per Dwelling Unit
Maximum Total Accessory Buildings SF for Single-Family Attached & Detached	1,000 SF


Detached garages must be set back four feet behind the front facade or front porch or be side- or rear-loaded.

Exceptions shall be allowed in the following situations upon approval by the Zoning Administrator of a certificate of compliance and shall apply only to one­ and two-car garages.  In the case of the replacement of an existing garage that does not meet accessory building setback requirements or in the case of the construction of a new garage on an existing lot of record that has not had a garage in place with the primary residential building, every reasonable effort shall be made to meet the dimensional setback requirements, but the Zoning Administrator shall be allowed to approve lesser setback requirements if it is shown that there is no reasonable alternative.  In no case shall the Zoning Administrator approve a building setback of less than two feet.  In these cases where the Zoning Administrator approves a lesser setback, the Zoning Administrator shall send a written notice to all abutting property owners making them aware of the Zoning Administrator's decision and providing them an opportunity to object in writing to this decision within 20 calendar days of the date that the notification is mailed.  Ifno objection is received by the Zoning Administrator within that 20-day calendar period, the application shall be approved and valid on the following day.  In such cases where a written objection is received within 20 calendar days, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule a public hearing with the Advisory Planning Commission at the next available meeting date and said application shall be treated as a conditional use permit application.

F)	Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be required for all permitted uses according to the following schedule.  All parking areas shall conform  to the design requirements as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter.

Duplex	Two spaces per dwelling unit, one per unit must be located in a garage
Family Day Care	One space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space for loading and unloading
Group Family Day Care	One space per employee on the largest work
 
	shift, plus one space for loading and unloading
Group Home	One space per employee on the largest work shift
Multifamily Residential	Two spaces per dwelling unit, one per unit must be located in a garage.
Single Family Attached	Two spaces per dwelling unit, one per unit must be located in a garage
Single Family Detached	Two spaces per dwelling unit, one per unit must be located in a garage
Parks and Open Areas	No requirement


25-40	Multiple Family Residential (RM-2) District.

A)	Purpose.  The RM-2 Multiple Family Residential District is designed to provide sites for multiple family dwelling structures and related uses which will generally serve as zones of transition between the non-residential districts and moderate density single family districts.  A RM-2 district allows higher density apartments of up to nine stories with a floor area not to exceed four times the lot area. RM-2 districts are intended to provide higher density housing for easy access and close proximity to commercial, office, service and other employment and activity centers in the community. Densities range from 12 to 24 units per acre.

B)	Permitted Principal Uses.

1)	Duplex
2)	Family Day Care
3)	Group Family Day Care
4)	Group Home
5)	Parks and Open Areas
6)	Single Family Attached


C)	Uses Requiring A Certificate of Compliance.

1)	Broadcasting and Communication (Meeting Criteria)
2)	Colleges and Universities
3)	Congregate Housing
4)	Funeral Home
5)	Group Residential Facility
6)	Home Occupation (Meeting Criteria)
7)	Interim Use
8)	Nursing and Personal Care
9)	Offices
10)	Public and Private Schools
11)	Religious Institutions
12)	Semi-Transient Accommodations
 
D)	Conditional Uses.

1)	Bed and Breakfast
2)	Broadcasting and Communication
3)	Cemetery
4)	Commercial Historic Site
5)	Community Services
6)	Day Care Center
7)	Halfway House
8)	Home Occupation (Not Meeting Criteria)
9)	Medical Facilities
10)	Multiple Family Residential (3-4 Units)
11)	Multiple Family Residential (5 + Units)
12)	Neighborhood Convenience Store
13)	Outdoor Recreation Facility 14)Parking Facility
15)	Planned Unit Development
16)	Interim Use (Requiring a Conditional Use Permit)


E)	Dimensional Requirements.

1)	Lot Area per Dwelling Unit

Single Family Detached ............................... Not Permitted Single Family Attached/Duplex ................... 3,600 SF
One Bedroom Multifamily or Efficiency ...... 990 SF Two Bedroom Multifamily .......................... 1,110 SF
Three Bedroom Multifamily ........................ 1,320 SF
Four Bedroom Multifamily .......................... 1,320 SF


2)	Principal Structures

Lot Width
At Building Line ........................... 70 feet Frontage on Existing Lots ............. 70 feet

Front Yard Setback ......................... 24 feet Side Yard Setbacks
Interior ......................................... 15 feet
Comer .......................................... 20 feet
Rear Yard Setback .......................... 20 feet


Maximum Lot Coverage ................. 70 percent Maximum Height ............................ 108 feet (9 stories)

Housing with attached garages is encouraged to set the garage at least 4 feet behind the front facade or front porch or be side- or rear-loaded (except houses
 
with tuck under garages). The front yard may be reduced to 20 feet when garages are set back or side- or rear-loaded.

3)	Other Density Requirements
Single Family Attached	Lot Width at Building Line - 50 feet per unit Frontage on Existing Roads - 50 feet perunit
Planned Unit Development	Up to 24 units per acre
Lot with Septic System	Not Permitted

4)	Lot Depth.  The minimum lot depth for buildable land is 110 feet and the maximum lot depth on all lots less than 5 acres will be three times the lot width.

5)  Accessory Buildings
Maximum Height Above Grade	16 feet
Maximum Door Height	10 feet
Distance to Principal Structure	10 feet
Front Yard Setback	24 feet
Side Yard Setback	5 feet
Street Side - Side Yard Setback	20 feet
Rear Yard Setback	8 feet
Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings	2
Maximum Total Accessory Buildings SF	220 SF per Dwelling Unit

Detached garages must be set back four feet behind front facades or front porches or be side- or rear-loaded.

F)	Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be required for all permitted uses according to the following schedule.  All parking areas shall conform  to the design requirements as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter.


Duplex	I   Two spaces per dwelling unit, one per unit
I  1:1 !	lg<;l:l! 4 # i:l 8i:lTi:l8
Family Day Care	!    One space per employee on the largest work
I  hif1:, pl1:1 21'.J:  Pi:l'? f()E lg<:t4 1'.J:g i:ll'.J:41:11'.J:l'?<:t4 1'.J:g
Group Family Day Care	!    One space per employee on the largest work
I  hif1:, pl1:1 ()l'.J:  Pi:l'? f()T)()<:t4 1'.J:g  i:ll'.J:41:11'.J:l()<:t4 1'.J:g
Group Home	I   One space per employee on the largest work

............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Multifamily Residential	I   Two spaces per dwelling unit, one per unit
I  1:1 !	l()C?l:l! 4)1'.J: i:l 8i:lTi:l8 :
Single Family Attached	!   Two spaces per dwelling unit, one per unit
I  1:1 !	l()C?l:l! 4)1'.J: i:l 8i:lTi:l8
Parks and Open Areas	!   No requirement
 
25-050  Residential Zoning Districts Use Classification Chart.

Residential Use Classifications	NP	Not Permitted
p	Permitted
c	Conditional Use Permit
cc Certificate of Compliance
I
Use	I	Zoninx District	I   Additional  Use
I	Regulations
	R-1    I   R-2	RM-1   I  RM-2	
Residential
Congregate Housing	NP	c	cc	cc
Duplex	c	p	p	p
Family Day Care	p	p	p	p
Group Family Day Care	p	p	p	p
Group Home	p	p	p	p
Group Residential Facility	c	c	cc	cc
Halfway House	NP	c	c	c
Home Occupation (Meeting Criteria)	cc	cc	cc	cc 	55-170
Home Occupation (Not Meeting Criteria)	c	c	c	c 	55-170
Manufactured Home Park	c	c	NP	NP
Multiple Family Residential
3-4 Units	NP	c	c	c
5 +Units	NP	NP	c	c
Semi-Transient Accommodations	NP	c	cc	cc
Single Family Attached	c	c	p	p
Single Family Detached	p	p	p	NP

Institutional and Public Uses
Cemetery	c	c	c	c
Colleges and Universities	c	c	cc	cc
Community Services	NP	c	c	c
Golf Course	c	c	NP	NP
Medical Facilities	NP	c	c	c
Outdoor Recreation Facility	c	c	c	c
Parks and Open Areas	p	p	p	p
Public and Private Schools	cc	cc	cc	cc
Religious Institutions	c	cc	cc	cc

Commercial Uses
Bed and Breakfast	c	c	c	c 	55-160
Broadcasting and Communication	NP	NP	CC/C	CC/C 	55-240
Commercial Historic Site	c	c	c	c 	55-150
Day Care Center	c	c	c	c
Funeral Home	NP	NP	cc	cc
Neighborhood Convenience Store	NP	c	c	c
Nursing and Personal Care	c	c	cc	cc
Offices	NP	NP	cc	cc

Special Uses
Interim Use	cc	cc	cc	cc	55-115
Parking Facility	NP	NP	c	c
Planned Unit Development	c	c	c	c	47-010
 
ARTICLE II- BASE DISTRICT REGULATIONS DIVISION 30: BUSINESS DISTRICT REGULATIONS
30-10	Neighborhood Business (B-1) District.

A)	Purpose.  The B-1 Neighborhood Business District as herein established is designed to meet the day-to-day local convenience shopping and service needs of persons residing in adjacent residential areas.

B)	Permitted Principal Uses.

1)	Business Services
2)	Communications  Services
3)	Community Services
4)	Financial Institution
5)	Neighborhood  Convenience Store
6)	Offices
7)	Parks and Open Areas
8)	Personal Services

C)	Uses Requiring A Certificate of Compliance.

1)	Broadcasting and Communication (Meeting Criteria)
2)	Day Care Center
3)	Garden Center
4)	Interim Use
5)	Parking Facility
6)	Accessory Commercial Apartment (Upper Level)

D)	Conditional Uses.

1)	Animal Grooming Facility
2)	Broadcasting and Communication
3)	Business Center
4)	Colleges and Universities
5)	Drinking and Entertainment
6)	Educational Service
7)	Fast Food Restaurant
8)	Medical Facilities
9)	Membership Organization
10)	Multiple Family Residential
11)	Outdoor Recreation Facility
12)	Planned Unit Development
13)	Public and Private Schools
14)	Repair and Maintenance Shop
 
15)	Retail Trade
16)	Shopping Center
17)	Standard Restaurant
18)	Veterinary Service
19)	Accessory Commercial Apartment (Main Level or Lower Level)

E)	Dimensional Requirements.

1)	Principal Structures
Non-residential Lot Area with Utilities ....... 10,800 SF Lot Width
At Building Line ....................................... 70 feet
Frontage on Existing Roads ...................... 90 feet

Front Yard Setback ..................................... 10 feet
Side Yard Setbacks
Interior ..................................................... 10 feet
Comer ...................................................... 10 feet
Rear Yard Setback ...................................... 20 feet

Maximum Lot Coverage ............................. 70 percent
Maximum Height ....................................... 36 feet (three stories)

2)	Lot Depth.  The minimum lot depth for buildable land is 120 feet.

3)	Accessory Buildings

Maximum Height Above Grade .................. 16 feet Maximum Door Height ............................... 12 feet Distance to Principal  Structure.................... 10 feet

Front Yard Setback ..................................... 20 feet
Side Yard Setback ...................................... 10 feet
Street Side - Side Yard Setback .................. 20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback. ..................... 20 feet (unless alley- 8 feet)

Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings  1 Maximum Total Accessory Buildings SF .... 720 SF

F)	Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be required for all permitted uses according to the following schedule.  All parking areas shall conform to the design requirements as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter.


Communit	Services
 
	area
Outdoor Recreation Facility	One space per three persons based on maximum occupancy load, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift.  Driving Ranges, Miniature Golf, Swimming Pools, and Tennis and Racquet Court Games as per Section 60-080, C
Parks and Open Areas	No requirement
Business Services	One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area
Communications  Services	One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per company vehicle stored on-site
Financial Institution	One space per 100 square feet of usable floor area
Neighborhood  Convenience Store	One space per 100 square feet of usable floor area
Offices	One space per 200 square feet of usable floor area.  Clinics and Medical Offices per Section 60-080, D
Personal Services	One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area


30-20	General Business (B-2) District.

A)	Purpose.  The B-2 General Business District is designed to provide for more diversified business types that are oriented towards thoroughfare locations because of the access and visibility they provide.

B)	Permitted Principal Uses.

1)	Animal Grooming Facility
2)	Automobile Parts/Supply
3)	Business Services
4)	Communications  Services
5)	Community Services
6)	Drinking and Entertainment
7)	Family Day Care
8)	Fast Food Restaurant
9)	Financial Institution
10)	Group Family Day Care
11) Group Home
12)Neighborhood  Convenience  Store
13) Offices
14)	Outdoor Recreation Facility
15)	Parks and Open Areas
 
16)	Personal Services
17)	Repair and Maintenance Shop
18)	Retail Trade
19)	Standard Restaurant

C)	Uses Requiring A Certificate of Compliance.

1)	Agricultural  Support
2)	Automobile Maintenance Service
3)	Broadcasting and Communication (Meeting Criteria)
4)	Car Wash
5)	Educational Service
6)	Funeral Home
7)	Garden Center
8)	Indoor Athletic Facility
9)	Indoor Recreation lO)Interim Use
11)	Membership Organization
12)	Parking Facility
13)	Public Assembly
14)	Religious Institutions
15)	Sales and Storage Lots
16)	Self Service Storage Facility
17)	Transient Accommodations
18)	Transportation Services
19)	Veterinary Service
20)	Accessory Commercial Apartment (Upper Level)

D)	Conditional Uses.

1)	Adult Establishment
2)	Broadcasting and Communication
3)	Business Center
4)	Colleges and Universities
5)	Commercial Kennel
6)	Commercial Vehicle Repair
7)	Correctional Facilities
8)	Day Care Center
9)	Drive-in Restaurant
10)	Duplex (on lots historically used for residential purposes)
11)	Gasoline Station
12)	Local Transit
13)	Medical Facilities
14)	Multiple Family Residential
15)	Non-production  Industrial
16)	Nursing and Personal Care
 
17) Outdoor Entertainment
18)	Planned Unit Development
19)	Public Works Maintenance Shop and Yards
20)	Railroad Transportation
21)	Restricted Recreation
22)	Shopping Center
23)	Single Family Attached (on lots historically used for residential purposes)
24)	Single Family Detached (on lots historically used for residential purposes)

E)	Dimensional Requirements.

1)	Principal Structures

Non-residential Lot Area with Utilities ....... 15,000 SF Lot Width
At Building Line ....................................... 100 feet
Frontage on Existing Roads ...................... 100 feet

Front Yard Setback ..................................... 10 feet
Side Yard Setbacks
Interior ..................................................... 10 feet
Comer ...................................................... 10 feet
Rear Yard Setback ...................................... 10 feet

Maximum Lot Coverage ............................. 80 percent
Maximum Height ...................................... .45 feet (three stories)

2)  Lot Depth.  The minimum lot depth for buildable land is 120 feet.

4)   Accessory Buildings

Maximum Height Above Grade .................. 16 feet Maximum Door Height ............................... 12 feet Distance to Principal  Structure.................... 10 feet

Front Yard Setback ..................................... 30 feet
Side Yard Setback ...................................... 10 feet
Street Side - Side Yard Setback .................. 30 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback. ..................... 20 feet

Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings  1
Maximum Total Accessory Buildings SF .... 1,000 SF

F)	Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be required for all permitted uses according to the following schedule.  All parking areas shall conform to the design requirements as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter.
 
Community Services	One space per 500 square feet of gross floor area
Outdoor Recreation Facility	One space per three persons based on maximum occupancy load, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift. Driving Ranges, Miniature Golf, Swimming Pools, and Tennis and Racquet Court Games as per Section	,C
Parks and Op	Areas	No requirement
Automobile Parts/Supply	One space per 200 square feet of usable floor area
Business Services	One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area
Communications  Services	One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per company vehicle stored on-site
Drinking and Entertainment	One space per three persons based on maximum capacity of the b1111clinq
Fast Food Restaurant	One space for each 100 square feet of usable floor area or one space for each two persons allowed within the maximum capacity, whichever  is g11;;an:a
Financial Institution	One space per 100 square feet of usable floor area
Neighborhood  Convenience Store	One space per 100 square feet of usable floor area
Offices	One space per 200 square feet of usable floor area.  Clinics and Medical Offices per Section 60-080, D
Personal Services	One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
Repair and Maintenance Shop	One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per service company vehicle parked on the site
Retail Trade	One space for each 200 square feet of usable floor area. Furniture and Appliance Sales per Section	,D
Standard Restaurant	One space for each 100 square feet of usable floor area or one space for each two persons allowed within the maximum capacity, whichever is greater.


30-30	Mixed General & Central Business (B-2A) District.

A)	Purpose.  The B-2A Mixed Business District is designed to provide auto oriented business uses in blocks directly abutting the B-3 districts with an opportunity to
 
increase density over time by eliminating interior side lot line setbacks and rear lot setbacks.  Because of the potential increase in pedestrian and auto oriented business, this district provides a substantial increase in building floor area nearly equivalent to B-3 blocks, while retaining the permitted uses, the building height, parking space, and sign requirements of the auto oriented B-2 zoning district.

B)	Size and location of district.  A B-2A district shall be at least one-half of one city block or 45,000 square feet, whichever is larger.  A proposed B-2A block shall abut an existing B-3 zoning district and shall, at the time of the petition, be zoned as B-2.

C)	Petition for Designation.  To create a B-2A zoning district, at least two-thirds of the property owners within a potential B-2A district shall sign a petition to the City Council requesting such a change.

D)	Permitted Principal Uses.

1)	Animal Grooming Facility
2)	Community Services
3)	Outdoor Recreation Facility
4)	Parks and Open Areas
5)	Automobile Parts/Supply
6)	Business Services
7)	Communications  Services
8)	Drinking and Entertainment
9)	Fast Food Restaurant
10)	Financial Institution
11)	Neighborhood  Convenience Store
12) Offices
13)	Personal Services
14)	Repair and Maintenance Shop
15)	Retail Trade
16)	Standard Restaurant

E)	Uses Requiring A Certificate of Compliance.

1)	Agricultural  Support
2)	Membership Organization
3)	Public Assembly
4)	Religious Institutions
5)	Broadcasting and Communication (Meeting Criteria)
6)	Car Wash
7)	Educational Service
8)	Funeral Home
9)	Garden Center
10)	Indoor Athletic Facility
11)	Indoor Recreation
 
12)	Sales and Storage Lots
13)	Self Service Storage Facility
14)	Transient Accommodations
15)	Transportation Services
16)	Veterinary Service
17)	Interim Use
18)	Parking Facility
19)	Accessory Commercial Apartment (Upper Level)

F)	Conditional Uses.

1)	Multiple Family Residential
2)	Colleges and Universities
3)	Correctional Facilities
4)	Adult Establishment
5)	Commercial Kennel
6)	Medical Facilities
7)	Nursing and Personal Care
8)	Broadcasting and Communication
9)	Business Center
10)	Commercial Vehicle Repair
11)	Day Care Center
12)	Gasoline Station
13)	Public Works Maintenance Shop and Yards
14)	Restricted Recreation
15)	Shopping Center
16)	Non-production  Industrial
17)	Railroad Transportation
18)	Local Transit
19)	Planned Unit Development

G)	Dimensional Requirements.

1)	Principal Structures
Non-residential Lot Area with Utilities ....... 8,520 SF Maximum Floor Area Ratio	2.4

Lot Width
At Building Line ....................................... 60 feet
Frontage on Existing Roads ...................... 60 feet

Front Yard Setback ..................................... Zero feet Side Yard Setbacks
Interior ..................................................... 8 feet
Comer ...................................................... Zero feet
 
Rear Yard Setback ...................................... I 0 feet

Maximum Lot Coverage ............................. 80 percent
Maximum Height ...................................... .45 feet (3 stories)

3)  Lot Depth.  The minimum lot depth for buildable land is 120 feet.

4)   Accessory Buildings

Maximum Height Above Grade .................. 16 feet Maximum Door Height ............................... 12 feet Distance to Principal Structure.................... I 0 feet

Front Yard Setback ..................................... 30 feet
Side Yard Setback ...................................... 8 feet
Street Side - Side Yard Setback .................. 30 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback. ..................... 20 feet

Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings I
Maximum Total Accessory Buildings SF .... 720 SF

F)  Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be required for all permitted uses according to the following schedule.  All parking areas shall conform to the design requirements as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter.












 











 

o
 
	whichever is g1catc1
Financial Institution	One space per 100 square feet of usable floor area
Neighborhood  Convenience Store	One space per 100 square feet of usable floor area
Offices	One space per 200 square feet of usable floor area.  Clinics and Medical Offices per Section
,D
Personal Services	One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
Repair and Maintenance Shop	One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per service company vehicle parked on the site
Retail Trade	One space for each 200 square feet of usable floor area.  Furniture and Appliance Sales per Section 60-080, D
Standard Restaurant	One space for each 100 square feet of usable floor area or one space for each two persons allowed within the maximum capacity, whichever is greater.

30-40	Central Business (B-3) District.

A)	Purpose.  The B-3 Central Business District is designed to cater to the needs of a larger consumer population than is generally served by the local business district, and is generally characterized by an integrated or planned cluster of establishments
served by common parking and generating large volumes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.  Residential uses are encouraged above commercial areas.

B)	Permitted Principal Uses.

1)	Accessory Commercial Apartment (Upper Level)
2)	Animal Grooming Facility
3)	Automobile Parts/Supply
4)	Business Services
5)	Communications  Services
6)	Community Services
7)	Drinking and Entertainment
8)	Family Day Care
9)	Fast Food Restaurant
10)	Financial Institution
11) Funeral Home
12)	Group Family Day Care
13)	Group Home
14)	Membership Organization
15)	Neighborhood  Convenience Store
 
16) Offices
17)	Outdoor Recreation Facility
18)	Parks and Open Areas
19)	Personal Services
20)	Public Assembly
21)	Repair and Maintenance Shop
22)	Retail Trade
23)	Standard Restaurant

C)	Uses Requiring A Certificate of Compliance.

1)	Broadcasting and Communication (Meeting Criteria)
2)	Educational Service
3)	Indoor Athletic Facility
4)	Indoor Recreation
5)	Interim Use
6)	Multiple Family Residential (non-ground floor units)
7)	Parking Facility
8)	Religious Institutions
9)	Transient Accommodations

D)	Conditional Uses.

1)	Accessory Commercial Apartment (Main Level or Lower Level)
2)	Broadcasting and Communication
3)	Business Center
4)	Colleges and Universities
5)	Correctional Facilities
6)	Day Care Center
7)	Duplex (on lots historically used for residential purposes)
8)	Garden Center
9)	Group Residential Facility
10)	Local Transit
11) Medical Facilities
12)	Multiple Family Residential (ground floor units)
13)	Planned Unit Development
14)	Public and Private Schools
15)	Public Works Maintenance Shop and Yards
16)	Railroad Transportation
17)	Semi-Transient  Accommodations
18)	Single Family Attached
19)	Single Family Detached (on lots historically used for residential purposes)

E)	Dimensional Requirements.

1)	Principal Structures
 

Non-residential Lot Area with Utilities .......No Minimum Maximum Floor Area Ratio	4.0

Lot Width
At Building Line ....................................... No Minimum
Frontage on Existing Roads ...................... No Minimum

Front Yard Setback ..................................... No Minimum Side Yard Setbacks
Interior ..................................................... No Minimum
Comer ...................................................... No Minimum
Rear Yard Setback ...................................... No Minimum

Maximum Lot Coverage ............................. I 00 Percent
Maximum Height ....................................... 96 feet (9 stories)

2)	Lot Depth.  There is no minimum lot depth for buildable land in this district.

3)	Accessory Buildings

Maximum Height Above Grade .................. 16 feet Maximum Door Height ............................... 12 feet Distance to Principal Structure.................... I 0 feet

Front Yard Setback ..................................... 30 feet
Side Yard Setback ...................................... 8 feet
Street Side - Side Yard Setback .................. 30 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback. ..................... 20 feet

Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings 2 Maximum Total Accessory Buildings SF	720

F)	Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking is not required for developments located within this district; however, all new parking areas shall conform to the design requirements as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter.
 
30-050  Business Zoning Districts Use Classification Chart.


Business Use Classifications	NP	Not Permitted
p	Permitted
c	Conditional Use Permit
cc	Certificate of Compliance
I
Use	I	Zoning District	I  Additional   Use
I	Regulations
	B-1    I   B-2	B-2a    I	B-3	
	

Agricultural
Agricultural Support	NP	cc	cc	NP

Residential
Duplex (on lots historically used for residential	NP	c	NP	c
purposes)
Family Day Care	NP	p	NP	p
Group Family Day Care	NP	p	NP	p
Group Home	NP	p	NP	p
Group Residential Facility	NP	NP	NP	c
Multiple Family Residential	c	c	c	CC/C
Semi-Transient Accommodations	NP	NP	NP	c
Shopkeeper Residential Unit	p	p	p	p
Single Family Attached	NP	c	NP	c
Single Family Detached (on lots historically used for	NP	c	NP	c
residential purposes)

Institutional and Public Uses
Colleges and Universities	c	c	c	c
Community Services	p	p	p	p
Correctional Facilities	NP	c	c	c
Membership Organization	c	cc	cc	p
Outdoor Recreation Facility	p	p	p	p
Parking Facility	cc	cc	cc	cc
Parks and Open Areas	p	p	p	p
Public and Private Schools	c	NP	NP	c
Public Assembly	NP	cc	cc	p
Religious Institutions	NP	cc	cc	cc

Commercial Uses
Adult Establishment	NP	c	c	NP 	55-230
Animal Grooming Facility	c	p	p	p
Automobile Maintenance Service	NP	cc	cc	NP
Automobile Parts/Supply	NP	p	p	p
Broadcasting and Communication	CC/C	CC/C	CC/C	CC/C	55-240
Business Center	c	c	c	c
Business Services	p	p	p	p
Car Wash	NP	cc	cc	NP
Commercial Vehicle Repair	NP	c	c	NP
Commercial Kennel	NP	c	c	NP
Communications Services	p	p	p	p
Day Care Center	cc	c	c	c
Drinking and Entertainment	c	p	p	p
Drive-in Restaurant	NP	c	c	NP	55-190
Educational Service	c	cc	cc	cc
 

Business Use Classifications	NP	Not Permitted p	Permitted
c	Conditional Use Permit
cc	Certificate of Compliance
I
Use	I	Zoning District	I  Additional   Use
I	Regulations
	B-1    I   B-2	B-2a    I	B-3	
Fast Food Restaurant	c	p	p	p
Financial Institution	p	p	p	p
Funeral Home	NP	cc	cc	p
Garden Center	cc	cc	cc	c
Gasoline Station	NP	c	c	NP 	55-210
Indoor Athletic Facility	NP	cc	cc	cc
Indoor Recreation	NP	cc	cc	cc
Medical Facilities	c	c	c	c
Neighborhood Convenience Store	p	p	p	p
Nursing and Personal Care	NP	c	c	NP
Offices	p	p	p	p
Outdoor Entertainment	NP	c	NP	NP
Personal Services	p	p	p	p
Repair and Maintenance Shop	c	p	p	p
Restricted Recreation	NP	c	c	NP
Retail Trade	c	p	p	p
Sales and Storage Lots	NP	cc	cc	NP
Self Service Storage Facility	NP	cc	cc	NP
Shopping Center	c	c	c	c
Standard Restaurant	c	p	p	p
Transient Accommodations	NP	cc	cc	cc
Transportation Services	NP	cc	cc	NP
Veterinary Service	c	cc	cc	NP

Industrial Uses
Non-production Industrial	NP	c	c	NP
Railroad Transportation	NP	c	c	c

Special Uses
Interim Use	cc	cc	cc	cc	55-115
Local Transit	NP	c	c	c
Parking Facility	cc	cc	cc	cc
Planned Unit Development	c	c	c	c	47-010

 
ARTICLE II- BASE DISTRICT REGULATIONS DIVISION 35: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
35-10	Light Industrial (1-1) District.


A)	Purpose.  The I-1 Light Industrial District is designed so as to primarily  accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses, and industrial operations whose external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts.  The I-1 district is so structured as to permit, along with any specified uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly, and/or treatment of finished or semi­ finished products from previously prepared material.  It is further intended that the processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form, to be used in an industrial operation at another location, not be permitted.

B)	Goals.  The general goals of this use district include, among others, the following specific purposes:

1)	To provide sufficient space and appropriate locations to meet the needs of the City's expected future economy for all types of manufacturing and related uses.

2)	To protect abutting residential districts by separating them from manufacturing activities, and by prohibiting the use of such industrial areas for new residential development.

3)	To promote manufacturing development which is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation, and other hazards and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor, and other objectionable influences.

4)	To promote the most desirable use ofland in accordance with a well considered plan;  to protect the character and established pattern of adjacent development, and in each area to conserve the value of land and buildings and other structures; and to protect the City's tax revenue.

C)	Permitted Principal Uses.


1)	Animal  Grooming Facility
2)	Car Wash
3)	Communications Services
4)	Family Day Care
5)	Group Family Day Care
6)	Group Home
7)	Laundry Plants
8)	Light Industrial
 
9)	Non-production  Industrial
10)	Parks and Open Areas
11)	Research and Testing
12)	Trade Shop
13) Wholesaling


D)	Uses Requiring A Certificate of Compliance.

1)	Agricultural Support
2)	Automobile Maintenance Service
3)	Automobile Parts/Supply
4)	Broadcasting and Communication (Meeting Criteria)
5)	Business Services
6)	Commercial Kennel
7)	Commercial Vehicle Repair
8)	Indoor Athletic Facility
9)	Interim Use
10)	Local Transit
11)	Motor Freight and Warehousing, except operations involving silica sand, which are subject to Special Provisions as set forth in Division 55 of this Chapter and require a conditional use permit.
12) Offices
13)	Public Works Maintenance Shop and Yards
14)	Repair and Maintenance Shop
15)	Retail Trade [Only retail trade that is directly related to and incidental to a principal use on the site that is allowed as a permitted use in 35-010 C) above].
16)	Sales and Storage Lots
17)	Self-Service Storage Facility
18)	Transportation Services
19)	Veterinary Service

E)	Conditional Uses.

1)	Agricultural Services
2)	Air Transportation
3)	Business Center
4)	Correctional Facilities
5)	Day Care Center
6)	Fast Food Restaurant
7)	Indoor Recreation
8)	Landfill
9)	Marina
10)	Outdoor Recreation Facility
11)	Parking Facility
12)	Personal Services
13)	Planned Unit Development
 
14)	Railroad Transportation
15)	Scrap and Salvage Services
16)	Silica Sand Motor Freight and Warehousing as set forth in Division 55 of this Chapter

F)	Dimensional Requirements.

1)	Principal Buildings

Lot Area ..................................................... 24,000 SF
Lot Width
At Building Line ....................................... 100 feet
Frontage on Existing Roads ...................... 100 feet


Front Yard Setback ..................................... 30 feet
Side Yard Setbacks
Interior ..................................................... 20 feet
Comer ...................................................... 30 feet
Rear Yard Setback ...................................... 30 feet


Maximum Lot Coverage ............................. 80 percent
Maximum Height ....................................... .45 feet (unless approved by a CUP)


2)	Other Lot Requirements


Lot With Septic System .............................. Not Allowed


G)	Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be required for all permitted uses according to the following schedule.  All parking areas shall conform  to the design requirements as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter.


Parks and	Areas	No
Car Wash                                         One and one-half spaces per bay, plus stacking as required in Section 60-100. Full service car washes also require one space per employee on the	work shift
Communications Services	One space per 400 square feet of gross floor
area, plus one space per company vehicle stored on the site
See Section 60-090
See Section 60-090
See Section 60-090
See Section 60-090
One space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per 200 square feet of
 
	usable floor area
Wholesaling	See Section 60-090


35-20	General Industrial (1-2) District.
A)	Purpose.  The I-2 General Industrial District is designed primarily for manufacturing, assembly, and fabrication activities including large scale or specialized industrial operations, whose external physical effects will be felt to some degree by surrounding districts.  The I-2 district is so structured as to permit the manufacturing, processing, and compounding of semi-finished or finished products from raw material as well as from previously prepared material.

B)	Permitted Principal Uses.


1)	Animal  Grooming Facility
2)	Car Wash
3)	Laundry Plants
4)	Light Industrial
5)	Non-production  Industrial
6)	Parks and Open Areas
7)	Research and Testing
8)	Trade Shop
9)	Wholesaling


C)	Uses Requiring A Certificate of Compliance.


1)	Agricultural Support
2)	Broadcasting and Communication (Meeting Criteria)
3)	Business Services
4)	Commercial Kennel
5)	Commercial Vehicle Repair
6)	Interim Use
7)	Local Transit
8)	Motor Freight and Warehousing except operations involving silica sand, which are subject to Special Provisions as set forth in Division 55 of this Chapter.
9)	Public Works Maintenance Shop and Yards
10)	Retail Trade [Only retail trade that is directly related to and incidental to a principal use on the site that is allowed as a permitted use in 35-020 B) above].
11)	Self-Service Storage Facility
12)	Transportation Services
13)	Veterinary Service


D)	Conditional Uses.


1)	Air Transportation
2)	Business Center
 
3)	Correctional Facilities
4)	Day Care Center
5)	Heavy Industrial
6)	Landfill
7)	Marina
8)	Outdoor Recreation Facility
9)	Parking Facility
10)	Planned Unit Development
11) Railroad Transportation
12)	Resource Extraction
13)	Scrap and Salvage Services
14)	Silica Sand Motor Freight and Warehousing as set forth in Division 55 of this Chapter

E)	Dimensional Requirements.


1)	Lot Area per Principal Structure


Lot With Septic System .............................. 5 acres
Lot With Municipal Services ....................... 1 acre


2)  Buildings


Non Residential Lot Area ................ 1 acre Lot Width
At Building Line ........................... 150 feet Frontage on Existing Roads .......... 150 feet

Front Yard Setback ......................... 40 feet Side Yard Setbacks
Interior ......................................... 20 feet
Comer .......................................... 40 feet
Rear Yard Setback .......................... 40 feet


Maximum Lot Coverage ................. 60 percent
Maximum Height ............................ 60 feet (unless approved by a CUP) New Animal Building Setback ...... 100 feet

F)	Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be required for all permitted uses according to the following schedule.  All parking areas shall conform  to the design requirements as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter


Parks   and   Open   Areas	I <? Et?q1::1iEt?1?'1t?1?:
Car Wash	I   One and one-half spaces per bay, plus stacking
I   as required in Section 60-100.   Full service car
 
		washes also require one space per employee on the	work shift
		See Section 60-090
		See Section 60-090
		See Section 60-090
		See Section 60-090
		See Section 60-090
		One space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per 200 square feet of usable floor area
Wholesaling	See Section 60-090

 
35-030  Industrial Zoning Districts Use Classification Chart:



Industrial Use Classifications	NP	Not Permitted
p	Permitted
c	Conditional Use Permit


Use	I I	Zoning District	I	Additional Use
Regulations
		1-1	1-2	I	
	

Agricultural Agricultural Services Agricultural Support	

c	


NP
cc	
























55-240
Residential Uses			
Family Day Care	p	NP	
Group Family Day Care	p	NP	
Group Home	p	NP	

Institutional and Public Uses
Correctional  Facilities Marina
Outdoor Recreation Facility Parking  Facility	
c c	
c c	
Parks and Open Areas	p	p	

Commercial Uses			
Animal Grooming Facility Automobile Maintenance Service	p
cc	p
NP	
Automobile  Parts/Supply	cc	NP	
Broadcasting and Communication	CC/C	CC/C	
Business  Center Business Services	c	c	
Car Wash
Commercial Vehicle Repair Commercial Kennel Communications Services Day Care Center	p
cc

p
c	p
cc

cc	
Fast Food Restaurant	c	NP	
Indoor Recreation	c	NP	
Offices	cc	NP	
Personal  Services	c	NP	
Repair and Maintenance Shop
Retail Use Incidental to the Permitted Uses Sales and Storage Lots
Self-Service Storage Facility Transportation  Services Veterinary  Service	cc

cc cc	NP
cc

cc cc	
Industrial Uses
Air Transportation	
c	
c	
Heavy Industrial
Landfill	NP
c	p
c	
55-220
 


Industrial Use Classifications		NP	Not Permitted
p	Permitted
c	Conditional Use Permit
I
Use	I	Zoning District	I	Additional Use
Regulations
	1-1	1-2	I	
Laundry Plants	p	p	









90-060
Industrial Uses (Continued)			
Light Industrial Local Transit
Motor Freight and Warehousing	p
cc	p
cc	
Non-production Industrial
Railroad Transportation	p
c	p
c	
Research and Testing
Resource Extraction
Scrap and Salvage Services	p
NP
c	p
c	
Trade Shop	p	p	
Wholesaling	p	p	

Special Uses
Air Transportation	
c	
c	
Interim Use Local Transit Parking Facility	cc

c	cc

c	55-115
Planned Unit Development	c	c	47-010

 
ARTICLE II- BASE DISTRICT REGULATIONS DIVISION 40: SPECIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
40-10	Civic District.


A)	Purpose.  The original plat of Red Wing established an area for the development of churches, government, and schools.  The intent of this civic district is to continue this tradition by providing for areas of the community where public or semipublic institutional uses are or can be established and to ensure that such areas will continue in this use unless otherwise approved by the City of Red Wing.  The civic district is intended to be a mixed-use district with an emphasis on public and semipublic institutional uses.

B)	Permitted Uses.


1)	Community Services
2)	Family Day Care
3)	Financial Institution
4)	Group Family Day Care
5)	Group Home
6)	Offices
7)	Parks and Open Areas
8)	Public and Private Schools
9)	Religious Institutions


C)	Uses Requiring A Certificate of Compliance.


1)	Broadcasting and Communication (Meeting Criteria)
2)	Educational Service
3)	Home Occupation (Meeting Criteria)
4)	Interim Use
5)	Membership Organization
6)	Multiple Family Residential (3-4 Units)
7)	Nursing and Personal Care


D)	Conditional Uses.


1)	Broadcasting and Communication
2)	Business Services
3)	Campgrounds and Trailering
4)	Cemetery
5)	Colleges and Universities
6)	Communications Services
7)	Congregate Housing
 
8)	Correctional Facilities
9)	Day Care Center lO)Duplex
11) Golf Course
12)	Group Residential Facility
13)	Home Occupation (Not Meeting Criteria)
14)	Indoor Athletic Facility
15)	Local Transit
16)	Medical Facilities
17)	Multiple Family Residential (5 + Units)
18)	Neighborhood Convenience Store
19)	Outdoor Entertainment
20)	Outdoor Recreation Facility
21)	Parking Facility
22)	Planned Unit Development
23)	Public Assembly
24)	Public Works Maintenance Shop and Yards
25)	Semi-Transient Accommodations
26)	Accessory Commercial Apartment (Upper Level)


E)	Dimensional Requirements.


1)	Principal Structures


Nonresidential Lot Area with Utilities ......... 5,000 SF Maximum Floor Area Ratio	4.0

Lot Width
At Building Line ....................................... 50 feet
Frontage on Existing Roads ...................... 50 feet


Front Yard Setback ..................................... 0 feet
Side Yard Setbacks
Interior ..................................................... 5 feet
Comer ...................................................... 5 feet
Rear Yard Setback ...................................... 8 feet


Maximum Lot Coverage ............................. 75 percent Maximum Height ........................................ 96 feet (9 stories)

3)  Lot Depth.  There is no minimum lot depth for buildable land in this district.


4)  Accessory Buildings


Maximum Height Above Grade ................... 16 feet
 
Maximum Door Height ............................... 14 feet Distance to Principal Structure .................... I 0 feet

Front Yard Setback ..................................... 20 feet
Side Yard Setback ...................................... 5 feet
Street Side - Side Yard Setback .................. 5 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback ...................... 8 feet


Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings ..2
Maximum Total Accessory Buildings SF .....I000 SF


F)	Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking is not required for development located within this district; however, all new parking areas shall conform to the design requirements as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter. .

Community Services

 
Public and Private Schools	One space per 500 square feet of gross floor area
No   
One space per teacher, employee, or
administrator, plus one space per each three students in 11th and 12th
Religious Institutions	One feet	space per six seats or one space per I 0 in the main unit  
space per I 00 square feet of usable floor
Financial Institution	One area	
Offices	One space per 200 square feet of usable floor area. Clinics and Medical Offices per Section 60-080, D

40-20	Mixed Use Industrial/Office Commercial (MC) District.

A)	Purpose.  The intent of the Mixed-Use Industrial/Office Commercial district is to allow for a mix of compatible and integrated land uses that will enhance the economic vitality of the district.  It is also the intent of the district to provide for a balance between commercial and light industrial uses within certain districts of the City.
These district regulations are designed to provide for the orderly development of this area.  This district allows for flexible and creative approaches to development concepts with mixed land uses that would not be permitted within standard zoning districts.

B)	Permitted Principal Uses.
I)	Animal Grooming Facility
2)	Automobile Maintenance Service
3)	Automobile Parts/Supply
4)	Business Services
 
5)	Community Services
6)	Family Day Care
7)	Financial Institution
8)	Group Family Day Care
9)	Group Home
10) Offices
11)	Parks and Open Areas
12)	Personal Services
13)	Repair and Maintenance Shop
14)	Trade Shop
15) Wholesaling

C)	Uses Requiring A Certificate of Compliance.

1)	Accessory Commercial Apartment (Upper Level)
2)	Broadcasting and Communication (Meeting Criteria)
3)	Car Wash
4)	Fast Food Restaurant
5)	Group Residential Facility
6)	Home Occupation (Meeting Criteria)
7)	Indoor Recreation
8)	Local Transit
9)	Membership Organization
10)	Multiple Family Residential (3-4 Units)
11)	Neighborhood Convenience Store
12)	Retail Trade
13)	Self Service Storage Facility
14)	Veterinary Service

D)	Conditional Uses.

1)	Accessory Commercial Apartment (Main Level or Lower Level)
2)	Broadcasting and Communication
3)	Business Center
4)	Commercial Vehicle Repair
5)	Communications Services
6)	Congregate Housing
7)	Day Care Center
8)	Drinking and Entertainment
9)	Drive-in Restaurant lO)Duplex
11)	Educational Service
12)	Garden Center
13)	Gasoline Station
14)	Home Occupation (Not Meeting Criteria)
15)	Indoor Athletic Facility
 
16)	Laundry Plants
17)	Light Industrial 18)Marina
19)	Medical Facilities
20)	Motor Freight and Warehousing
21)	Multiple Family Residential (5 + Units)
22)	Nonproduction Industrial
23)	Outdoor Entertainment
24)	Outdoor Recreation Facility
25)	Parking Facility
26)	Planned Unit Development
27)	Public Assembly
28)	Public Works Maintenance Shop and Yards
29)	Railroad Transportation
30)	Research and Testing
31)	Sales and Storage Lots
32)	Semi-Transient Accommodations
33)	Shopping Center
34)	Single Family Attached
35)	Single Family Detached
36)	Standard Restaurant
37)	Transient Accommodations
38)	Transportation Services


E)	Dimensional Requirements.


1)	Principal Structures


Nonresidential Lot Area with Utilities ......... 3,500 SF Maximum Floor Area Ratio	4.0

Lot Width
At Building Line ....................................... 30 feet
Frontage on Existing Roads ...................... 30 feet


Front Yard Setback ..................................... 0 feet
Side Yard Setbacks
Interior ..................................................... 0 feet
Comer ...................................................... 0 feet
Rear Yard Setback ...................................... 0 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage ............................. 80 percent Maximum Height ........................................ 60 feet (5 stories)

2)	Lot Depth.  There is no minimum lot depth for buildable land in this district.
 
3)	Accessory Buildings


Maximum Height Above Grade ................... 16 feet Maximum Door Height ............................... 14 feet Distance to Principal Structure .................... 10 feet

Front Yard Setback ..................................... 20 feet
Side Yard Setback ...................................... 5 feet
Street Side - Side Yard Setback .................. 25 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback ...................... 8 feet


Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings ..2
Maximum Total Accessory Buildings SF ..... 1000 SF


F)	Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be required for all permitted uses according to the following schedule.  All parking areas shall conform  to the design requirements as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter.

 
 
Automobile Maintenance Service



Automobile Business Services

Financial Institution Offices

Personal Services
 
No   
One space per 400 square feet of office space,
plus three spaces per service bay, plus one
on the	work shift


One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area
One space per 100 square feet of usable floor area
One space per 200 square feet of usable floor area.  Clinics and Medical Offices per Section
D
One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
 
Repair and Maintenance Shop	One space per 400 square feet of gross floor
area, plus one space per service company vehicle	on the site
Trade Shop		One space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per 200 square feet of usable floor area
Wholesalin	See Section 60-090 40-030  Mixed Use Commercial Tourism (MCT) District.
A)	Purpose.  The intent of the Mixed-Use Commercial Tourism district is to allow for a
mix of compatible and integrated land uses that will enhance the liveliness of the district.  It is also the intent of the district to provide for a balance between tourist-
 
oriented attractions, public recreational facilities, commercial, office, residential, neighborhood services and specialty shops within certain districts of the City.  These district regulations are designed to provide for the orderly development of this area. This district allows for flexible and creative approaches to development concepts with mixed land uses that would not be permitted within standard zoning districts.

B)	Permitted Principal Uses.

1)	Animal  Grooming Facility
2)	Business Services
3)	Community Services
4)	Family Day Care
5)	Group Family Day Care
6)	Group Home
7)	Offices
8)	Parks and Open Areas


C)	Uses Requiring A Certificate of Compliance.

1)	Accessory Commercial Apartment (Upper Level)
2)	Broadcasting and Communication (Meeting Criteria)
3)	Duplex
4)	Fast Food Restaurant
5)	Group Residential Facility
6)	Home Occupation (Meeting Criteria)
7)	Indoor Recreation
8)	Interim Use
9)	Local Transit
10)	Membership Organization
11)	Multiple Family Residential (3-4 Units)
12)	Neighborhood Convenience Store
13)	Retail Trade
14)	Single Family Detached
15)	Standard Restaurant


D)	Conditional Uses.

1)	Accessory Commercial Apartment (Main Level or Lower Level)
2)	Automobile Parts/Supply
3)	Broadcasting and Communication
4)	Business Center
5)	Communications Services
6)	Congregate Housing
7)	Day Care Center
8)	Drinking and Entertainment
 
9)	Drive-in Restaurant
10)	Educational Services
11) Financial Institution
12)	Garden Center
13)	Gasoline Station
14)	Home Occupation (Not Meeting Criteria)
15)	Indoor Athletic Facility
16) Marina
17)	Multiple Family Residential (5 + Units)
18)	Outdoor Entertainment
19)	Outdoor Recreation Facility
20)	Parking Facility
21)	Personal Services
22)	Planned Unit Development
23)	Public Assembly
24)	Public Works Maintenance Shop and Yards
25)	Railroad Transportation
26)	Repair and Maintenance Shop
27)	Research and Testing
28)	Sales and Storage Lots
29)	Semi-Transient Accommodations
30)	Shopping Center
31)	Single Family Attached
32)	Transient Accommodations
33)	Wholesaling

E)	Dimensional Requirements.

1)	Principal Structures

Nonresidential Lot Area with Utilities ......... 3,500 SF Maximum Floor Area Ratio	4.0

Lot Width
At Building Line ....................................... 30 feet
Frontage on Existing Roads ...................... 30 feet

Front Yard Setback ..................................... 0 feet
Side Yard Setbacks
Interior ..................................................... 0 feet
Comer ...................................................... 0 feet
Rear Yard Setback ...................................... 0 feet

Maximum Lot Coverage ............................. 80 percent Maximum Height ........................................ 60 feet (5 stories)

2)	Lot Depth.  There is no minimum lot depth for buildable land in this district.
 

3)	Accessory Buildings

Maximum Height Above Grade ................... 16 feet Maximum Door Height ............................... 14 feet Distance to Principal Structure .................... 10 feet

Front Yard Setback ..................................... 20 feet
Side Yard Setback ...................................... 5 feet
Street Side - Side Yard Setback .................. 25 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback ...................... 8 feet


Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings ..2 feet Maximum Total Accessory Buildings SF ..... 1000 SF

F)	Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be required for all permitted uses according to the following schedule.  All parking areas shall conform  to the design requirements as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter.

Community Services	One space per 500 square feet of gross floor area
Parks and Open Areas	No reqmrement
Business Services	One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area
Offices	One space per 200 square feet of usable floor area. Clinics and Medical Offices per Section 60-080, D

40-40	Riverfront District.


A)	Purpose. Red Wing citizens recognize the significance of riverfront property along the Mississippi River. The intent of this riverfront district is to maintain, encourage and promote the following:

1)	Recognize the Mississippi River as a priceless, irreplaceable natural and cultural heritage with significance nationally, regionally, and to local citizens.
2)	Recognize that benefits to residents will also benefit visitors.
3)	Promote views of the river; promote physical public access to and along the River.
4)	Foster the ongoing vitality of existing commercial enterprises.
5)	Promote economic sustainability.
6)	Accommodate many types of circulation needs including pedestrian, bike, automobile, truck, boat, etc.
7)	Comply with regulatory requirements of the multiple jurisdictions that govern the riverfront.
 
8)	Maintain the ecological health of rivers (i.e., water quality, wetland systems, wildlife habitat, etc.).
9)	Engage residents and visitors via public art, programming and events that celebrate the river.
10)	Retain City ownership of land currently owned; retain City right of review and approval.
11) Require compatibility of riverfront development with the Red Wing
Comprehensive Plan.
12)	Commit to ongoing meaningful public dialogue.
13)	Successfully balance diverse interests to best serve Red Wing's future.


B)	Permitted Uses.


1)	Parks and Open Areas
2)	Campgrounds and Trailering (if the campgrounds are part of the Upper Harbor Master Plan for the area approved by the City Council on May 14, 2007)
3)	Community Services (if the community services are part of the Upper Harbor Master Plan for the area approved by the City Council on May 14, 2007)
4)	Concessions (if the concessions are part of the Upper Harbor Master Plan for the area approved by the City Council on May 14, 2007)
5)	Marina
6)	Outdoor Entertainment (if the outdoor entertainment is part of the Upper Harbor Master Plan for the area approved by the City Council on May 14, 2007)
7)	Outdoor Recreation Facility (if the outdoor recreation facility is part of the Upper Harbor Master Plan for the area approved by the City Council on May 14, 2007)
8)	Public Assembly (if the public assembly is part of the Upper Harbor Master Plan for the area approved by the City Council on May 14, 2007)
9)	Truck Fleeting Area (if the truck fleeting area is part of the Upper Harbor Master Plan for the area approved by the City Council on May 14, 2007)

C)	Uses Requiring a Certificate of Compliance.


1)	Forestry Operation (excluding the temporary operation of a sawmill and/or chipper to process timber)

D)	Conditional Uses.


1)	Interim Use
2)  Maritime Commercial Use:  A Mix of uses including restaurant, retail, office, and professional services.

E)	Dimensional Requirements.


1)	Principal Structures
 
Lot Area with Utilities ................................... 10,000 SF


Lot Width
At Building Line ..................................... 100 feet
Frontage on Existing Roads ........................ 100 feet


Front  Yard  Setback.......................................     30 feet
Side Yard Setbacks
Interior. .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . ..	10 feet
Comer .................................................     30 feet Rear Yard Setback..................................	10 feet

Maximum Lot Coverage... . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . ....   40 percent
Maximum  Height........................................	30 feet


(For development where the elevation of the existing topography as of June 15, 2007 is altered by more than five feet, the grade from which the height of structures is measured shall be the elevation of the ground surface prior to excavation or filling.)

2)	Lot Depth.  There is no minimum lot depth for buildable land in this district.


3)	Wetlands.  Development in this district shall preserve identified wetland areas.


F)	Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be required for all uses and shall conform to all of the requirements as set forth in Division 60 of this Chapter with the exception that all off-street parking shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any public street.
 
40-050  Special Zoning Districts Use Classification Chart.


Special Use Classifications	NP	Not Permitted p	Permitted
c	Conditional Use Perm
cc	Certificate of Complia	

it nce

Use	I	Zoning    District 	
I	CIVIC	I	MC	I	MCT	
I	
RF	Additional Use Regulations


Agricultural Forestry  Operation	


NP	


NP	


NP	

cc	












55-170

Residential Congregate Housing Duplex	
c	
c	
c		
Family Day Care	p	p	p		
Group Family Day Care	p	p	p		
Group Home
Group Residential Facility	p
c	p
cc	p
cc		
Home Occupation (Meeting Criteria)	cc	cc	cc		
Home Occupation (Not Meeting Criteria)	c	c	c		55-170
Multiple Family Residential
3-4 Units
5 +Units
Semi-Transient   Accommodations Single Family Attached
Single Family Detached	cc c
NP
NP	
cc c c	
cc c cc		

Institutional and Public Uses Campgrounds and Trailering	
c	

NP	

NP	

p	
Cemetery	c	NP	NP		
Colleges and Universities	c	NP	NP		
Community  Services
Correctional  Facilities	p
c	p
NP	p
NP	p	
Golf Course Marina
Membership   Organization Outdoor Recreation Facility	c
NP
cc	NP
c

c	NP
c

c	p p	
Parks and Open Areas	p	p	p	p	
Public and Private Schools Public Assembly	p
c	NP
c	NP
c	
p	
Religious  Institutions	p	NP	NP		

Commercial  Uses					
Animal Grooming Facility	NP	p	p		
Automobile  Maintenance  Service	NP	p	NP		
Automobile  Parts/Supply	NP	p	c		
Bed and Breakfast	NP	NP	NP		55-160
Broadcasting and Communication	CC/C	CC/C	CC/C		55-240
Business Center Business Services Car Wash	NP
c
NP	c
p
cc	
p NP		
Commercial Vehicle Repair	NP	c	NP		
 


Special Use Classifications	NP
p
c	Not Permitted Permitted
Conditional Use Permit Certificate of Compliance

Use	I	Zoning    District 	
I	CIVIC	I	MC	I	MCT	
I	
RF	Additional Use Regulations
Communications  Services Concessions
Day Care Center
Drinking and Entertainment Drive-in Restaurant Educational Service
Fast Food Restaurant	c
NP
c
NP NP
cc
NP	c
NP
c
c cc	c
NP
c
c cc	
p	




55-190
Financial Institution Garden Center Gasoline Station
Indoor Athletic Facility Indoor Recreation Maritime Commercial Use Medical Facilities
Neighborhood Convenience Store Nursing and Personal Care Offices
Outdoor Entertainment Personal Services
Repair and Maintenance Shop Retail Trade
Sales and Storage Lots
Self Service Storage Facility Shopping Center
Standard Restaurant Transient Accommodations Transportation Services Veterinary Service

Industrial   Uses Laundry Plants Light Industrial
Motor Freight and Warehousing Non-production Industrial Railroad Transportation Research and Testing
Trade Shop
Truck Fleeting Area	p NP
NP
c
NP NP
c

cc p c
NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP


NP NP NP NP NP NP NP NP	p
c

c

NP
c

NP
p c p
p
cc

cc c c


c c c
p NP	c
c cc
NP NP
cc

p
c

c c c c

NP



NP NP NP NP
c

NP NP	





c





p























p	


55-210
Wholesaling	NP	p	c		

Special  Uses Interim Use Local Transit Parking Facility	
cc c	
cc c	
cc c		

55-115
Planned Unit Development	c	c	c		47-010

 
ARTICLE III - OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS DIVISION 43: OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
43-010  Policy and Administration.   The City of Red Wing has identified the need to preserve
important bluff land and river land in order to protect and preserve the outstanding scenic, recreational, natural, historical and scientific values of key land areas that were recognized by the Open Space Preservation Plan, adopted by the City Council of the City of Red Wing on March 24, 2008, as an amendment to the City's Comprehensive Plan.  In order to give effect to this policy, the City of Red Wing has determined that an overlay district should be created, within which certain land uses are prohibited.

43-020  Purpose.  This Division is adopted to achieve the policy of Section 43-010 and to: (1) designate an Open Space Preservation Overlay District based on the 2008 Open Space Preservation Plan; (2) regulate the land use within the designated Open Space Preservation Overlay District by prohibiting any new resource extraction land use within the overlay district; (3) regulate the setback of structures and sanitary waste treatment facilities from bluff lines and shorelines to protect the existing and/or natural scenic values, vegetation, soils, water quality, floodplain areas, and bedrock from disruption by man-made structures or facilities; (4) regulate alterations of the natural vegetation and topography; (5) maintain property values and prevent poorly-planned development; (6) conserve and protect the natural scenic values and resources located within the overlay district boundaries; and (7) promote the general welfare of the people of Red Wing and the surrounding communities.

43-30	District Jurisdiction and Designation.

A)	Jurisdiction.  The jurisdiction  of this Division shall include all lands designated within the Open Space Preservation Overlay District within the jurisdiction  of the City.

B)	Designated Open Space Preservation Overlay District. Additional zoning regulations shall apply to Designated Open Space Preservation Overlay District(s). Property located with certain designated Overlay District(s) shall have additional regulations applied with the intent of preserving open space with outstanding cultural and natural resources. These additional regulations for Open Space Preservation Overlay District( s) shall apply to the areas identified on the map designated as the Open Space Preservation Overlay District Map Addendum to the City of Red Wing Official Zoning Map which is made a part of this Division and is on file with the zoning authority.

43-040	Definitions.  Certain terms and words used in this section are defined in Division 10, Definitions, including Resource Extraction.
 
43-50	Uses Prohibited Within the Open Space Preservation Overlay District.

A)	Purpose.	The purpose of prohibiting certain uses within the Open Space Preservation Overlay District shall be to protect and preserve existing natural, scenic, historical, scientific, and recreational values of open space properties identified in
the 2008 Open Space Preservation Plan. It has been determined by the City of Red
Wing that certain uses, by their very nature, have severe impacts on these values that have been identified to be preserved and protected.

B)	Prohibited Land Uses. The following Land Uses are prohibited within the designated Open Space Preservation Overlay District as described in 43-030 B) above:

I)	Resource Extraction Land Use.
 
ARTICLE III- OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS DIVISION 45: DESIGN REVIEW REGULATIONS
45-010  Purpose.  It is the purpose of this Division to establish minimum standards for exterior
architecture of commercial, office, industrial and warehouse buildings located within designated districts in order to ensure high quality design of development and redevelopment within the City of Red Wing.  In particular, these design standards are intended to help establish a unique design identity for the primary entry corridors and gateways that lead to Red Wing's downtown historic core and for the activity centers identified in the City of Red Wing Comprehensive Plan. These standards are intended to ensure coordinated design of building exteriors, additions and accessory structure  exteriors in order to prevent visual disharmony and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties from buildings that detract from the character and appearance of the area. These standards are further intended to prevent use of materials that are unsightly, rapidly deteriorate, contribute to depreciation of area property values, or cause urban blight.  It is not the intent of this Division to unduly restrict design freedom when reviewing and approving project architecture in relationship to the proposed land use, site
characteristics and interior building layout.


45-20	Design Review Designation.  These Design Review Regulations apply to all of the zoned property as listed below in 45-020 A) while specific additional standards apply only to designated overlay district(s) as provided in 45-020 B).

A)	Minimum Design Review Standards Designated Zoning Districts.  The provisions of these Design Review Regulations shall apply to all property located within the B-1 (Neighborhood Business District); B-2 (General Business District); B- 2A (Mixed General and Central Business District); MC (Mixed Use Industrial/Office Commercial District); and the MCT (Mixed Use Commercial Tourism District).
These provisions shall also apply to property located within the I-1 (Light Industrial District) that directly abuts T.H. 61 and T.H. 63 and property located within the B-3 (Central Business District) that is not within a Local Historic District as per Chapter 16 (Heritage Preservation).  Special material provisions for I-1 (Light Industrial District) property that directly abuts T.H. 6land T.H. 63 are listed in Section 45-090. Residential structures (sole use) with four or fewer units that are located within the designated zoning districts are exempt from these Design Review Regulations, unless converted to a commercial use.

B)	Additional Design Review Standards for Designated Overlay District(s).
Property located with certain designated Overlay District( s) shall have additional Design Review Standards applied with the intent of providing a unique design identity for those areas of Red Wing and to promote mixed uses and density.  The specific additional Design Review Standards for each Designated Overlay District are
provided for in 45-080.  These Additional Design Review Standards for Designated Overlay District(s) shall apply to the following areas.
 
I)	Downtown Overlay District; see Figure B. l


c::::J Downtown Overlay District
m . . ml Historic  Downtown  District
........! Historic Mall District
........! Historic St James District
























Figure B. l - Downtown Overlay District


45-30	Division Provisions. Except as exempted by Section 45-040, the provisions of this Division shall apply to the following activities within the Design Review Designated Areas as described in 45-020:

A)	All new building construction.


B)	Any exterior modifications to existing buildings.


C)	All new parking lots.


D)	All outdoor storage and display areas.


E)	All new signage.


F)	All building  expansions.


45-40	Exemptions.  This Division does not apply to the following activities:
 
A)	Maintenance of the exterior of an existing structure such as repainting, reroofing or re-siding where similar materials and colors are used or materials and colors are used that comply with this Division.

B)	Interior remodeling.


C)	Building expansions on a nonpublic fa<;ade.  Building expansions on a public facade that are less than 60 percent of the gross square footage of the existing building and where the expansion does not exceed 10,000 square feet in area in the I-1 (Light Industrial District) and does not exceed 3,000 square feet in all of the other Zoning Districts as listed in Section 45-020 above.  Building expansions exempted above must, at a minimum, be constructed to match the current adjacent facade of the building.

D)	Parking lot expansion not exceeding 25 percent of the gross square footage of the original lot.

45-50	Process.  The following process shall be used for projects designated for Design Review:


A)	Prior to issuance of a grading permit, parking lot permit, certificate of compliance, sign permit, or building permit for a project listed in Section 45-030 above, an applicant shall receive a Certificate of Design Review Approval from the Review Authority (in this case, the Review Authority shall be the Zoning Administrator). The Zoning Administrator shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application based upon compliance with the site plan criteria, design review standards, conformance with the City of Red Wing Comprehensive Plan and all City laws, rules and regulations.

B)	Prior to issuance of a conditional use permit, planned unit development, zoning amendment, or variance for a project listed in Section 45-030 above, an applicant shall receive a Certificate of Design Review Approval from the Review Authority (in this case the Review Authority shall be the Red Wing City Council).  The Red Wing Advisory Planning Commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of an application based upon compliance with the site plan criteria, design review standards, conformance with the City of Red Wing Comprehensive Plan and all City laws, rules and regulations.

C)	An applicant may appeal the decision made by the Zoning Administrator in A) above per Section 90-120 of this Chapter.

45-60	Minimum Submission Requirements.  The applicant shall submit the following:


A)	Elevations and dimensions of all sides of existing and proposed buildings, including roof mechanical equipment, vents, chimneys, or other projecting items above the roof line.
 

B)	Elevations and dimensions of all existing or proposed solid waste and recycling containment areas.

C)	Detailed exterior descriptions, including type and color of all exterior building materials, awnings, exterior lighting, mechanical screening material, fencing, metal flashing, and the like.

D)	Schematic floor plans showing, if applicable, window locations, doors, loading docks, projected interior layouts, seating, bar areas, waiting areas, vestibules, storage areas, food preparation areas, interior trash or recycling space, and the like.

E)	Heating, air conditioning and ventilating and electrical equipment heights, locations and screening materials.

F)	Colored renderings, exterior building and finish material samples and color pallets.


G)	Schematic attached sign package that meets the sign regulations found in Division 65 of this Chapter.

H)	A detailed landscaping plan as regulated elsewhere in this Division and Division 62 of this Chapter.

I)	Appropriate fee as established by the City Council by Ordinance.


J)	Other information as required.


45-70	Minimum Design Review Standards.  The Review Authority shall use the standards in this Division, the criteria for site plan review, and the guidebook City of Red Wing Commercial Design Guidelines to ensure compliance with the purpose of the Design Review Regulations for designated Zoning Districts listed in 45-020 A) and 45-020 B).

A)	Natural Features.  Buildings shall be sited to protect areas of special interest as shown in the City of Red Wing Comprehensive Plan. Other natural features such as natural grade, trees, vegetation, and scenic views, wetlands, other natural features as identified in the Natural Environment Section of the City of Red Wing Comprehensive Plan are encouraged to be incorporated into the overall site plan and may be calculated as part of the landscaping requirement if healthy and not damaged during construction.

B)	Building Location and Orientation.  New buildings shall have at least one principal building entrance oriented toward the primary frontage property line.  In general, buildings should be oriented parallel and perpendicular to the primary frontage property line.
 
C)	Pedestrian Walkways.


1)	Walkways from Sidewalks to Building Entrances.  A continuous pedestrian walkway shall be provided from the primary frontage sidewalk for pedestrians to access building entrances.  This internal walkway shall incorporate landscaping, benches, drop-off bays or bicycle facilities for at least 50 percent of the length of the walkway.  This walkway is necessary for persons who will access the site by walking, biking or transit.  Walkways shall be connected to adjacent sites wherever practicable.

2)	Walkways from Parking Areas to Building Entrances.  Internal pedestrian walkways shall be developed for persons who need access to the building( s) from the parking areas.  The walkway shall be located within the parking area and shall be designed to provide access from the parking lot to the entrances of the building(s).  The walkways shall be designed to separate people from moving vehicles as much as possible.  These walkways shall have a minimum width of four feet with no car overhang or other obstruction.  The walkways must also be designed for disabled access according to the International Building Code, which may require the walkways to be widened or modified.  The walkways shall be distinguished from the parking and driving areas by use of any of the following materials: special pavers, bricks, raised elevation colored concrete or scored concrete.  Other materials may be used if they are appropriate to the overall design of the site and building and acceptable to the Review Authority.

D)	Mechanical Equipment and Service Areas.  Mechanical equipment and service areas shall be screened with visual barriers from adjacent properties, public roadways, parks, or other public areas.  The architectural design of the building shall incorporate design features which screen, contain and conceal all heating, ventilation, air conditioning units, trash enclosures, dumpsters, loading docks, and service yards.

E)	Building Design.


I)  Exterior Building Design.  Exterior walls shall be constructed using a combination of architectural features and a variety of building materials and landscaping near the walls. Public facades shall be designed using architectural features and landscaping (abutting the building) for at least 50 percent of the wall length.  Other walls shall incorporate architectural features and landscaping for at least 30 percent of the wall length.  In certain circumstances the Review Authority may waive the landscaping requirement near building walls if found to be appropriate and the exterior building design still adequately satisfies all other requirements.
2)	Architectural Features. Architectural features include, but are not limited to, the following: windows, window sills/hoods, recesses, projections, wall insets, arcades, window display areas, awnings, balconies, window projections,
 
landscape structures or other features that complement the design intent of the structure and are acceptable to the Review Authority.

In addition, a portion of the on-site landscaping shall abut the walls so that the vegetation combined with the architectural features significantly reduce the visual impact of the building mass as viewed from the street.  Additional landscape requirements are found in Division 62 of this Chapter.

3)	Building Materials


a)	The primary building materials should be materials that are characteristic of Southeastern Minnesota and the Red Wing Downtown Historic District.  No less than 75 percent of the exterior, exposed walls (excluding glass windows) of a public facade of any newly constructed building regulated by the Design Review Regulations shall be constructed of a primary vertical finish made of noncombustible, nondegradable, and low maintenance construction material. In order to adapt to changing technology, the development of new materials, and so as not to limit the designer, additional materials other than those specified in this section may be used.  The right to use alternative materials shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis, in the context of each individual project.

The primary exterior materials shall consist of or be a combination of:
•	Clay or Concrete Brick (with a permanent integral color)
•	Natural or Cast Stone
•	Other materials may be considered by the City provided that they are not expressly prohibited below.

No more than 25 percent of the exterior, exposed walls (excluding glass windows) of a public facade shall be constructed of a secondary vertical finish.  The secondary exterior materials shall consist of or be a combination of:
•	Tile
•	Stucco
•	Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EIFS)
•	Architectural or Decorative Concrete Block (with a permanent integral color)
•	Architectural or Decorative Cast Concrete (with a permanent integral color)
•	Architectural or Decorative Concrete Panels (with a permanent integral color)
•	Wood Trim
•	Jumbo or King-Sized Clay or Concrete Brick (larger than 4" tall or  12" long (with a permanent integral color)
•	Glass Block
 
•	Copper
•	Architectural Metal
•	Terra-Cotta
•	Other materials may be considered by the City provided that they are not expressly prohibited below.

The following materials are specifically not allowed on any facade:
•	Vinyl
•	Sheet Metal
•	Aluminum  siding
•	Non-decorative  Concrete Block
•	Painted or Natural Colored Architectural/Decorative  Concrete Block
•	Painted or Natural Colored Architectural/Decorative  Cast Concrete
•	Painted or Natural Colored Architectural/Decorative  Panels
•	Plywood

In conditions where the rear elevation, or any other nonpublic facade of a building, is not exposed to view from a public street or public area, the rear elevation may be constructed of a combination of primary and secondary materials as listed above with no less than 50 percent of the exterior exposed walls consisting of a primary material.

b)	All exterior, exposed walls of a public facade of any accessory structure to a building located within the Design Review District as provided for in 45-020
A) and 45-020 B) shall be constructed of similar materials used on the principal building or materials that are compatible with the principal building in terms of color and texture as determined by the Review Authority.

F)	Roof Design.  Metal roofs may be allowed if compatible with the overall architectural design of the building.  Roofs should add visual interest and be appropriate to the architectural style of the building.  Variations within an architectural style are highly encouraged.

G)	Infill Construction.  The following general rules should be followed when constructing a new building between existing buildings or adjacent to existing buildings:

I)  Proportions and Facade.  The average height and width of the surrounding buildings determines a general set of proportions for an infill structure or the bays of a larger structure.  The infill building should fill the entire space and reflect the characteristic rhythm of facades along the street.  If the site is large, the mass of the facade can be broken into a number of smaller bays to maintain a rhythm similar to the surrounding buildings.
 
2)	Composition.  The composition of the infill facade (that is the organization of its parts) should be similar to that of surrounding facades.  Rhythms that carry throughout the block (such as window spacing) should be similar to those on surrounding facades.

3)	Detailing.  Infill architecture should reflect some of the detailing of surrounding buildings in window shapes, cornice lines and brick work.

4)	Materials.  An infill facade should be composed of materials similar to the adjacent facades. The new building should not stand out against the others.

5)	Color.  The colors chosen for an infill facade should relate to the building's neighbors.

6)	Building Setback.  The new facade should have a similar setback as the neighboring properties.

H)	Community Amenities.  Community amenities such as patio/seating areas, water features, artwork or sculpture, clock towers, pedestrian plazas with park benches or other features located adjacent to the primary entrance to the building( s) are highly encouraged.

I)	Lighting and Flag Poles.  The lighting shall be shielded and directed down onto the site and not shine or glare onto adjacent property or streets.  Light poles, light fixtures and flagpoles shall not exceed 25 feet in height.

J)	Signage.  Signage for uses located within the Design Review Districts as provided for in Sections 45-020 A) and 45-020 B) shall meet the requirements of the underlying zoning district as per the Sign Regulations found in Division 65 of this Chapter.

K)	Parking Layout.  Off-street parking lots should be located in the rear and side yards where possible.  Front yard parking shall be allowed only when traffic circulation needs require such a layout.  In these cases, the site plan shall include landscaping and/or architectural features such as brick retaining walls with iron railings or other materials located to partially screen parking lots from the street.

45-80	Additional Design Review Standards for Designated Overlay Districts.  The following additional Design Review  Standards shall apply to the Designated  Overlay Districts  as identified in Section 45-020 B) above:

A)	Downtown Overlay District.
Materials (new building construction and nonexempt building expansions) as regulated by Section 45-070 E) 3).

Setbacks (new building construction; not required for building expansions).
 
Front - 10 feet required in non-B-3 Zoning Districts; a IO-foot maximum setback is allowed in the B-3 Zoning District - (80 percent of the primary building frontage must be at or within 5 feet of the required front setback) Side - 0 feet Minimum
Side Corner - 10 feet required in non-B-3 Zoning Districts; a IO-foot maximum setback is allowed in the B-3 Zoning District - (80 percent of the comer building frontage must be at or within 5 feet of the required side comer setback)
Rear - I 0 feet Minimum


Height (new building construction; not required for building expansions).
Minimum Two Stories or 24 feet Maximum Per Underlying Zoning

Parking. As regulated elsewhere in this Division and Chapter with the exception that no new/expanded parking stalls or drive lanes shall be allowed in front of the principal structure along its primary frontage.

Transparency (new building construction; not required for building expansions).
Windows and door openings must comprise at least 50 percent of the area of the ground floor level of a primary street facade and at least 30 percent of the area of the ground floor level of a comer street facade.  Windows and/or door openings must comprise at least 20 percent of the area on all other ground level public facades.  Windows and door opening must comprise at least 25 percent of the area of each upper level of a primary or comer street facade
and at least 15 percent of the area on all other upper level public facades.


Landscaping.  As regulated elsewhere in this Division and Chapter.


Signage.	Building signs shall be the preferred type of signage allowed in the Main
Street Overlay District.  New freestanding signs shall be monument signs; new pylon/pole signs shall not be allowed.

45-090  Special Exterior Material Regulations for 1-1 Zoned Property that Directly Abuts
T.H. 61 and T.H. 63.


A)	I-1 (Light Industrial District) zoned parcels that directly abut T.H. 61 and T.H. 63 shall be constructed of exterior building materials that are characteristic of Southeastern Minnesota.  No less than 75 percent of the exterior, exposed walls (excluding glass windows) of any newly constructed building regulated by the Design Review Regulations shall be constructed of a primary vertical finish made of noncombustible, nondegradable, and low maintenance construction material.  In order to adapt to changing technology, the development of new materials, and so as not to limit the designer, additional materials other than those specified in this section may
 
be used.  The right to use alternative materials shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis, in the context of each individual project.

The primary exterior materials shall consist of or be a combination of:
•	Clay or Concrete Brick (with a permanent integral color)
•	Natural or Cast Stone
•	Stucco
•	Tile
•	Architectural/Decorative  Concrete Block (with a permanent integral color)
•	Architectural/Decorative  Cast Concrete (with a permanent integral color)
•	Architectural/Decorative  Concrete Panels (with a permanent integral color)
•	Jumbo/King-Sized Clay or Concrete Brick larger than 4 inches tall or 12 inches long (with a permanent integral color)
•	Other Materials may be considered by the City provided they are not expressly prohibited below

No more than 25 percent of the exterior, exposed walls (excluding glass windows) shall be constructed of a secondary vertical finish.  The secondary exterior materials shall consist of or be a combination of:
•	Sheet Metal
•	Aluminum
•	Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EIFS)
•	Painted Non-decorative Concrete Block
•	Painted Architectural/Decorative  Concrete Block
•	Painted Architectural/Decorative  Cast Concrete
•	Painted Architectural/Decorative  Concrete Panels
•	Wood Lap Siding
•	Wood Trim
•	Glass Block
•	Copper
•	Architectural Iron Trim
•	Terra-Cotta
•	Other Materials may be considered by the City provided that they are not expressly prohibited below

The following materials are specifically not allowed as a primary or secondary material:
•	Unpainted or Natural Colored Non-decorative Concrete Block
•	Vinyl
•	Plywood
•	Unpainted or Natural Colored Architectural/Decorative  Concrete Block
•	Unpainted or Natural Colored Architectural/Decorative  Cast Concrete
•	Unpainted or Natural Colored Architectural/Decorative  Concrete Panels
 
B)	1-1 zoned properties that exceed the required minimum front and comer side yard setbacks by 30 feet or more may reduce the primary material percentage requirement to 50 percent and may increase the secondary material percentage requirement to 50 percent, if submitted with a vegetative landscape buffer plan meeting the requirements of Section 62-030 Buffer Yards - General Standard, including overstory deciduous trees.  On through lots or lots with double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on each street.
 
ARTICLE III- OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS DIVISION 47: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
47-1	I 0  Purpose.  The purpose of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) is to encourage and
provide for a more creative development of land than is possible under conventional zoning districts.  The PUD concept provides an opportunity to encourage the mix ofland uses within a development and the mixture of housing and commercial densities.  The PUD allows for:

A)	Innovations in residential development to meet growing demands for housing at all economic levels.

B)	Coordinated and comprehensive plans for landscaping, buildings, and open space to attain creative site and building design.

C)	The preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics such as natural topography, existing vegetation, and geologic features.

D)	The creative use ofland and related physical development which allows an orderly transition ofland from one neighborhood and/or land use to another.

E)	An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets.


F)	A development pattern in harmony with the objectives of the Comprehensive Guide Plan.

G)	A more desirable environment than would be possible through the strict application of zoning and subdivision regulations of the City.

H)	A creation of housing densities and mixed land uses that provide greater opportunities for low and moderate-income housing.

47-020  Conditional Use Permit Required.  Planned unit developments are treated as a conditional use permit and are allowed as such according to the district regulations of the underlying zoning district.

47-30	Unified Control.  All land included for development as a PUD shall be under the legal control of the applicant, whether that applicant be an individual, partnership, or corporation or group of individuals, partnerships, or corporations.  Applicants requesting approval of a PUD shall present firm evidence of unified control of the entire area within the proposed PUD together with evidence that the developer has the unrestricted right to impose all of the covenants and conditions upon the land as are contemplated by the provisions of these regulations.
 
The applicant may be required to enter into a developer's agreement with the City and agree to the following:

A)	Agreement to proceed with the proposed development according to the provisions of these zoning regulations and such conditions as may be attached to the conditional use permit for the PUD.

B)	Provide agreements, contracts, deed restrictions, and sureties acceptable to the City for completion of the development according to the approved plans and maintenance of such areas, functions and facilities. that are not to be provided, operated, or maintained at public expense.

C)	Bind their successors in title to any commitments made under A) and B) above.  All such agreements and evidence of unified control shall be approved by the City Attorney.

47-40	Permitted Uses.


A)	The predominate land use in a PUD shall be a permitted use in the underlying zoning district.  Therefore, the predominate land use in a residentially zoned district shall be residential uses; the predominate land use in a business zoned district shall be commercial uses; and the predominate land use in an industrial zoned district shall be industrial uses.

B)	Permitted uses in a PUD are:


I)	Dwelling units in detached, clustered, semi-detached, or attached multi-storied structures or combination thereof.

2)	Commercial Uses.


3)	Supporting Community Facilities.


4)	Light Industrial Uses.


47-50	Minimum Requirements for PUD Applications.


A)	A conditional use permit shall be required of all PUD's.  Planned unit developments are only appropriate if the applicant can satisfy all of the following minimum application requirements:

I)	General Requirements. All permitted uses shall be subject to the accessory use and structure, sign, height and parking requirements of the district in which it is located, unless a variation is specifically allowed in the approved PUD.
 
2)	The PUD is consistent with the Comprehensive Guide Plan of the City.


3)	The PUD is an effective and unified treatment of the development possibilities on the project site and the development plan provides for the preservation of unique natural amenities such as streams, stream banks, wooded cover, rough terrain, and similar areas and/or the preservation/reuse of an existing building.

4)	The PUD can be planned and developed to harmonize with any existing or proposed development in the areas surrounding the project site.

5)	The tract under consideration is under unified control by the applicant.


6)	The tract is at least two acres, with the exception that a residential PUD involving the reuse of an existing institutional/commercial building located within an  existing developed residential district may be located on a tract less than two acres.

7)	Single-family detached units may be allowed as a PUD in areas providing urban services, provided parks and open space are an integral part of the plan.

47-060  Density.  In any PUD the maximum number of dwelling units allowed shall not exceed the density requirements as listed in the district regulations of the underlying zoning district.  All density limits listed are calculated from gross acreage. The maximum number of dwelling units allowed for a proposed residential PUD involving the reuse of an existing institutional/commercial building located within an existing developed residential district may be calculated based upon the existing density of the surrounding neighborhood outside of the proposed development boundaries, but located on the same block or within 250 feet of the proposed development boundaries and the proposed new dwelling units.

47-70	Coordination with Subdivision Regulations.


A)	It is the intent of this Article (Article III - Overlay District Regulations) that subdivision review under Chapter 12 of this City Code shall be carried out simultaneously with the review of a PUD under this Division.

B)	The plans required under this Division must be submitted in a form which will satisfy the requirements of Chapter 12.

47-80	Procedures for Approving Planned Unit Developments.  Approval of a PUD shall follow the procedures shown below.

A)	Preapplication Meeting.  Prior to the submission of any plan to the Advisory Planning Commission, the applicant shall meet with the Zoning Administrator, and such other staff as the Zoning Administrator shall determine, to discuss the
 
contemplated project.  This meeting shall provide an opportunity to discuss the project relative to community development objectives for the area in question and to learn the procedural steps and exhibits required.  This includes the procedural steps for a conditional use permit and a preliminary plan.  The applicant may submit a simple sketch plan at this stage for informal review and discussion.

B)	Preliminary Plan and Application.  An applicant shall make an application for a PUD following the procedural steps set forth in Article V, Section 90-040, Conditional Use Permit.  In addition to the criteria and standards set forth in Article V, Section 90-040 of this Chapter for the granting of conditional use permits, the following additional findings shall be made prior to approval of the preliminary plan:

I)	The proposed PUD is in conformance with the Comprehensive Guide Plan.


2)	The uses proposed will not have an adverse impact on the reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property and will not be detrimental to potential surrounding uses.

3)	Each phase of the proposed development, as it is proposed to be completed, is of sufficient size, composition, and arrangement that its construction, marketing, and operation are feasible as a complete unit, and that provision and construction of dwelling units, commercial businesses, and open space are balanced and coordinated.

4)	The PUD will not create an excessive burden on parks, schools, streets, and other public facilities and utilities, which serve or are proposed to serve the district.

5)	The proposed total development is designed in such a manner as to form a desirable and unified environment within its own boundaries.

C)	The following exhibits shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator by the applicant as a part of the application for a conditional use permit for a PUD:

I)	The title of the project and the names of the professional project planner and/or engineer and the developer for the project.

2)	An explanation of the character of the PUD and the manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of the PUD regulations.

3)	A statement of the present ownership of all of the land included within the PUD.


4)	A general indication of the expected schedule of development including progressive phasing and time schedule.

5)	A map showing the existing conditions giving the legal description of the property and including the approximate total acreage.  In addition this map should indicate
 
existing property lines and dimensions, ownership of all parcels, platting, easements, street ROWs, utilities, and buildings for the property and for the area 500 feet beyond the boundaries of the PUD.

6)	A map showing the natural features of the area and the area within 500 feet of the proposed PUD.  This map should show contour lines at no more than two-foot intervals, drainage patterns, wetlands, vegetation, soil type, and subsoil
conditions.


7)	The proposed preliminary plan showing proposed locations and the acreage of each component of the different uses proposed by dwelling types, commercial business types, open space designations, recreational facilities, other permitted uses, and off-street parking. The preliminary plan shall show vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and open space uses.

8)	Tabulations of the total gross acreage in the development, and the percentage thereof proposed to be devoted to the several dwelling types, other permitted uses, recreational facilities, open spaces, streets, parks, schools, and other reservations.  Tabulations of projected density shall be computed by deducting gross acreage used for non-residential purposes other than open space recreational uses.

9)	Architectural drawings and sketches illustrating the design and character of the various structures proposed in the development.

10)	Deed restrictions, conservation easements and other documents pertaining to the improvement, operation, and maintenance of common areas in the development.

11) A full description showing the public facilities plan for the development to include sanitary sewer, stormwater management, water systems, streets and other public utilities.

12)	Preliminary Erosion Control and Stormwater Management Plan meeting the submission requirements of Article IV, Section 57-060.

13)	Preliminary Landscape Plan.


14)	Any additional information required by the Advisory Planning Commission such as maps, plans, studies, and reports that may be needed in order to make the necessary findings and determinations that the applicable standards and guidelines have been complied with.

D)	Preliminary Plat.  If the PUD involves land subdivision as regulated by Chapter 12 of the Red Wing City Code, the applicant shall also submit a preliminary plat or documents meeting the requirements of Other Subdivision Methods, and all necessary
 
documentation as required by Chapter 12 of all or that portion of the project to be subdivided.  For purposes of the administrative simplification, the public hearing required for the conditional use permit and preliminary plat may be combined into one hearing or may be held concurrently.

E)	Final Plan.


1)	Within 90 days following the approval of the preliminary plan with modifications, if any, and the preliminary plat, the applicant shall file with the Zoning Administrator a final plan containing in final form the information required in the preliminary plan plus any changes required by the City Council.  The applicant shall also submit a final plat for all or that portion to be platted.

2)	The Zoning Administrator shall submit the final plan and final plat to the Advisory Planning Commission for review and recommendation.

3)	The final plan and final plat shall conform to the preliminary plan and the preliminary plat plus any required changes made by the City Council to the preliminary plan and preliminary plat.

4)	The City Council shall review the final plan and final plat.   If the final plan is approved by the City Council, the Zoning Administrator  shall issue a conditional use permit  to the applicant.   Said approval for phased PUD projects  may provide for future review and approval by the Advisory  Planning  Commission  and City Council of the detailed plans  for the future phased  developments.   The City Council approval of the PUD may also include the requirement  that the applicant enter into a developer's  agreement  that identifies  the responsibilities  of the developer and the City.   In addition, the City may require that the City Attorney review  and approve  any homeowner  association  or business  owner  association agreements  that will establish  ownership,  maintenance,  and funding for common open space or other private  street or utility  operation  and maintenance.

47-90	Operating and Maintenance Requirements for PUD Common Open Space/Facilities Documents.  Whenever common open space or service facilities are provided within the PUD, the PUD plan shall contain provisions to assure the continued operation and maintenance of such open space and service facilities to a predetermined reasonable standard.  Common open space and service facilities within a PUD may be placed under the ownership of one or more of the following, as approved by the City Council:

A)	The public, by dedication, where community-wide use is anticipated and the City Council agrees to accept the dedication.

B)	Landlord control, where only use by tenants is anticipated.
 
C)	A Property Owners Association, provided all of the following conditions are met:


I)	Prior to the use or occupancy or sale or the execution of contracts for sale of an individual building unit, parcel, tract, townhouse, apartment or common area, a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or an equivalent document or a document such as specified by Minnesota Statutes, Section 515A.2-105, as amended, and a set of floor plans such as specified by said statute shall be filed with the City of Red Wing, said filing with the City to be made prior to the filings of said declaration or document or floor plans with the recording officers of Goodhue County, Minnesota.

2)	The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or equivalent document shall specify that deeds, leases or documents of conveyance affecting buildings, units, parcels, tracts, townhouses, or apartments shall subject said properties to the terms of said declaration.

3)	The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall provide that an owners' association or corporation shall be formed and that all owners shall be members of said association or corporation which shall maintain all properties and common areas in good repair and which shall assess individual property owners' proportionate shares of joint or common costs.  This declaration shall be subject  to the review and approval of the City Attorney.  The intent of this requirement is to protect the property values of the individual owner through establishing private control.

4)	The declaration shall additionally, among other things, provide that in the event the association or corporation fails to maintain properties in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the City of Red Wing or fails to pay taxes or assessments on properties as they become due and, in the event the said City of Red Wing incurs any expenses in enforcing its rules and regulations, which said expenses are not immediately reimbursed by the association or corporation, then the City of Red Wing shall have the right to assess each property its prorata share of said expenses. Such assessments, together with interest thereon and costs of collection, shall be a lien on each property against which each such assessment is made.

5)	Membership must be mandatory for each owner and any successive buyer.


6)	The open space restrictions must be permanent and not for a given period of years.

7)	The Association must be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes, and the maintenance of the open space facilities to be deeded to it.
 
8)	A property owner must pay their prorata share of the cost of the Association by means of an assessment to be levied by the Association which meets the requirements for becoming a lien on the property in accordance with Minnesota Statutes.

9)	The Association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs.


10)	The by-laws and rules of the Association and all covenants and restrictions to be recorded must be approved by the City Council prior to the approval of the Final Development Plan.

D)	The City or a not-for-profit organization of the City's choosing shall be conveyed a perpetual conservation easement in and to the open space land for the purpose of assuring the retention of the open space as open space and scenic surroundings. Where this option is determined to be in the best interest of the City, the owner shall be compelled to maintain the open space in compliance with City Code provisions then and thereafter enacted.  Such easement shall also establish enforcement procedures and allow the City or the not-for-profit organization to perform obligations of the owner, collect its costs from the owner, and charge such costs against the open space land and adjoining property of the owner and collect such
costs as an assessment.  Such easement shall not grant any right to use the open space as public park, nor any right to the City or the public to make improvements on or physical use of the open space.

47-100	Revisions and/or Changes in the Planned Unit Development.


A)	A PUD shall be developed only according to the approved and recorded final plan and final plat and all supporting data.  The recorded final plan and final plat and supporting data together with all recorded amendments shall be binding on the
applicants, their successors, grantees and assigns and shall limit and control the use of premises (including the internal use of buildings and structures) and location of structures in the PUD as set forth therein.

1)	Major Changes.  Changes which alter the concept or intent of the PUD including increases in the density, change in location and types of nonresidential land uses, increases in the height of buildings, reduction of proposed open space, more than
a 15 percent modification in proportion of housing types, changes in road standards or alignment, utilities, water, electricity, and drainage or changes in the final governing agreements, provisions, or covenants, may be approved only by submission of a new preliminary plan and supporting data, and following the same steps required initially for approval of the final plan as listed in Section 47-080 above.

2)	Minor Changes.  The Zoning Administrator may approve minor changes in the PUD, which do not change the concept or intent of the development, without
 
going through the preliminary approval steps.  Minor changes are defined as any change not defined as a major change.

3)	Schedule of Construction.  The Council shall consider the PUD subject to revocation if construction falls more than two  years behind the schedule filed with the final plan.  The developer shall be notified at least 60 days prior to any
revocation hearing.  Extension in the building schedule may be granted by the City Council.
 
ARTICLE   III- OVERLAY   DISTRICT   REGULATIONS DIVISION 50:  LAKE AND SHORELAND MANAGEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
50-10	Purpose.  These shoreland standards are adopted for the purpose of:


A)	Regulating suitable uses ofland surrounding protected waters.


B)	Regulating the size of parcels, length of water frontage and alteration of shorelands of protected  waters.

C)	Regulating the location of sanitary facilities adjacent to protected waters.


D)	Preservation of the natural vegetation, natural topography, and other natural resources to insure a high standard of environmental quality.

50-20	Statutory Authorization,  Policy, and Jurisdiction.


A)	Statutory Authorization. This Division is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 103F, Minnesota Rules, parts 6120.2500 - 6120.3900, and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 462 for municipalities.

B)	Policy.  The uncontrolled use of shorelands of the City of Red Wing, Minnesota, affects the public health, safety and general welfare not only by contributing to pollution of public waters, but also by impairing the local tax base. Therefore, it is in the best interests of the public health, safety, and welfare to provide for the wise subdivision, use, and development of shorelands of public waters. The Legislature of Minnesota has delegated responsibility to local governments of the state to regulate the subdivision, use and development of the shorelands of public waters and, thus, preserve and enhance the quality of surface water, conserve the economic and natural environmental values of shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters and  related land resources. This responsibility is hereby recognized by the City of Red Wing.

C)	Jurisdiction.  The provisions of this Division shall apply to the shorelands of the public water bodies as classified in Section 50-050 of this Division. Pursuant to Minnesota Regulations, Parts 6120.2500-6120.3900, no lake, pond, or flowage less than 10 acres in size in municipalities or 25 acres in size in unincorporated areas need be regulated in a local government's shoreland regulations. A body of water created by a private user where there was no previous shoreland may, at the discretion of the governing body, be exempt from this Division.

50-30	General Provisions and Definitions.
 
A)	Compliance.   The use of any shoreland of public waters; the size and shape oflots; the use, size, type and location of structures on lots; the installation and maintenance of water supply and waste treatment systems; the grading and filling of any shoreland area; the cutting of shoreland vegetation; and the subdivision of land shall be in full compliance with the terms of this Division and other applicable regulations.

B)	Enforcement.  The Zoning Administrator is responsible for the administration and enforcement of this Division. Any violation of the provisions of this Division or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law. Violations of this Division can occur regardless of whether or not a permit is required for a
regulated activity pursuant to Section 50-040 A) of this Division. In addition, the City may enforce these regulations by injunction or other civil proceeding. Civil enforcement shall not waive the right of the City to seek or enforce criminal penalties.

C)	Interpretation.  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Division shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other
powers granted by State Statutes.


D)	Severability.  If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this Division is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Division shall not be affected thereby.

E)	Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this Division to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Division imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Division shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this Division are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.

F)	Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in  Division shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this Division its most reasonable application. For the purpose of this Division, the words "must" and "shall" are mandatory and not permissive. All distances, unless otherwise specified, shall be measured horizontally.

I)	Accessory Structure or Facility. Any building or structure on the same lot, or part of the main building subordinate to the principal building and its primary/permitted use.

2)	Bluff. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment with an average slope of 25 percent or greater with a vertical rise of 25 feet or greater, excluding road embankments.
 
3)	Boathouse. A structure designed and used solely for the storage of boats or boating equipment.

4) Building Height. The vertical distance to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip, gambrel, and all other types of roofs, measured from the average grade level adjoining the building.  For parapet walls with decorative arches, peaks, or other features that vary in height, height shall be determined by calculating the average height between the roof line/lowest point of the parapet wall and the highest point of the parapet wall, measured from the average grade level adjoining the building.

5)	Building Setback Line. A line within a lot which describes the required nonbuildable portion of the lot because of closeness to a public right-of-way line, a side or rear lot line, a bluffline, or a high-water mark.  Beyond this line toward the interior of the lot, buildings or structures may be placed when in accordance with this chapter.

6)	Clear Cutting. See Intensive Vegetation Clearing.


7)	Commercial Use. . Any activity conducted with the intent of realizing a profit from the sale, lease, rental, or trade of products, goods and services.

8)	Commissioner. The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.


9)	Conditional Use. A use that is not appropriate generally or a use that is not appropriate generally without restriction throughout the zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, is not detrimental to public health, safety, or general welfare.

10)	Deck. A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal use or site, and at any point extending more than three feet above ground.

11) Dwelling, Two Family - (Duplex). A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other.

12)	Dwelling Site. A designated location for residential use by one or more persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational vehicle sites.

13)	Dwelling Unit. Any structure, or portion of a structure, or other shelter designed as short- or long-term living quarters for one or more persons, including rental or time-share accommodations such as motel, hotel, and resort rooms and cabins.
 
14)	Forest Land Conversion. The clear cutting of forested lands to prepare for a new land use other than reestablishment of a subsequent forest stand.

15)Industrial Use. Light or Heavy Industrial Uses as defined in Division 10-030.


16)	Intensive Vegetation Clearing. The removal of greater than 30 percent of the trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.

17)	Lot. A parcel of land legally subdivided by plat, metes and bounds, registered land survey, auditors plot, or other accepted means and separated from other parcels or portions by said description for the purpose of sale, leased, or operation.

18)	Lot Width. The shortest distance between lot lines measured at the midpoint of the building line.

19)	Multi-Family Residential. A building containing three or more dwelling units.
The term includes cooperative apartments, condominiums, and the like.  For the purposes of these regulations, regardless of how rental units are equipped, any multifamily dwelling in which units are available for rental periods of one week or less shall be considered a hotel.

20)	Nonconformity. Any legal use, structure or parcel ofland already in existence, recorded, or authorized before the adoption of official controls or amendments thereto that would not have been permitted to become established under the terms of the official controls as now written, if the official controls have been in effect prior to the date it was established, recorded or authorized.

21)	Ordinary High Water Level. The boundary of public waters and wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.

22)	Planned Unit Development. Developments which may have one or more main uses or structures on a single parcel or contiguous parcel of land, controlled by a single landowner or development group, upon which the developer may be granted relief or design flexibility from specific City Code provisions relating to land use, subdivision, and other similar regulations.  This relief or design flexibility may be granted by the City in return for assurances of an overall innovation and/or quality of development, which will be of exceptional benefit to the community as a whole.

23)	Practical Difficulties. As used in connection with the granting of a variance, means that the property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable
 
manner not permitted by this Chapter; the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner; and the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.  Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties.  Practical difficulties include, but are not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.

24)	Public Waters. Any waters as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 103 G.005, and subdivisions 14 and 15.

25)	Resource Extraction. A use involving on-site extraction of surface or subsurface mineral products or natural resources.  Typical uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, mining, and soil mining.  Specifically excluded from this use type shall be grading and removal of dirt associated with an approved site plan or subdivision.

26)	Semipublic Use. The use ofland by a private, nonprofit organization to provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the regular constituency of the organization.

27)	Sensitive Resource Management. The preservation and management of areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints such as shallow soils over groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding, or occurrence of flora or fauna in need of special protection.

28)	Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage treatment system, or other facility and an ordinary high water level, sewage treatment system, top of a bluff, road, highway, property line, or other facility.

29)	Sewage Treatment System. Any system for the collection, treatment and dispersion of sewage including but not limited to septic tanks, soil absorption systems and drain fields.

30)	Sewer System. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main, and all other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal.

31)	Shore Impact Zone. Land located between the ordinary high water level of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50 percent of the structure setback.

32)	Shoreland. Land located within the following distances from public waters: 1000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond, or flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a floodplain designated by
 
ordinance on a river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for lesser distances and when approved by the commissioner.

33)	Shoreland Bluff. That part of a bluff which faces a river or lake designated as in the shoreland zone having a part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area and the slope must drain toward the waterbody.

34)	Shoreland Bluff Impact Zone. A shoreland bluff and land located within 30 feet from the top of the bluff.

35)	Significant Historic Site. Any archaeological site, standing structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of Historic Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions of Minnesota Statutes section
307.08 as amended. A historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the Minnesota state archaeologist or the director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be significant historic sites.

36)	Steep Slope. Land where agricultural activity or development is not recommended or poorly suited based on slope steepness or soil site characteristics as found mapped and described in available county soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of this Division. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are lands having average slopes over 12 percent, as measured over horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, that are not bluffs.

37)	Structure. Anything constructed or erected the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground, except
aerial or underground utility lines, such as sewer, electric, telephone, telegraph, gas lines, towers, poles, and other supporting facilities.

38)	Subdivision. The division of a parcel ofland after the effective date of this Chapter into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development.  This term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.

39)	Surface Water-Oriented  Commercial Use. The use ofland for commercial purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants with transient docking facilities are examples of such use.
 
40)	Toe of Bluff. The point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from gentler to steeper slope above. Ifno break in the slope is apparent or if there is disagreement in the breaking point, the toe of the bluff shall be the lowest end of the lowest 50-foot segment, as measured on the ground, indicating an average slope exceeding 18 percent.

41)	Top of Bluff. The point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from steeper to gentler slope above. Ifno break in the slope is apparent or if there is disagreement in the breaking point, the top of the bluff shall be the highest end of the highest 50-foot segment, as measured on the ground, indicating an average slope exceeding 18 percent.

42)	Variance. A relaxation by the Board of Adjustments of the dimensional regulations of this Chapter  where such action will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of actions or the situation of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this Chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.

43)	Water-Oriented Accessory Structure or Facility. A small, aboveground building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks, and retaining walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to a surface water feature, reasonably needs
to be located closer to public waters than the normal structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities include boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, and detached decks.

44)	Wetland. A surface water feature classified as a wetland in the United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition).

50-40	Administration.


A)	Permits Required.


1)	A permit is required for the construction of buildings or building additions (and including such related activities as construction of decks and signs), the installation and/or alteration of sewage treatment systems, and those grading and filling activities not exempted by Section 50-060 F) of this Division. Application for a permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator on the forms provided. The application shall include the necessary information so that the Zoning Administrator can determine the site's suitability for the intended use and that a compliant sewage treatment system will be provided.

2)	A permit authorizing an addition to an existing structure shall stipulate that an identified nonconforming sewer treatment system, as defined by Section 50-070
C) of this Division shall be reconstructed or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this Division.
 

B)	Certificate of Compliance.


1)	The Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of compliance for each activity requiring a permit as specified in Section 50-040 A) of this Division. This certificate will specify that the use of land conforms to the requirements of this Chapter. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized by permit shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter and shall be punishable as provided in Section 50-030 B) of this Division.

C)	Variances.


1)	Variances may only be granted in accordance with Section 90-110 of this Chapter as applicable. A variance may not circumvent the general purposes and intent of this Chapter. No variance may be granted that would allow any use that is prohibited in the zoning district in which the subject property is located.
Conditions may be imposed in the granting of a variance to ensure compliance and to protect adjacent properties and the public interest. In considering a variance request, the Board of Adjustments must also consider whether the property owner has reasonable use of the land without the variance, whether the
property is used seasonally or year-round, whether the variance is being requested solely on the basis of economic considerations, and the characteristics of development on adjacent properties.

2)	The Advisory Planning Commission shall hear and make recommendations in response to requests for variances in accordance with the rules that it has adopted for the conduct of business.  The Red Wing City Council shall decide on the request for variances. When a variance is approved after the Department of Natural Resources has formally recommended denial in the hearing record, the Department of Natural Resources shall receive notification of the approved variance as required in Section 50-040 D) 1) of this Division. Notification shall also include the City Council's public record/testimony and the findings of facts and conclusions which supported the issuance of the variance.

3)	For existing developments, an application for a variance must clearly demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment system is present for the intended use of the property. The variance, if issued, must require reconstruction of a nonconforming sewer treatment system.

D)	Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources.


1)	Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances, amendments, or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls must be sent to the commissioner or the commissioner's designated representative and be postmarked
 
at least 10 days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to consider proposed subdivisions/plats must include copies of the subdivision/plat.

50-50	Shoreland Classification System and Land Use Districts.


A)	Shoreland Classification System.  The public waters of the City of Red Wing have been classified below with the criteria found in Minnesota Rules, part 6120.3000, and the Protected Waters Inventory Map for Goodhue County, Minnesota.

1)	The shoreland area for the water bodies listed in Section 50-050 A) 2) and 3) of this Division and shall be defined in Section 50-030 F) 31) of this Division, and as shown on the Official Zoning Map.

2)	Lakes


Natural Environment Lakes
Goose Lake	Protected Waters Inventory l.D
25-0005
Brunner Lake	25-0006
Birch Lake	25-0009
Spring Creek Lake	25-0011
Cannon Lake	25-0012
Devil's Lake	25-0013
Larson Lake	25-0016
Sturgeon Lake	25-0017 01

General Development Lake	Protected  Waters Inventory l.D.
U.S. Lock & Dam No. 3 Pool	25-0017 00
U.S. Lock & Dam No. 4 Pool	79-0005 00


3)	Rivers.


Transition Rivers	From	To
Vermillion	Red Wing City Limits	Confluence with Mississippi
River in Sec. 11  Tl 1	Rl5W


Tributary Rivers
All other non-classified watercourses as shown on county protected waters inventory and map.


B)	Land Use District Descriptions.


1)	Criteria For Designation. The land use districts in Section 50-050 B) 2) of this Division, and the delineation of a land use district's boundaries on the Official Zoning Map, must be consistent with the goals, policies, and objectives of the
 
comprehensive land use plan (when available) and the following criteria, considerations, and objectives.

a)	General Considerations and Criteria for All Land Uses:


i)	Preservation of natural areas;


ii)	Present ownership and development of shoreland areas;


iii)	Shoreland soil types and their engineering capabilities; topographic characteristics;

iv)	Vegetative cover;


v)	In-water physical characteristics, values, and constraints;


vi)	Recreational use of the surface water;


vii)	Road and service center accessibility;


viii) Socioeconomic development needs and plans as they involve water and related land resources;

ix)	The land requirements of industry which, by its nature, requires location in shoreland areas; and,

x)	The necessity to preserve and restore certain areas having significant historical or ecological value.

b)	Factors and Criteria for Planned Unit Developments:


i)	Existing recreational use of the surface water and likely increases in use associated with planned unit developments;

ii)	Physical and aesthetic impacts of increased density;


iii)	Suitability of lands for the planned unit development approach; and,


iv)	Level of current development in the area.


2)	Land Use Districts Descriptions. The land use districts and the allowable land uses therein for the given classifications of waterbodies, shall be properly delineated on the Official Zoning Map and this Chapter for the shorelands of this community. These land use districts are in conformance with the criteria specified in Minnesota Rules, part 6120.3200, subpart 3.
 

3)	Use and Upgrading  oflnconsistent Land Use Districts.


a)	When a revision is proposed to an inconsistent land use district provision, the following additional criteria and procedures shall apply:

i)	For Lakes. When a revision to a land use district designation on a lake is considered, the land use district boundaries and use provisions therein for all the shoreland areas within the jurisdiction of this Division on said lake must be revised to make them substantially compatible with the framework in Section 50-050 B) 1) and 2) of this Division.

ii)	For Rivers and Streams. When a revision to a land use district designation on a river or stream is proposed, the land use district boundaries and the use provisions therein for all shoreland on both sides of the river or stream within the same classification within the jurisdiction of this Division must be revised to make them substantially compatible with the framework in Section 50-050 B) 1) and 2) of this Division. If the same river
classification is contiguous for more than a 5-mile segment, only the shoreland for a distance of 2.5 miles upstream and downstream, or to the class boundary if closer, need be evaluated and revised.

b)	When an interpretation question arises about whether a specific land use fits within a given "use" category, the interpretation shall be made by the Zoning Administrator. When a question arises as to whether a land use district's boundaries are properly delineated on the Official Zoning Map, this decision shall also be made by the Zoning Administrator. These interpretations and/or decisions may be appealed according to Section 90-120 of this Chapter.

c)	When a revision is proposed to an inconsistent land use district provision by an individual party or landowner, this individual party or landowner will only be responsible to provide the supporting and/or substantiating information for the specific parcel in question. The Zoning Administrator is directed to provide such additional information for this waterbody as is necessary to satisfy Items a) and b) above.

d)	The Zoning Administrator must make a detailed finding of fact and conclusion when taking final action that this revision, and the upgrading of any inconsistent land use district designations on said waterbody, are consistent with the enumerated criteria and use provisions of Section 50-050 B) of this Division.

50-60	Zoning and Water Supply/Sanitary Provisions.
 
A)	Lot Area Standards. The lot area (in square feet) for single, duplex, triplex, and quad residential lots created after June 22, 2000 for the lake and river/stream classification will comply with all existing lot area requirements in this Chapter.

B)	Lot Width Standards. The lot width standards (in feet) for single, duplex, triplex, and quad residential lots created after June 22, 2000 for the lake and river/stream classifications are the following:

1)	Unsewered Lakes.


a)	Natural Environment:


Riparian Lots Width	Non-Riparian Lots  Width
 
Single Duplex Triplex
 
200
300
400
500
 
200
400
600
800
 

b)	General Development:


Riparian Lots Width	Non-Riparian Lots  Width
 
Single Duplex Triplex
 
100
180
260
340
 
150
265
375
490
 

2)	Sewered Lakes.


a)	Natural Environment:

Riparian Lots Width	Non-Riparian Lots  Width
 
Single Duplex Triplex
 
125
225
325
425
 
125
220
315
410
 

b)	General Development:


	Riparian Lots	Width	Non-Riparian  Lots	Width
Single	75		75	
Duplex	135		135	
Triplex	195		190	
	255		245	
 
C)	River/Stream Lot Width Standards. There is no minimum lot size requirements for rivers and streams. The lot width standards for single, duplex, triplex and quad residential developments for the six river/stream classifications are:

	Transition	Tributary No Sewer	Sewer
Single	250	700	75
Duplex	375	150	115
Triplex	500	200	150
	625	250	190

D)	Additional Special Provisions.


1)	Residential subdivisions with dwelling unit densities exceeding those in the tables in Section 50-060 B) 1) and 2) of this Division can only be allowed if designed and approved as residential planned unit developments under Section 50-090 of this Division. Only land above the ordinary high water level of public waters can be used to meet lot area standards, and lot width standards must be met at both the ordinary high water level and at the building line. The sewer lot width dimensions in Section 50-060 B) 1) of this Division can only be used if publicly owned sewer system service is available to the property.

2)	Subdivisions of duplexes, triplexes, and quads on natural environment lakes must also meet the following standards:

a)	Each building must be set back at least 200 feet from the ordinary high water level;

b)	Each building must have common sewage treatment and water systems in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building;

c)	Watercraft docking facilities for each lot must be centralized in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building; and

d)	No more than 25 percent of a lake's shoreline can be in duplex, triplex, or quad developments.

3)	Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or as recreation areas for use by owners of non-riparian lots within subdivisions are permissible and must meet or exceed the following standards:

a)	They must meet the width and size requirements for residential lots and be suitable for the intended uses of controlled access lots.
b)	If docking, mooring, or over-water storage of more than six  watercraft is to be allowed at a controlled access lot, then the width of the lot (keeping the same lot depth) must be increased by the percent of the requirements for
 
riparian residential lots for each watercraft beyond six, consistent with the following table:

Controlled Access Lot Frontage Requirements

 
Ratio of lake size to shore length
 
Required increase infrontage
 
  (acres/miles)	(percent) 	
Less than 100	25
100-200	20
201-300	15
301-400	10
Greater than 400	5


c)	They must be jointly owned by all purchasers of lots in the subdivision or by all purchasers of non-riparian lots in the subdivision who are provided riparian access rights on the access lot; and

d)	Covenants or other equally effective legal instruments must be developed that specify which lot owners have authority to use the access lot and what activities are allowed. The activities may include watercraft launching,
loading, storage, beaching, mooring, or docking. They must also include other outdoor recreational activities that do not significantly conflict with general public use of the public water or the enjoyment of normal property rights by adjacent property owners. Examples of the non-significant conflict activities include swimming, sunbathing, or picnicking. The covenants must limit the total number of vehicles allowed to be parked and the total number of watercraft allowed to be continuously moored, docked, or stored over water, and must require centralization of all common facilities and activities in the most suitable locations on the lot to minimize topographic and vegetation alterations. They must also require all parking areas, storage buildings, and other facilities to be screened by vegetation or topography as much as
practical from view from the public water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.

E)	Placement, Design, and Height of Structures.


1)	Placement of Structures on Lots. When more than one setback applies to a site, structures and facilities must be located to meet all setbacks. Where structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides of a proposed building site, structure setbacks may be altered without a variance to conform to the adjoining setbacks from the ordinary high water level, provided the proposed building site is not located in a shore impact zone or in a shoreland bluff impact zone.  All other structures shall be located as follows:
 
a)	Structure and On-site Sewage System Setbacks (in feet) from Ordinary High Water Level.

Setbacks*

 
Class of Public Waters	Structures
 
Sewage
 
 	Unsewered	Sewered	Treatment 	

Lakes
Natural Environment	

150	

150	

150
General Development	75	50	50

Rivers
Remote	

200	

200	

150
Forested and Transition	150	150	100
Tributary	100	50	75

* One water-oriented accessory structure designed in accordance with Section 50-060 E) 2) b) of this Division may be set back a minimum distance of 10
feet from the ordinary high water level.


b)	Additional Structure Setbacks. The following additional structure setbacks apply, regardless of the classification of the water body:


Setback From:	Setback (in.feet)
Top of bluff	30
Unplatted cemetery	50
Right-of-way line of federal, state, or	50
county highway
Right-of-way line of town road, public	20
street, or other public roads or streets not classified


c)	Shoreland Bluff Impact Zone. Structures and accessory facilities, except stairways and landings, must not be placed within shoreland bluff impact zones.

2)	Design Criteria for Structures.
a)	High Water Elevations. Structures must be placed in accordance with any floodplain regulations applicable to the site. Where these controls do not exist, the elevation to which the lowest floor, including basement, is placed or flood­ proofed must be determined as follows:
 

i)	For lakes - by placing the lowest floor at a level at least three feet above the highest known water level, or three feet above the ordinary high water level, whichever is higher; and,

ii)	For rivers and streams - by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the flood of record, if data are available. If data are not available, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the ordinary high water level, or by conducting a technical evaluation to determine effects of proposed construction upon flood stages and flood flows and to establish
a flood protection elevation. Under all three approaches, technical evaluations must be done by a qualified engineer or hydrologist consistent with Minnesota Administrative Rule, Parts 6120.5000 to 6120.6200 governing the management of flood plain areas. If more than one approach is used, the highest flood protection elevation determined must be used for placing, structures and other facilities.

b)	Water-oriented Accessory Structures. Each lot may have one water-oriented accessory structure not meeting the normal structure setback in Section 50- 060 E) of this Division if this water-oriented accessory structure complies with the following provisions:

i)	The structure or facility must not exceed 10 feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than 250 square feet. Detached decks must not exceed 8 feet above grade at any point;

ii)	The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high water level must be at least 10 feet;

iii)	The structure facility must be designed or used for human habitation and must not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities;

iv)	The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must not be enclosed or used as a storage area;

v)	The structure or facility must not be designed or used for human habitation and must not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities; and

vi)	As an alternative for general development and recreational development water-bodies, water-oriented accessory structures used solely for watercraft storage, and including storage of related boating and water­ oriented sporting equipment, may occupy an area up to 400 square feet provided the maximum width of the structure is 20 feet as measured parallel to the configuration of the shoreline.
 

c)	Stairways, Lifts, and Landings. Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and down shoreland bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet the following design requirements:

i)	Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet in width on residential lots.
Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, public open­ space recreational properties, and planned unit developments;

ii)	Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square feet may be used for commercial properties, pubic open-space recreational properties, and planned unit developments;

iii)	Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or landings;


iv)	Stairways, lifts and landings may be either constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion;

v)	Stairways, lifts, and landings must be located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical; and

vi)	Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for physically handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore area, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of sub items (i) to (v) complies with, in addition to, the requirements of Minnesota Rules, Chapter 1341.

d)	Proximity to Unplatted Cemeteries and Significant Historic Sites. No
structure may be placed nearer than 50 feet from the boundary of an unplatted cemetery protected under Minnesota Statutes, section 307.08, unless necessary approval is obtained from the Minnesota State Archaeologist's Office.  No structure may be placed on a significant historic site in a manner that affects the values of the site unless adequate information about the site has been removed and documented in a public repository.

e)	Steep Slopes. The Zoning Administrator must evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary, conditions must be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed
from the surface of public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation.
 

3)	Height of Structures. All structures in the designated shoreland districts must not exceed the maximum height allowed by this Chapter except RM-2 districts in shoreland areas shall not exceed 35 feet in height.

F)	Shoreland Alterations. Alterations of vegetation and topography will be regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, and protect fish and wildlife habitat.

I)	Vegetation Alterations.


a)	Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures and sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and parking areas regulated by Section 50-060 G) of this Division are exempt from the vegetation alteration standards that follow.

b)	Removal or alteration of vegetation except for agricultural and forest management uses as regulated in Section 50-060 I) 2) and 3) of this Division, respectfully, is allowed subject to the following standards:

i)	Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes is not allowed. Intensive vegetation clearing from forest land conservation to another use outside of shoreland areas is allowable only as a conditional use if an erosion control and sedimentation plan is developed and approved by the soil and water conservation district in which the property is located.

ii)	In shore and shoreland bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited clearing of trees and/or shrubs and cutting, pruning, and trimming of trees is allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings, picnic areas, access paths, livestock watering areas, beach watercraft access areas, and permitted water-oriented, accessory structures or facilities, provided that,

a.	The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is not substantially reduced;

b.	Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is preserved; and


c.	The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards.

2)	Topographic Alterations/Grading  and Filling.
 

a)	Grading and filling and excavations necessary for the construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways under validly issued construction permits for these facilities do not require the issuance of a separate grading and filling permit. However, the grading and filling standards in this Division must be incorporated into the issuance of permits for construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways.

b)	Public roads and parking areas are regulated by Section 50-060 G) of this Division.

c)	Notwithstanding items a) and b) above, a grading and filling permit will be required for:

i)	The movement of more than I 0 cubic yards of material on steep slopes or within shore or shoreland bluff impact zones; and
ii)	The movement of more than 50 cubic yards of material outside of steep slopes and shore and shoreland bluff impact zones.

d)	The following considerations and conditions must be adhered to during the issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits, conditional use permits, variances and subdivision approvals:

i)	Grading or filling in any type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 wetland must be evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity would affect the following functional qualities of the wetland*:

a.	Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention;


b.	Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage;


c.	Fish and wildlife habitat;


d.	Recreational use;


e.	Shoreline or bank stabilization; and,


f.	Noteworthiness, including special qualities such as historic significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and animals, or others.

*This evaluation must also include a determination of whether the wetland alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews, or approvals by other local, state, or federal agencies, such as a watershed district, the
 
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, or the United States Army Corps of Engineers.  The applicant will be so advised.

ii)	Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible;

iii)	Mulches or similar materials must be used, where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover must be established as soon as possible;

iv)	Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach any surface water feature must be used;

v)	Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts and the Natural Resources Conservation Service;
vi)	Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope;

vii)	Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes must be reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope stability and must not create finished slopes of 30 percent or greater;

viii) Fill or evacuated material must not be placed in shoreland bluff impact zones;

ix)	Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public waters must first be authorized by the commissioner under Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.245 and 103G.405;

x)	Alterations of topography must only be allowed if they are accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties; and

xi)	Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if the finished slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, the land­ ward extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the ordinary high water
level, and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level does not exceed three feet.

e)	Connections to public waters.  Excavations where the intended purpose is connection to public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and harbors, must be controlled by local shoreland controls. Permission for excavations
 
may be given only after the commissioner has approved the proposed connection to public waters.

G)	Placement and Design of New Roads, Driveways, and Parking Areas.


I)  Public and private roads, driveways, and parking areas must be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from public waters.  Documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that all roads and parking areas are designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation district, or other applicable technical materials.


2)	Roads, driveways, and parking areas must meet structure setbacks and must not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist.  Ifno alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas and must be designed to minimize adverse impacts.
3)	Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this subpart are met.  For private facilities, the grading and filling provision of Section 50-060 F) 2) of this Division must be met.

H)	Stormwater Management. The following general and specific standards shall apply:


I)	General Standards:


a)	When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands, and vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and retain stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters.

b)	Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes.  Disturbed areas must be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to retain sediment on the site.

c)	When development density, topographic features, and soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and ponds may be used.  Preference must be given to designs using surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and man-made materials and facilities.

2)	Specific Standards:
 

a)	Impervious surface coverage of the lot area must not exceed the following:


Zone	Percent of Lot Area
A, AR, AC	10
R-1, R-2, RF	25
R-3, RM-I, RM-2, B-1, CIVIC	60
B-2, B-2A, B-3, I-1, MC, MCT	70
I-2	50


b)	When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management, documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that they are designed and installed consistent with the field office technical guide of the local soil and water conservation districts.

c)	New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters must provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before discharge.

I)	Special Provisions  for Commercial, Industrial, Public/Semipublic,  Agricultural, Forestry and Extractive Uses and Mining of Metallic Minerals and Peat.

I)	Standards for Commercial, Industrial, Public, and Semipublic Uses.


a)	Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public, or semipublic uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public waters may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters.  Those uses with water-oriented needs must meet the following standards:

i)	In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks, and other zoning standards in this Chapter, the uses must be designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and structures;

ii)	Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons must centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need; and

iii)	Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the following general standards:

a.	No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be placed in or upon public waters.  Signs conveying information or safety messages may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority or under a permit issued by the county sheriff;
 

b.	Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the shore impact zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary to convey needed information. They must only convey the location and name of the establishment and the general types of goods or services available. The signs must not contain other detailed information such as product brands and prices, must not be located higher than I 0 feet above the ground, and must not exceed 32 square feet in size. If illuminated by artificial lights, the lights must be shielded or directed to prevent illumination out across public waters; and

c.	Other outside lighting may be located within the shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct illumination out across public waters.  This does not preclude use of navigational lights.

2)	Agriculture Use Standards.


a)	General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation plan (Resource Management Systems) consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation district or the Natural Resources Conservation Service, as provided by a qualified individual or agency.  The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the ordinary high water level;

b)	Animal feedlots must meet the following standards:


i)	New feedlots must not be located in the shoreland of watercourses or in shoreland bluff impact zones and must meet a minimum setback of 300 feet from the ordinary high water level of all public waters basins; and

ii)	Modifications or expansions to existing feedlots that are located within 300 feet from the ordinary high water level or within a bluff impact zone are allowed if they do not further encroach into the existing ordinary high water level setback or encroach on shoreland bluff impact zones.

iii)	A Certificate of Compliance must be obtained by the owner or operator of an animal feedlot when required by Minnesota Rules Chapter 7020.

3)	Forest Management Standards.
 
a)	The harvesting of timber and associated reforestation must be conducted consistent with the provisions of the Minnesota Non point Source Pollution Assessment-Forestry and the provisions of the Water Quality in Forest Management "Best Management Practices in Minnesota".

J)	Water Supply and Sewage Treatment.


1)	Water Supply.  Any public or private supply of water for domestic purposes must meet or exceed standards for water quality of the Minnesota Department of Health and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.

2)	Sewage Treatment. Any premises used for human occupancy must be provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment, as follows:

a)	Publicly owned sewer systems must be used where available.


b)	All private sewage treatment systems must meet or exceed the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's standards for individual sewage treatment systems contained in the Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080", a copy of which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter.

c)	On-site sewage treatment systems must be set back from the ordinary high water level in accordance with the setbacks continued in Section 50-060 E) 1) of this Division.

d)	All proposed sites for individual sewage treatment systems shall be evaluated in accordance with the criteria in i) a. through d. below.  If the determination of a site's suitability cannot be made with publicly available, existing information, it shall then be the responsibility of the applicant to provide sufficient soil borings and percolation tests from on-site field investigations.

i)	Evaluation criteria:


a.	Depth to the highest known or calculated ground water table or bedrock;

b.	Soil conditions, properties, and permeability;


c.	Slope; and


d.	The existence of lowlands, local surface depressions, and rock outcrops.
 
e)	Nonconforming sewage treatment systems shall be regulated and upgraded in accordance with Section 50-070 A) 2) of this Division.

K)	Trail Placement and Design.


1)	Trails intended for use by pedestrians, bikers, in-line skaters, and other specialty uses shall be exempted from the other provisions of this Chapter provided the following provisions are met in the design and maintenance of the trails:

a)	Trails shall be set back at least 25 feet from the ordinary high water level when possible.  In those areas where this setback cannot be met and no other
feasible alternative exists, the trail may be allowed closer provided that as little vegetation is removed as possible and minimal siltation occurs during and
after construction.  In areas where the trail directly abuts a body of water, extensive measures must be taken to ensure bank stability.
b)	Intensive vegetation clearing may only occur in the direct pathway of the trail.
Vegetation alongside the trail shall not be intensively cleared.


c)	Limited clearing of trees and shrubs shall be allowed along the trail provided that the screening of structures and the trail as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is not substantially reduced and existing shading of water surfaces is preserved.  These provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards.

d)	Trails shall be of minimum width necessary to accommodate the users of the trail to minimize the amount of impervious surface.

e)	Grading, filling, and excavations necessary for the construction of trails under validly issued construction permits for any trails do not require the issuance of a separate grading and filling permit.

f)	Grading or filling in any type of wetland must be evaluated to determine how extensively the trail would affect the following functional qualities of the wetland*:
i)	Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention;


ii)	Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage;


iii)	Fish and wildlife habitat;


iv)	Shoreline or bank stabilization; and


v)	Noteworthiness, including special qualities such as historic significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and animals, or others.
 

*This evaluation must also include a determination of whether the wetland alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews, or approvals by other local, state, or federal agencies such as a county government, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, or the United States Army Corps of Engineers. The applicant will be so advised.

g)	Construction and maintenance of the trail must be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible;

h)	Mulches or similar materials must be used for temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover must be established as soon as possible;

i)	Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach any surface water feature must be used;

j)	Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts and the Natural Resources Conservation Service;

k)	Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope;

1)	Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes must be reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope stability and must not create finished slopes of 25 percent or greater;

m)	Fill or excavated material must not be placed in shoreland bluff impact zones;


n)	Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public waters must first be authorized by the commissioner under Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.245;

o)	Alterations of topography must only be allowed if they are necessary and do not adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties; and

p)	Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if the finished slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, the landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the ordinary high water level, and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level does not exceed three feet.

L)	Conditions Attached to Conditional Use Permits. The City Council upon consideration of the criteria listed above and the purposes of this Chapter, shall attach
 
such conditions to the issuance of the conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Chapter.  Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

I)  Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level;


2)	Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the requirement that additional vegetation be planted; and

3)	Special provisions for the location, design, and use of structures, sewage treatment systems, watercraft launching and docking areas, and vehicle parking areas.

50-70	Nonconformities.


A)	Construction on Nonconforming Lots of Record.


I)	Lots of record in the office of the county recorder on the date of enactment of local shoreland controls that do not meet the requirements of Section 50-060 A) of this Division may be allowed as building sites without variances from lot size requirements provided the use is permitted in the zoning district, the lot has been in separate ownership from abutting lands at all times since it became
substandard, was created compliant with official controls in effect at the time, and sewage treatment and setback requirements of this Chapter are met.

2)	A variance from setback requirements must be obtained before any use, sewage treatment system, or building permit is issued for a lot.  In evaluating the variance, the Board of Adjustments shall consider sewage treatment and water supply capabilities or constraints of the lot and shall deny the variance if adequate facilities cannot be provided.

3)	If, in a group of two or more contiguous lots under the same ownership, any individual lot does not meet the requirements of Section 50-060 A) of this Division, the lot must not be considered as a separate parcel of land for the purposes of sale or development.  The lot must be combined with the one or more contiguous lots so they equal one or more parcels of land, each meeting the requirements of Section 50-060 A) of this Division as much as possible.

B)	Additions/Expansions  to Nonconforming Structures.


I)	All additions or expansions to the outside dimensions of an existing
nonconforming structure must meet the setback, height, and other requirements of Section 50-060 A) of this Division.  Any deviation from these requirements must be authorized by a variance pursuant to Section 50-040 C) of this Division.
 
2)	Deck additions may be allowed without a variance to a structure not meeting the required setback from the ordinary high water level if all of the following criteria and standards are met:

a)	The structure existed on the date the structure setbacks were established;


b)	A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing ordinary high water level setback of the structure;

c)	The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level does not exceed 15 percent of the existing setback of the structure from the ordinary high water level or does not encroach closer than 30 feet, whichever is more restrictive; and.

d)	The deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed or screened.


C)	Nonconforming Sewage Treatment Systems.


1)	A sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of Section 50-060 J) of this Division must be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a permit or variance of any type is required for any improvement on, or use of, the property.  For the purposes of this provision, a sewage treatment system shall not be considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is the sewage treatment system's improper setback from the ordinary high water level.

2)	The governing body of the City of Red Wing has by formal resolution has notified the commissioner of its program to identify nonconforming sewage treatment systems.  The City of Red Wing will require upgrading or replacement of any nonconforming system identified by this program within a reasonable period of time which will not exceed two years.  Sewage systems installed according to all applicable local shoreland management standards adopted under pertinent Minnesota Statutes and Rules in effect at the time of installation may be considered as conforming unless they are determined to be failing, except that systems using cesspools, leaching pits, seepage pits, or other deep disposal methods, or systems with less soil treatment area separation above groundwater than required by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's Chapter 7080 for design of on-site sewage treatment systems, shall be considered nonconforming.

50-80	Subdivision/Platting  Provisions.


A)	Land Suitability.  Each lot created through subdivision, including planned unit developments authorized under Section 50-090 of this Division, must be suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration.  Suitability analysis by the local unit of government shall consider susceptibility to flooding, existence of
 
wetlands, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, steep topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities, near-shore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation, important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of significant historical sites, or any feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community.

B)	Subdivision/platting of lands under the control of this Chapter shall be subdivided in accordance with Chapter 12 of the City Code.

C)	Additional Information Requirements.   In addition to the information requested on preliminary plats, the following information shall also be provided for subdivisions
that may fall under the control of this Chapter:


1)	The surface water features required in Minnesota Statutes, Section 505.021 Subdivision 1, to be shown on plats, obtained from United States Geological Survey quadrangle topographic maps or more accurate sources;

2)  A line or contour representing the ordinary high water level, the "toe" and the "top" of bluffs, and the minimum building setback distances from the top of the bluff and the lake or stream.

D)  Controlled Access or Recreational Lots. Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or for recreational use areas for use by non-riparian lots within a subdivision must meet or exceed the sizing criteria in Section 50-060 C) of this Division.

50-90	Planned Unit Developments  (PUD's).


A)	Types of PUD's Permissible.  Planned unit developments  are allowed as described in Division 47 of this Chapter.

B)	Processing of PUD's. Planned unit developments must be processed as described in Division 47 of this Chapter.

C)	Application for a PUD.  The applicant for a PUD must contact the Zoning Administrator for a proper application as described in Division 47 of this Chapter.

D)	Site "Suitable Area" Evaluation.  Proposed new or expansions to existing PUD's must be evaluated using the following procedures and standards to determine the suitable area for the dwelling/unit site density evaluation in Section 50-090 E) of this Division.
 
1)	The project parcel must be divided into tiers by locating one or more lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary high water level at the following intervals, proceeding landward:

Shoreland  Tier Dimensions
General Development Lakes	Unsewered (ft.)	Sewered (ft.)
- First Tier	200	200
- Second and Additional Tiers	267	200
Recreational Development Lakes	267	267
Natural Environment Lakes	400	320
All River Classes	300	300

2)  The suitable area within each tier is next calculated by excluding from the tier area all wetlands, bluffs, or land below the ordinary high water level of public waters. This suitable area and the proposed project are then subjected to either the residential or commercial planned unit development density evaluation steps to arrive at an allowable number of dwelling units or sites.

E)	Residential and Commercial PUD Density Evaluation.   The procedures for determining the "base" density of PUD 's and density increase multipliers are as follows:  Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to any other tier further from the waterbody, but must not be transferred to any other closer tier.

1)	Residential PUD "Base" Density Evaluation.


a)	The suitable area within each tier is divided by the single residential lot size standard for lakes or, for rivers, the single residential lot width standard times the tier depth, unless the local unit of government has specified an alternative minimum lot size for rivers which shall then be used to yield a base density of dwelling units or sites for each tier.  Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for the residential planned unit developments are then compared with the tier, density, and suitability analyses herein and the design criteria in Section 50-090 F) of this Division.

2)	Commercial PUD "Base" Density Evaluation.


a)	Determine the average inside living area size of dwelling units or sites within each tier, including both existing and proposed units and sites. Computation of inside living area sizes need not include decks, patios, stoops, steps, garages, or porches and basements, unless they are habitable space.

b)	Select the appropriate floor area ratio from the following table:


Commercial Planned  Unit Development Floor Area Ratios*
 
Public Waters Classes

 
Average Unit Floor Area (sq. ft.)
 
Sewered general	Second and additional development lakes;	tiers on unsewered first tier on unsewered	general development general development	lakes; recreational lakes; urban,	development lakes; agricultural, tributary	transition and forested
 
Natural environment lakes and remote river segments
 
 	river segments	river segments



















* For average unit floor areas less than shown, use the floor area ratios listed for 200 square feet.  For areas greater than shown, use the ratios listed for 1,500 square feet.  For recreational camping areas, use the ratios listed at 400 square feet.  Manufactured home sites in recreational camping areas shall use a ratio equal to the size of the manufactured home, or if unknown, the ratio listed for 1,000 square feet.

c)	Multiply the suitable area within each tier by the floor area ratio to yield total floor area for each tier allowed to be used for dwelling units or sites.

d)	Divide the total floor area by tier computed in Item c) above by the average inside living area size determined in Item a) above.  This yields a base number of dwelling units and sites for each tier.

e)	Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for the commercial planned unit development are then compared with the tier, density and suitability analysis herein and the design criteria in Section 50-090 F) of this Division.

3)	Density Increase Multipliers.
 
a)	Increases to the dwelling unit or dwelling site base densities previously determined are allowable if the dimensional standards in Section 50-060 of this Division are met or exceeded and the design criteria in Section 50-090 F)
of this Division are satisfied.  The allowable density increases in Item b) below will only be allowed if structure setbacks from the ordinary high water level are increased to at least 50 percent greater than the minimum setback, or the impact on the waterbody is reduced an equivalent amount through vegetative management, topography, or additional means acceptable to the local unit of government and the setback is at least 25 percent greater than the minimum setback.

b)	Allowable Dwelling Unit or Dwelling Site Density Increases for Planned Unit Developments:


Density Evaluation Tiers	Maximum Density Increase within Each Tier
 
First Second Third Fourth Fifth
 
50 percent
100 percent
200 percent
200 percent
200 percent
 

F)	Other Requirements.


I)   Open Space Requirements.   The shore impact zone, based on normal structure setbacks, must be included as open space.  For residential PUD's, at least 50 percent of the shore impact zone area of existing developments or at least 70 percent of the shore impact zone area of new developments must be preserved in its natural or existing state.  For commercial PUD's, at least 50 percent of the shore impact zone must be preserved in its natural state.

2)	Erosion Control and Stormwater Management.   Erosion control and stormwater management plans must be developed and the PUD must:

a)	Be designed, and the construction managed, to minimize the likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after construction.  This must be accomplished by limiting the amount and length of time of bare ground exposure.  Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment facilities, vegetated buffer strips, or other appropriate techniques must be used to minimize erosion impacts on surface water features.  Erosion control plans approved by a soil and water conservation district may be required if project size and site physical characteristics warrant; and

b)	Be designed and constructed to effectively manage reasonably expected quantities and qualities of stormwater runoff.  Impervious surface coverage within any tier must not exceed 25 percent of the tier area, except that for
 
commercial PUD's, 35 percent impervious surface coverage may be allowed in the first tier of federal development lakes with an approved stormwater management plan and consistent with Section 50-060 F) of this Division.

3)	Centralization and Design of Facilities.  Centralization and design of facilities and structures must be done according to the following standards:

a)	Planned unit developments must be connected to publicly owned water supply and sewer systems, if available.  On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems must be centralized and designed and installed to meet or exceed applicable standards or rules of the Minnesota Department of Health and Section 50-060 E) and J) of this Division.  On-site sewage treatment systems must be located on the most suitable areas of the development, and sufficient lawn area free of limiting factors must be provided for a replacement soil treatment system for each sewage system;

b)	Dwelling units or sites must be clustered into one or more groups and located on suitable areas of the development.  They must be designed and located to meet or exceed the following dimensional standards for the relevant shoreland classification, setback from the ordinary high water level, elevation above the surface water features, and maximum height.  Setbacks from the ordinary high water level must be increased in accordance with Section 50-090 E) 3) of this Division for developments with density increases;

c)	Shore recreation facilities, including but not limited to swimming areas, docks, and watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps, must be centralized and located in areas suitable for them.  Evaluation of suitability must include consideration of land slope, water depth, vegetation, soils, and depth to groundwater and bedrock, or other relevant factors.  The number of spaces provided for continuous beaching, mooring, or docking of watercraft must not exceed one for each allowable dwelling unit or site in the first tier (notwithstanding existing mooring sites in an existing commercially used harbor).  Launching ramp facilities, including a small dock for loading and unloading equipment, may be provided for use by occupants of dwelling units or sites located in other tiers;

d)	Structures, parking areas, and other facilities must be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or other means acceptable to the local unit of government, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.  Vegetative and topographic screening must be preserved, if existing, or may be required to be provided; and,
 
e)	Water-oriented accessory structures and facilities may be allowed if they meet or exceed design standards contained in Section 60-060 E) of this Division and are centralized.

G)	Conversions.  Local governments may allow existing resorts or other land uses and facilities to be converted to residential planned unit developments if all of the following standards are met:

I)  Proposed conversions must be initially evaluated using the same procedures for residential planned unit developments involving all new construction. Inconsistencies between existing features of the development and these standards must be identified.

2)	Deficiencies involving water supply and sewage treatment, structure color, impervious coverage, open space, and shore recreation facilities must be corrected as part of the conversion or as specified in the conditional use permit.

3)	Shore and bluff impact zone deficiencies must be evaluated and reasonable improvements made as part of the conversion.  These improvements must include, where applicable, the following:

a)	Removal of extraneous buildings, docks, or other facilities that no longer need to be located in shore or bluff impact zones:

b)	Remedial measures to correct erosion sites and improve vegetative cover and screening of buildings and other facilities as viewed from the water; and,

c)	If existing dwelling units are located in shore or bluff impact zones, conditions are attached to approvals of conversions that preclude exterior expansions in any dimension or substantial alterations.  The conditions must also provide for future relocation of dwelling units, where feasible, to other locations, meeting all setback and elevation requirements when they are rebuilt or replaced.

4)	Existing dwelling unit or dwelling site densities that exceed standards in Section 50-090 E) of this Division may be allowed to continue but must not be allowed to be increased, either at the time of conversion or in the future.  Efforts must be made during the conversion to limit impacts of high densities by recruiting seasonal use, improving vegetative screening, centralizing shore recreation facilities, installing new sewage treatment systems, or other means.
 
ARTICLE III- OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS DIVISION 52: FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
52-010  Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact and Purpose.

A)	Statutory Authorization.  The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in Minnesota Statutes Chapters I 03F and 462, delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.  Therefore, the City Council of
Red Wing, Minnesota, does ordain as follows:


B)	Findings of Fact.


I)	The flood hazard areas of the City of Red Wing, Minnesota, are subject to periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

2)	Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards. This Division is based upon a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.

3)	National Flood Insurance Program Compliance.  This Division is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 59-78, as amended, so as to maintain the community's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.

C)	Statement of Purpose:  It is the purpose of this Division to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those losses described in Section 1.21 by provisions contained herein.

52-020	General Provisions.

A)	Lands to Which this Division Applies.  This Division shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Red Wing shown on the Official Zoning Map and/or the attachments thereto as being located within the boundaries of the Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General Flood Plain Districts.

B)	Establishment of Official Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map, together with all materials attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Division. The attached material shall include the Flood Insurance Study for Goodhue County, Minnesota, and Incorporated Areas and Flood Insurance Rate Map Panels therein numbered 27049C0045E,27049C0065E,27049Cl60E,27049C0167E,27049C0170E,
27049C0178E,27049C0179E,27049C0180E,27049C0185E,27049C0186E,
 
27049C0190E, 27049C0195E, 27049C0205E, and 27049C0215E, all dated September 25,
2009, and prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  The Official Zoning Map shall be on file in the offices of the Red Wing City Clerk and the Red Wing Zoning Administrator.

C)	Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.  The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from
designation of a floodway.  Within the AO Zone shown on Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel number 27049C0190E, as adopted in Section 2.2, the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than two feet above the highest adjacent grade of an existing structure, a proposed structure or a proposed structural addition.

D)	Interpretation.


I)	In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Division shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the City Council and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.

2)  The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the Official Zoning Map.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the Official Zoning Map, as for example
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions and there is a formal appeal of the decision of the Zoning Administrator, the Board of Adjustments shall make the necessary interpretation.  All decisions will be based on elevations on the regional (100-year) flood profile, the ground elevations that existed on the site at the time the Community adopted its initial floodplain ordinance or on the date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map showing the area within the I 00-year floodplain if earlier, and other available technical data. Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Board of Adjustments and to submit technical evidence.

E)	Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.  It is not intended by this Division to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this Division imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Division shall prevail.  All other ordinances inconsistent with this Division are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.

F)	Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.  This Division does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages.  This Division shall not create liability on the part of the City of Red Wing or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Division or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
 
G)	Severability.  See Section 05-100 of the Red Wing Zoning Code.


H)	Definitions.  Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Division shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this Division its most reasonable application.

I)	Accessory Structure or Facility. Any building or structure on the same log, or part of the main building subordinate to the principal building and its primary/permitted use.

2)	Accessory Use. A use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and (except in the case of accessory off-street parking spaces or loading) located on the same buildable lot as the principal use to which it is related.

3)	Basement. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level. A basement shall not be counted as a story.

4)	Conditional Use. A use that is not appropriate generally or a use that is not appropriate generally without restriction throughout the zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, is not detrimental to public health, safety, or general welfare.

5)	Equal Degree of Encroachment. A method of determining the location of floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.

6)	Flood. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.

7)	Floodway. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge

8)	Flood Frequency. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.

9)	Flood Fringe. That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.  Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the Flood Insurance Study for Goodhue County, Minnesota and Incorporated Areas.

I 0) Floodplain. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
 
11)	Flood Proofing. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.

12)	Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor.

13)	Manufactured Home. Means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and contains the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems in it. Manufactured home includes any accessory structure that is an addition or supplement to the manufactured home and, when installed, becomes a part of the manufactured home.

14)	Obstruction. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.

15)	Principal Building. A building in which is conducted the main or primary use of the lot upon which it is situated.

16)	Reach. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction.  In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.

17)	Recreational Vehicle. Any vehicle or structure designed and used for temporary, seasonal human living quarters which meets all of the following qualifications: (a) is not used as the permanent residence of the owner or occupant; (b) is used for temporary living quarters by the owner or occupant while engaged in recreational or vacation activities; (c) is towed or self-propelled on public streets or highways incidental to such recreational or vacation activities; (d) examples of such vehicles include van campers, tent camping trailers, self-contained travel trailers, pickup campers, camping buses, and self-contained, self-propelled truck chassis mounted vehicles providing living accommodations.

18)	Regional Flood. A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year
 
recurrence interval.  Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood" used in the Flood Insurance Study.

19)	Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.  Within the AO Zone shown on Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel number 27049C0190E, as adopted in Section 2.2, the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than two feet above the highest adjacent grade of an existing structure, or a proposed structure, or a proposed structural addition.

20)	Structure. Anything constructed or erected the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground, except aerial or underground utility lines, such as sewer, electric, telephone, telegraph, gas lines, towers, poles, and other supporting facilities.

21)	Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the estimated market value, as indicated in the records of the County Assessor, of the structure before the damage occurred.

22)	Substantial Improvement. Within any consecutive 365-day period, reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the estimated market value, as indicated in the records of the County Assessor, of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term does not, however, include either:

a)	Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or,

b)	Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure."  For the purpose of this Division, "historic structure" shall be as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1.

23)	Variance. A relaxation by the Board of Adjustments of the dimensional regulations of this Chapter  where such action will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of actions or the situation of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this Chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
 
I)	Annexations.  The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference into 52-020 B) above may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate boundaries of the
City of Red Wing at the time of adoption of Ordinance No. 459, Third Series.   If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the City of Red Wing after the date of adoption  of Ordinance  No.  459,  Third  Series (September  14, 2009),  the newly  annexed floodplain lands shall be subject to the provisions  of this Division immediately upon the date of annexation into the City of Red Wing.

52-030  Establishment of Zoning Districts.

A)	Districts.


I)	Floodway District.  The Floodway District shall include those areas designated as floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Map Panels adopted in 52-020 B) and the AO Zone shown on Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel number 27049C0190E as adopted in Section 52-020 B).

2)	Flood-Fringe District.  The Flood-Fringe District shall include those areas designated as floodway fringe.  The Flood-Fringe District shall include those areas shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as adopted in 52-020 B) as being within Zone AE but being located outside of the floodway.

3)	General Floodplain District.  The General Floodplain District shall include those areas designated as Zone A and Zone AE without a floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in Section 52-020 B).

B)	Compliance:  No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this Division and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this Division.  Within the Floodway, Flood-Fringe and General Floodplain Districts, all uses not listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in Sections 52-040, 52-050 and 52-060 that follow, respectively, shall be prohibited.  In addition, a caution is provided here that:

I)	New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain recreational vehicles are subject to the general provisions of this Division and specifically Section 52-090.

2)	Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal maintenance and repair, or repair after damage to existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the general provisions of this Division and specifically Section 52-110.

3)	As-built elevations for elevated or flood-proofed structures must be certified by ground surveys and flood-proofing techniques must be designed and certified by a
 
registered professional engineer or architect as specified in the general provisions of this Division and specifically as stated in Section 52-100.

52-040  Floodway District (FW).

A)	Permitted Uses.


I)	General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.

2)	Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport landing strips.


3)	Private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single- or multiple-purpose recreational trails.

4)	Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.


B)	Standards for Floodway Permitted Uses.


I)	The use shall have a low flood damage potential.


2)	The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if one exists.


3)	The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood elevations and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations or storage of materials or equipment.

C)	Conditional Uses.


I)	Structures accessory to the uses listed in Section 52-040 A) above and the uses listed below.

2)	Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other materials.


3)	Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water control structures.


4)	Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines.


5)	Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.


6)	Placement of fill or construction of fences.
 
7)	Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of record or in existing or new subdivisions or commercial- or condominium-type campgrounds, subject to the exemptions and provisions of Section 52-090Division.

8)	Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes and floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect individual structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the 10-year frequency flood event.

D)	Standards for Floodway Conditional Uses.


1)	All Uses.  No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use that will cause any increase in the stage of the 100- year or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.

2)	All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the procedures and standards contained in Section 52-100 of this Division.

3)	The conditional use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning district if one exists.


4)	Fill.


a)	Fill, dredge spoil and all other similar materials deposited or stored in the floodplain shall be protected from erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.

b)	Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations shall not be allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan is submitted which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to the plan.

c)	As an alternative, and consistent with Subsection b) immediately above, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel operations may allow temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials which would have caused an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional flood but only after the City Council has received an appropriate plan which assures the removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time available.  The conditional use permit must be title registered with the property in the Office of the County Recorder.

5)	Accessory  Structures.


a)	Accessory structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
 
b)	Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of floodwaters:

i)	Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and

ii)	So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.

c)	Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or structurally dry flood proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood-proofing classifications in the State Building Code.  As an alternative, an accessory structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood-proofing classification in the State Building Code provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size at its largest projection, and for a detached garage, the detached garage must be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage.  All flood-proofed accessory structures must meet the following additional standards:

i)	The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;

ii)	Any mechanical and utility equipment in a structure must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly flood proofed; and,

iii)	To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be a minimum of two "automatic" openings in the outside walls of the structure having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding.  There must be openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.

d)	Within an AO Zone, require that adequate drainage paths are placed on slopes around the proposed accessory structure to guide floodwaters around and away from the proposed accessory structure.

6)	Storage of Materials and Equipment:


a)	The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.
 
b)	Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the City Council.

7)	Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters shall be subject to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 103G.  Community-wide structural works for flood control intended to remove areas from the regulatory floodplain shall not be allowed in the floodway.

8)	A levee, dike or flood wall constructed in the floodway shall not cause an increase to the I 00-year or regional flood and the technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.

52-050  Flood-Fringe District (FF).

A)	Permitted Uses.  Permitted uses shall be those uses ofland or structures listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district(s).  Ifno preexisting, underlying zoning use districts exist, then any residential or nonresidential structure or use of a structure or land shall be a permitted use in the Flood Fringe District provided such use does not constitute a public nuisance.  All permitted uses shall comply with the standards for Flood Fringe  District "Permitted Uses" listed in Section 55-50 B) and the "Standards for all Flood Fringe Uses" listed in Section 52-050.

B)	Standards for Flood-Fringe Permitted Uses.


I)	All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.  The finished fill elevation for structures shall be no lower than I foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least 15 feet beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.

2)	As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory structures that constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed 500 square feet at its largest projection may be internally flood proofed in accordance with Section 52-040.

3)	The cumulative placement of fill where at any one time in excess of 1,000 cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be allowable only as a conditional use, unless said fill is specifically intended to elevate a structure in accordance with Section 52-050 of this Division.

4)	The storage of any materials or equipment shall be elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation.

5)	The provisions of Section 52-050 of this Division shall apply.
 
C)	Conditional Uses.  Any structure that is not elevated on fill or flood proofed in accordance with Section 52-050 B) 1-2) or any use ofland that does not comply with the standards in Section 52-050 B) 3-4) shall only be allowable as a conditional use.  An application for a conditional use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and evaluation procedures specified in Sections 52-040, 52-050 and 52-100 of this Division.

D)	Standards for Flood-Fringe Conditional Uses.


1)	Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be utilized to elevate a structure's lowest floor above the regulatory flood protection elevation.  These alternative methods may include the use of stilts, pilings, parallel walls, etc., or above grade, enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck-under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be considered above grade and not a structure's basement
or lowest floor if:


a)	the enclosed area is above grade on at least one side of the structure;


b)	it is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood-resistant materials; and

c)	it is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The above­ noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the following additional standards:

i)	Design and Certification. The structure's design and as-built condition must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as being in compliance with the general design standards of the State Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or be designed to prevent floodwater from entering or accumulating within these components during times of flooding.

ii)	Specific Standards for Above-grade, Enclosed Areas. Above grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck-under garages must be designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:

a.	A minimum area of openings in the walls where internal flooding is to be used as a flood-proofing technique.  There shall be a minimum of two openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.  The automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net area would suffice.
 
The automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters without any form of human intervention; and

b.	That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials in accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State Building Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles  or storage.

2)	Basements, as defined by Section 52-020 of this Division, shall be subject to the following.

a)	Residential basement construction shall not be allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation.

b)	Nonresidential basements may be allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation provided the basement is structurally dry flood-proofed in accordance with 52-050 of this Division.

3)	All areas of nonresidential structures including basements to be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be flood proofed in accordance with the structurally dry flood-proofing classifications in the State Building Code. Structurally dry flood proofing must meet the FP-1 or FP-2 flood-proofing classification in the State Building Code and this shall require making the structure
watertight with the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.  Structures flood proofed to the
FP-3 or FP-4 classification shall not be permitted.


4)	When at any one time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other similar material is located on a parcel for such activities as on-site storage, landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads, dredge spoil disposal or construction of flood control works, an erosion/sedimentation control plan must be submitted unless the community is enforcing a state-approved shoreland management ordinance.  In the absence of a state-approved shoreland ordinance, the plan must clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize the fill on-site for a flood event at a minimum of the 100-year or regional flood event.  The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the City Council.  The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the material from the floodplain if adequate flood-warning time exists.

5)	Storage of Materials and Equipment.
 
a)	The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.

b)	Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the City Council.

6)	The provisions of Section 52-050 of this Division shall also apply.


E)	Standards for All Flood-Fringe Uses.


I)	All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation.  If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board of Adjustments must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate flood-warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.

2)	Commercial Uses. Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks, and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood-warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be inundated to a depth and velocity such that when multiplying the depth (in feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the product number exceeds four upon occurrence of the regional flood.

3)	Manufacturing and Industrial Uses. Measures shall be taken to minimize interference with normal plant operations especially along streams having protracted flood durations.  Certain accessory land uses such as yards and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements set out in Section 52-050 above.  In considering permit applications, due consideration shall be given to the needs of an industry whose business requires that it be located in floodplain areas.

4)	Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method.  The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the
I 00-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.

5)	Floodplain developments shall not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse or drainage system
 
where a floodway or other encroachment limit has not been specified on the Official Zoning Map.

6)	Standards for recreational vehicles are contained in Section 52-090.


7)	All manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement.  Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.  This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.

52-060	General Floodplain District.

A)	Permissible Uses.


1)	The uses listed in Section 52-040 A) of this Division shall be permitted uses.


2)	All other uses shall be subject to the floodway/flood-fringe evaluation criteria pursuant to Section 52-060 below. Section 52-040 shall apply if the proposed use is in the Floodway District and Section 52-050 shall apply if the proposed use is in the Flood-Fringe District.

B)	Procedures for Floodway and Flood-Fringe Determinations within the General Flood Plain District.

I)	Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval within the General Flood Plain District, the applicant shall be required to furnish such of the following information as is deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator for the determination of the regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the proposed use is within the Floodway or Flood-Fringe District.

a)	A typical valley cross section(s) showing the channel of the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel, cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high-water information.

b)	Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground, pertinent  structure, fill, or storage elevations, the size, location, and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site, and the location and elevations of streets.

c)	Photographs showing existing land uses, vegetation upstream and downstream, and soil types.

d)	Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream for at least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed development.
 

2)	The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of the above information to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in the Floodway or Flood-Fringe District and to determine the regulatory flood protection elevation.  Procedures consistent with Minnesota Regulations  1983, Parts 6120.5000-6120.6200 and 44 Code of Federal Regulations Part 65 shall be followed in this expert evaluation.  The designated engineer or expert is strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed technical evaluation methodology with the respective Department of Natural Resources' Area Hydrologist prior to commencing the analysis.  The designated engineer or expert shall:

a)	Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.


b)	Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank areas.

c)	Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional flood without increasing flood stages more than.5 foot. A lesser stage increase than .5 foot shall be required if, as a result of the additional stage increase, increased flood damages would result.  An equal degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach shall be assumed in computing floodway boundaries.

3)	The Zoning Administrator shall present the technical evaluation and findings of the designated engineer or expert to the City Council.  The City Council must formally accept the technical evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or Flood-Fringe District boundary or deny the permit application.  The City Council, prior to official action, may submit the application and all supporting data and analyses to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Department of Natural Resources or the Planning Commission for review and comment.  Once the Floodway and Flood­ Fringe District Boundaries have been determined, the City Council shall refer the matter back to the Zoning Administrator who shall process the permit application consistent with the applicable provisions of Sections 52-040 and 52-050 of this Division.

52-070	Subdivisions.

A)	Review Criteria.  No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities.  All lots within the floodplain districts shall be able to contain a building site outside of the Floodway District at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.  All subdivisions shall have water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the provisions of this Division and have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation.  For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the Floodway and Flood-Fringe District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation
 
and the required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents.

B)	Floodway/Flood-Fringe Determinations in the General Floodplain District.  In the General Floodplain District, applicants shall provide the information required in Section 52-060 of this Division to determine the 100-year flood elevation, the Floodway and Flood-Fringe District boundaries and the regulatory flood protection elevation for the subdivision site.

C)	Removal of Special Flood Hazard Area Designation. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments.  These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.

52-080	Public Utilities, Railroads, Roads, and Bridges.

A)	Public Utilities.  All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain shall be flood proofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation.

B)	Public Transportation Facilities.  Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the floodplain shall comply with Sections 52-040 and 52-050 of this Division.  Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area.  Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety.

C)	On-site Sewage Treatment and Water Supply Systems.  Where public utilities are not provided:

1)	On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and,

2)	New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters and they shall not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding.  Any sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the State's current statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this Section.

52-090  Manufactured Home and Manufactured Home Parks and Placement of Recreational Vehicles.
 

A)	New manufactured homes parks and expansions to existing manufactured home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on subdivisions by Section 52-070 of this Division.

B)	The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are located in floodplain districts will be treated as a new structure and may be placed only if elevated in compliance with Section52-050 of this Division.  Ifvehicular road access for preexisting manufactured home parks is not provided in accordance with Section 52-050, then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed until the property owner(s) develops a flood-warning emergency plan acceptable to the City Council.

I)	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement.  Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.  This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.

C)	Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria specified in Section 52-090 below shall be subject to the provisions of this Division and as specifically spelled out in Section 52-090 below.

I)	Exemption.  Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this Division if they are placed in any of the areas listed in Section 52-090 below and further, they meet the following criteria:

a)	Have current licenses required for highway use.


b)	Are highway ready, meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks, and the recreational vehicle has no permanent structural type additions attached to it.

c)	The recreational vehicle and associated use must be permissible in any preexisting, underlying zoning use district.

2)	Areas Exempted for Placement of Recreational Vehicles.


a)	Individual lots or parcels of record.


b)	Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds.


c)	Existing condominium type associations.
 
3)	Recreational vehicles exempted in Section 52-090 lose this exemption when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500 for a structural addition to the recreational vehicle or exceeding $500 for an accessory structure such as a garage or storage building.  The recreational vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the elevation/flood­ proofing requirements and the use ofland restrictions specified in Sections 52-040 and 52-050 of this Division.  There shall be no development or improvement on the parcel or attachment to the recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of the recreational vehicle to a flood-free location should flooding occur.

4)	New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and new residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five units or dwelling sites shall be subject to the following:

a)	Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will be allowed in the Floodway
or Flood-Fringe Districts provided said recreational vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood protection elevation and proper elevated road access to the site exists in accordance with Section 52.050 of this Division.  No fill placed in the floodway to meet the requirements of this Section shall increase flood stages of the I 00-year or regional flood.

b)	All new or replacement recreational vehicles not meeting the criteria of a)
above may, as an alternative, be allowed as a conditional use if said vehicles are in accordance with the following provisions and the provisions of Section52-
l 00 of this Division.  The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the I 00-year flood.  Said plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual, shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the
evacuation, and shall demonstrate the provisions of Section 52-090 of this Division will be met.  All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with Section 52-080 of this Division.

52-100  Administration.

A)	Zoning Administrator:  A Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the City Council shall administer and enforce this Division.  If the Zoning Administrator finds a violation of the provisions of this Division, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the person responsible for such violation in accordance with the procedures stated in Division 95 of this Chapter.

B)	Permit Requirements.
 
I)	Permit Required.  A Permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in conformity with the provisions of this Division shall be secured prior to the erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), or alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof; prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure, or land; prior to the construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic system; prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use; prior to the repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source; and prior to the placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or equipment within the floodplain.

2)	Application for Permit.  Application for a permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the Zoning Administrator and shall include the following where applicable: plans drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream channel. Application procedures shall follow the requirements listed in Division 85 of this Chapter.

3)	State and Federal Permits.  Prior to granting a permit or processing an application for a conditional use permit or variance, the Zoning Administrator shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits.

4)	Certificate of Compliance for a New, Altered, or Nonconforming Use.  It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this Division.

5)	Construction and Use to be as Provided on Applications, Plans, Permits, Variances and Certificates of Compliance.  Permits, conditional use permits, or certificates of compliance issued on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and   applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction.  Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Division, and punishable as provided by Division 95 of this Chapter.

6)	Certification.  The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this Division.  Flood-proofing measures shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect.

7)	Record of First Floor Elevation.  The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new structures and
 
alterations or additions to existing structures in the floodplain.  The Zoning Administrator shall also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures or alterations and additions to structures are flood proofed.

8)	Notifications for Watercourse Alterations.  The Zoning Administrator shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources prior to the community authorizing any alteration or relocation of a watercourse.  If the applicant has applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the Commissioner of Natural Resources.  A copy of said notification shall also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).

9)	Notification to FEMA When Physical Changes Increase or Decrease the 100-year Flood Elevation.  As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific data.

C)	Board of Adjustments.


1)	Rules. The Board of Adjustments shall adopt rules for the conduct of business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such Boards by State law. The Board of Adjustments is established in Division 80-040 of this Chapter.

2)	Administrative Review.  The Board of Adjustments shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this Division.

3)	Variances. The Board of Adjustments may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such relief or variance from the terms of this Division as will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances such as hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation for planning and zoning for cities or counties as appropriate.  In the granting of such variance, the Board of Adjustments
shall clearly identify in writing the specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in this Division, any other zoning regulations in the community, and in the respective enabling legislation that justified the granting of the variance.  No variance shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than those required by state law.  The general procedures and requirements for variances are listed in Division 90-110 of this Chapter.  The following additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must also be satisfied:
 

a)	Variances shall not be issued by a community within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

b)	Variances shall only be issued by a community upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in an undue hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

c)	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief

4)	Hearings.  The process for processing an appeal from a decision of the Zoning Administrator, or an application for a variance, shall follow the same process as listed in Division 90-110 (Variance) or 90-120 (Zoning Appeal) as listed in this Chapter.  In addition, the Zoning Administrator shall submit by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed variances sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least 10-days' notice of the hearing.

5)	Decisions.  The Board of Adjustments shall arrive at a decision on such appeal or variance within time limits allowed by Minnesota State Statutes.  In passing upon an appeal, the Board of Adjustments may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this Division, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or other public official.  It shall make its decision in writing setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decisions.  In granting a variance, the Board of Adjustments may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards such as those specified in Section 52-100, which are in conformity with the purposes of this Division. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Division punishable under Section 52-120.  A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within 10 days of such action.

6)	Appeals.  Appeals from any decision of the Board of Adjustments may be made, and as specified in this community's official controls and also by Minnesota Statutes.

7)	Flood Insurance Notice and Record Keeping.  The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant for a variance that:
 
a)	The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and,

b)	Such construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases risks  to life and property.  Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions.  A community shall maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.

D)	Conditional Uses.  The Red Wing City Council shall hear and decide applications for conditional uses permissible under this Division.  Applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator and processed in accordance with Division 90-040 of this Chapter.

1)	Hearings.  Upon filing with the Zoning Administrator an application for a conditional use permit, a hearing notice and notification shall be completed in accordance with Division 85 of this Chapter.  In addition to those requirements, the Zoning Administrator shall also submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed conditional use sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least 10-days' notice of the hearing.

2)	Decisions.  Decisions on conditional se permit applications shall follow the requirements listed in Division 90-040 of this Chapter.  In addition, the City Council shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, in addition to those specified in Section 52-100, which are in conformity with the purposes of this Division. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the conditional use permit is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Division punishable under Section52-120.  A copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within 10 days of such action.

3)	Procedures to be followed by the City Council in Passing on Conditional Use Permit Applications Within All Flood Plain Districts.  In addition to the requirements listed in Division 90-040 of this Chapter, the following additional requirements shall also be met:

a)	Require the applicant to furnish such of the following information and additional information as deemed necessary by the City Council for determining the suitability of the particular site for the proposed use:

i)	Plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, flood-proofing measures, and the relationship of the above to the location of the stream channel; and,
 

ii)	Specifications for building construction and materials, flood proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.

b)	Transmit one copy of the information described in subsection a) to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the use, the adequacy of the plans for protection, and other technical matters.

c)	Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or expert, the City Council shall determine the specific flood hazard at the site and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood hazard.

4)	Factors Upon Which the Decision of the City Council Shall Be Based.  In passing upon conditional use applications, the City Council shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this Division, and:

a)	The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments.

b)	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others or that they may block bridges, culverts or other hydraulic structures.

c)	The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.

d)	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.

e)	The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.

f)	The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.


g)	The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.

h)	The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.

i)	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area.
 

j)	The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.

k)	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site.

1)	Such other factors which  are relevant  to the purposes  of this Division.


5)	Time for Acting on Application.  The City Council shall act on an application in the manner described above and within a maximum time limit as prescribed by Minnesota State Statutes.

6)	Conditions Attached to Conditional Use Permits.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purpose of this Division, the City Council shall attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Division.  Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

a)	Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.


b)	Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.


c)	Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.


d)	Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures.

e)	Flood-proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code and this Division.  The applicant shall submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood-proofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.

52-110  Nonconforming Uses.

A)	A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this Division but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Division may be continued subject to the following conditions.  Historic structures, as defined in Section 52-020 of this Division, shall be subject to the provisions of Section 52- 110 of this Division.

1)	No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity.
 
2)	Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood damage potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or flood-proofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 through FP- 4 flood-proofing classifications) allowable in the State Building Code, except as further restricted in Section 52-110 below.

3)	The cost of all structural alterations or additions to any nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50 percent of the estimated market value of the structure, as indicated in the records of the County Assessor, unless the conditions of this Section are satisfied.  The cost of all structural alterations and additions must include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all manpower or labor.  If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations
and additions exceeds 50 percent of the estimated market value of the structure, then the structure must meet the standards of Sections 52-040 and 52-050 of this
Division for new structures depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood-Fringe District, respectively.

4)	If any nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this Division.  The Assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of nonconforming uses that have been discontinued for a period of 12 months.

5)	If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as defined in Section 52-020 of this Division, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Division.  The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or new structures in Sections 52-040, 52-050 and 52-060 will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the Floodway, Flood-Fringe or General Floodplain District, respectively.

6)	If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in Section 52-020 of this Division, from any combination of a building addition to the outside dimensions of the existing building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction, alteration, or other improvement to the inside dimensions of an existing nonconforming building, then the building addition and the existing nonconforming building must meet the requirements of Sections 52- 040 and 52-050 of this Division for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood-Fringe District, respectively.

52-120	Penalties For Violation.

A)	Violation of the provisions of this Division or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law.
 
B)	Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Red Wing from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.  Such actions may include but are not limited to:

I)	In responding to a suspected Zoning Code violation, the Zoning Administrator and City Council may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders
for corrective measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party.  The community must act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct Zoning Code violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.

2)	When a Zoning Code violation is either discovered by or brought to the attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural Resources and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office along with the community's plan of action to correct the violation to the degree possible.

3)	The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the requirements of this Division and all other official controls and the nature and extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/or use is under construction or development, the Zoning Administrator may order the construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or approval is granted by the community.  If the construction or development is already completed, then the Zoning
Administrator may either:


a)	issue an order identifying the corrective actions that must be made within a specified time period to bring the use or structure into compliance with the official controls; or,
b)	notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed 30 days.

4)	If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this Division and shall be prosecuted accordingly.  The Zoning Administrator shall also, upon the lapse of the specified response period, notify the landowner to restore the land to the condition which existed prior to the violation of this Division.

52-130	Amendments.
 
The floodplain designation on the Official Zoning Map shall not be removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of Natural Resources ifhe determines that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.

All amendments to this Division, including amendments to the Official Zoning Map, must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the Official Zoning Map must meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) Technical Conditions and Criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption.  The Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given I 0-days' written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this Division and said notice shall include a draft of the Division amendment or technical study under consideration.
 
ARTICLE III- OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS DIVISION 53: CANNON RIVER MANAGEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
53-010  Policy and Administration.   This Division is for the controlling ofbluffland and
riverland development in order to protect and preserve the outstanding scenic, recreational, natural, historical and scientific values of the Cannon River in the City, in a manner consistent with Minnesota Statutes, Sections 103F.301-.345, Minnesota Rules 6105.1550-6105.1680 (hereafter referred to as the "Rules", and the Management Plan for the Cannon River hereafter referred to as the "Plan"

53-020  Purpose.  This Division is adopted to achieve the policy of Section 53-010 and to: (1) designate land use districts along the bluffland and shoreline of the Cannon River as required by the Rules (2) regulate the area of a lot, and the length ofbluffland and water frontage suitable for building sites; (3) regulate the setback of structures and sanitary waste treatment facilities from blufflines and shorelines to protect the existing and/or natural scenic values, vegetation, soils, water quality, floodplain areas, and bedrock from disruption by man-made structures or facilities; (4) regulate alterations of the natural vegetation and topography; (5) maintain property values and prevent poorly-planned development; (6) conserve and protect the natural scenic values and resources of the Cannon River and to maintain a high standard of environmental quality; and, (7) to comply with the Rules

53-30	General Provisions.


A)	Jurisdiction.  The jurisdiction of this Division shall include all lands designated within the Cannon River land use districts within the jurisdiction of the City as defined in the Plan

B)	Compliance.  The use of any land within the Cannon River land use districts; the size and shape of lots; the use and location of structures on lots; the installation and maintenance of water supply and waste disposal facilities; the filling, grading, lagooning, or dredging of any river area; the cutting of vegetation or alteration of the natural topography within the district; and the subdivision of land shall be in full compliance with the terms of this Division and other applicable regulations. Permits from the Zoning Administrator are required by this Division and other applicable City Code provisions, for the construction of buildings, public or private water supply and sewage treatment systems, the grading and filling of the natural topography and erection of signs within the Cannon River land use districts.

C)	Rules.


1)	It is not intended by this Division to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easement, covenants, deed restrictions, or land use controls. Where this Division imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this Division shall prevail.
 
2)	In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Division shall be held to be minimum requirements, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any powers or rights granted by Minnesota Statutes.

3)	The provisions of this Division shall be severable, and the invalidity of any paragraph, subparagraph, or subdivision thereof shall not make void any other paragraph, subparagraph, subdivision or any other part.  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid any provision of this Division or the application of this Division to a particular property, building, or other structure, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this Division or any other property, building, or structure not specifically included in said judgment.

D)	Definitions.  The following terms, as used in this Division, shall have the meanings stated:

1)	Agricultural Production.  Establishments engaged in the production of crops, plants or vines, including forestry, and the incidental sale of produce raised on the premises to individuals, or establishments in existence on June 22, 2000 which are engaged in the keeping, grazing, or feeding of livestock for sale, value increase, or livestock increase.

2)	Bluffline.  A line along the top of a slope connecting the points at which the slope becomes less than 13 percent.	This applies to those slopes within the land use district(s), which are beyond the setback provisions from the ordinary high water mark.

3)	Building Setback Line.  A line within a lot which describes the required nonbuildable portion of the lot because of closeness to a public right-of-way line, a side or rear lot line, a bluffline, or a high-water mark.  Beyond this line toward the interior of the lot, buildings or structures may be placed when in accordance with this chapter.

4)  Campground.  An area accessible by vehicle and containing campsites or camping spurs for tents and trailer camping.

5)	Clear-cutting.  (See Intensive Vegetation Clearing).


6)	Commissioner.  The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.


7)	Conditional Use.  A use that is not appropriate generally or a use that is not appropriate generally without restriction throughout the zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, is not detrimental to public health, safety, or general welfare.
 
8)	Essential Services.  Overhead or underground electrical, gas, steam or water distribution structures or collection, communication, supply or disposal systems and structures used by public utilities or governmental departments or commissions or as are required for the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, and accessories in connection therewith.

9)	Forestry Operation.  The use ofland for the raising and harvesting of timber, pulp woods and other forestry products for commercial purposes, including the temporary operation of a sawmill and/or chipper to process the timber cut from that parcel or contiguous parcels. Excluded from this definition shall be the cutting of timber associated with land development approved by the City which shall be considered accessory to the development of the property.

10)	Intensive Vegetation Clearing. The removal of greater than 30 percent of the trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.

11) Lot.  A parcel of land legally subdivided by plat, metes and bounds, registered land survey, auditors plot, or other accepted means and separated from other parcels or portions by said description for the purpose of sale, leased, or operation.

12)	Nonconforming Use.  A lawful use ofland that does not comply with the use regulations for its zoning district but which complied with applicable regulations at the time the use was established.

13)	Open Space Recreation.  Recreation particularly oriented to and utilizing the outdoor character of an area; including hiking and riding trails, primitive campsites, campgrounds, waysides, parks and recreational areas.

14)	Ordinary High Water Level. The boundary of public waters and wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.

15)	Planned Cluster Development.  A pattern of subdivision development which places dwelling units into compact groupings while providing a commonly owned or dedicated open space.

16)	Primitive Campsites.  An area that consists of individual remote campsites accessible only by foot or water.
 

17)	Resource Extraction. A use involving on-site extraction of surface or subsurface mineral products or natural resources.  Typical uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, mining, and soil mining.  Specifically excluded from this use type shall be grading and removal of dirt associated with an approved site plan or subdivision.

18)	Screening.  The method by which a view of one site from another adjacent site is shielded, concealed, or hidden.  Screening techniques include fences, walls, hedges, berms, or other features. In reference to Division 53, when a structure is built or placed on a lot or vegetation is planted such that when the structure is built, it is visually inconspicuous as viewed from the river during the summer months. Visually inconspicuous means difficult to see or not readily noticeable in summer months as viewed from the river.

19)	Selective Cutting.  The removal of single scattered trees, provided a continuous tree cover is maintained within the structure setback areas.

20)	Setback.  The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage treatment system, or other facility and an ordinary high water level, sewage treatment system, top of a bluff, road, highway, property line or other facility

21)	Sewage Treatment System.  Any system for the collection, treatment and dispersion of sewage including but not limited to septic tanks, soil absorption systems and drain fields.

22)	Structure.  Anything constructed or erected the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground, except aerial or underground utility lines, such as sewer, electric, telephone, telegraph,
gas lines, towers, poles, and other supporting facilities.


23)	Subdivision.  The division of a parcel of land after the effective date of this Chapter into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development.  This term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.

24)	Substandard Building.  (Substandard Structure). Any building or structure lawfully existing on June 22, 2000 or any amendment thereto, which building or structure does not conform with regulations, including dimensional standards, for the district in which it is located after June 22, 2000 or such amendment.

25)	Variance.  A relaxation by the Board of Adjustments of the dimensional regulations  of this Chapter  where such action will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result
 
of actions or the situation of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this Chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.

26)	Watershed  Management  or Flood  Control  Structure.   A  dam, floodwall, wingdam, dike, diversion channel, or an artificially deepened or widened stream channel following the same or approximately the same course as the natural channel, or any other structure for altering or regulating the natural flow condition of a river or stream.   The term "watershed management or flood control structure" does not include pilings, retaining walls, gabion baskets, rock riprap, or other facilities intended primarily to prevent erosion and which must be authorized by permit from the Commissioner of Natural Resources.

27)	Wetland.  A surface water feature classified as a wetland in the United States Fish and Wildlife Service Circular No. 39 (1971 edition).

53-40	Land Use District Provisions.


A)	Designation of Districts.


I)	In order to preserve and protect the Cannon River and its adjacent lands which possess outstanding scenic, recreational, natural, historical, scientific and similar values, the Cannon River has been given the Scenic and/or Recreational River classification( s) and the uses and classification of this river and its adjacent lands are hereby designated by land use zoning districts, the boundaries of which are based on the Plan,

2)  The boundaries of the Cannon River Scenic and/or Recreational land use districts are shown on the map designated as the City of Red Wing Official Zoning Map, which is made a part of this Division and is on file with the Zoning Administrator. In case of conflict between the map and the property descriptions in the Plan the latter shall prevail.

B)	Minimum District Dimensional Requirements.


I)	The following chart sets forth the minimum area, setbacks, and other requirements of each district:


Land Use District Class fications:	Scenic	Recreational

 
Minimum lot size above ordinary high water mark
 
4 acres	2 acres
 

Lot width at building line	250 feet	200 feet Lot width at ordinary high water mark	250 feet	200 feet
 


Building setback from ordinary high water mark	
150 feet	
100 feet

Building setback from bluffline	
30 feet	
20 feet

On site sewage treatment system setback from ordinary high water mark	
100 feet	
75 feet

Maximum structure height	
35 feet	
35 feet


Controlled vegetative cutting area	See Section 53-070 (A)

Setback from ordinary high water mark	
150 feet	
100 feet

Setback from bluffline	
30 feet	
20 feet

Said requirements do not apply to agricultural buildings (non-residential structures).

2)	It is unlawful for any person to place a structure on any slope greater than 13 percent (13 feet vertical rise in 100 feet horizontal distance) unless such structures can be screened, excluding agricultural fencing; sewage disposal system facilities can be installed so as to comply with the Sanitary Provisions of Section 53-060; any potential or actual erosion or sedimentation problems do not exist, and adequate preventive measures are taken; consideration to color and design is
given subject to the Advisory Planning Commission conditions.


3)	It is unlawful for any person to place a structure in any floodway, except agricultural fencing where required.	Structures proposed within a floodplain shall be consistent with City and/or Statewide Standards and Criteria for Management of Floodplain Areas in Minnesota.

C)	Substandard Lots.


1)	Lots of record in the office of the County Recorder on June 22, 2000, which do not meet the dimensional requirements of this Division shall be allowed as building sites, provided: such use is permitted in the land use districts; the lot was in separate ownership on June 22, 2000; and all sanitary and dimensional requirements are complied with, as practicable.

2)	If in a group of contiguous lots under a single ownership, any individual lot does not meet the lot width minimum requirements of this Division, such individual lot cannot be considered as a separate parcel of land for purposes of sale or development, but must be combined with adjacent lots under the same ownership
 
so that the combination of lots will equal one or more parcels of land, each meeting the lot width requirements of this Division or to the greatest extent practicable.

53-50	Uses Within the Land Use Districts.


A)	Purpose.	The purpose of establishing standards and criteria for uses in the Cannon River land use district shall be to protect and preserve existing natural, scenic, historical, scientific, and recreational values, to maintain proper relationships between various land use types, and to prohibit new residential, commercial, or industrial uses that are inconsistent with the Statewide Standards and Criteria for Scenic and Recreational Rivers.

B)	Permitted and Conditional Uses.
I)	In the following table of uses: P means Permitted Use
C means Conditional Use
N means Nonpermitted Use


2)	Certain of the following uses are subject to the Zoning Dimension Provisions and Sanitary Provisions of Section 53-040 and Section 53-060.   All of the following uses are subject to the Vegetative Cutting Provisions of Section 53-070.

LAND USE DISTRICTS:	Scenic	Recreational

Governmental campgrounds, subject to management plan specifications	
P	
P

Private campgrounds, subject to management plan specifications	
C	
C

Public accesses, road access type with boat launching facilities subject to management plan specifications	
P	
P

Public accesses, trail type, subject to management plan specifications	
P	
P

Temporary docks	
C	
P

Other governmental open space recreational uses, subject to management plan specifications	
P	
P

Other private open space recreational uses, subject to	
C	
C
 
management plan specifications

Agricultural uses	p	p

Single family residential uses	p	p

Forestry uses	p	p

Essential services	p	p

Sewage disposal systems	p	p

Private roads and minor public streets	p	p

Signs approved by Federal, State, or local	p	p
government which are necessary for public health and safety and signs indicating areas that are available or not available for public use

Signs not visible from the river that are not specified	p	p
in Item 14

Governmental and private resource management for	p	p
improving fish and wildlife habitat; wildlife management areas; nature areas; accessory roads

Underground mining that does not involve surface	c	c
excavation in the land use district

Sand and gravel excavation, subject to the provisions	c	c
of Minn. Rule 6105.1610

Utility transmission power lines and pipelines, subject	p	p
to the provisions of Section 53-070

Public roads, subject to the provisions of Section 53-	c	c
070

Canoe rental establishments, subject to the provisions	c	c
of Minn. Rule 6105.1610

Inner tube rental establishments	N	N


3)	All uses not listed as permitted or conditional uses shall not be allowed within the applicable land use districts.
 

53-60	Sanitary Provisions.


A)	Sewage Disposal and Water Supply.


I)	Any premises intended for human occupancy must provide for an adequate method of sewage treatment.  Public or municipal collection and treatment facilities must be used where available and feasible.  Where public or municipal facilities are not available, all on-site individual sewer treatment systems shall conform to the minimum standards and administrative procedures set forth in other applicable City Code provisions, the minimum standards of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, the Minnesota Department of Health and Section 53- 040 of this Division.

2)	It is unlawful for any person to install or extend any individual sewer disposal system or private well without first obtaining a permit for such action from the Zoning Administrator for the specific installation or extension.

3)	Any public or private supply of water for domestic purposes must conform to Minnesota Department of Health standards for water quality and the administrative procedures of other applicable City Code provisions.

53-70	Landscape Alterations.


A)	Vegetative  Cutting.


I)	The vegetative cutting provisions shall apply to those areas as specified in Section 53-040 of this Division.

2)	General Provisions, Within Designated Areas:


a)	Clear-cutting, except for any authorized public services such as roads and utilities, shall not be permitted.

b)	Selective cutting of trees in excess of four inches in diameter at breast height shall be permitted provided cutting is spaced in several cutting operations and a continuous tree cover is maintained.

c)	The cutting provisions of this subparagraph shall not be deemed to prevent:


i)	The removal of diseased or insect-infested trees, or of rotten or damaged trees that present safety hazards.
 
ii)  Pruning understory vegetation, shrubs, plants, brushes, grasses or from harvesting crops, or cutting suppressed trees or trees less than four inches in diameter at breast height.

d)	Trimmings and cuttings generated from removal of trees shall be disposed of as per good forestry methods.

3)	Clear-Cutting.  Clear-cutting anywhere in designated land use district(s) on the Cannon River is subject to the following standards and criteria:

a)	Clear-cutting shall not be used as a cutting method where soil, slope, or other watershed conditions are determined by the Zoning Administrator to be fragile and subject to severe erosion and/or sedimentation.

b)	Clear-cutting shall be conducted only where clear-cut blocks, patches or strips are, in all cases, shaped and blended with the natural terrain.

c)	The size of clear-cut blocks, patches or strips shall be kept at the minimum necessary.

d)	Where feasible all clear-cuts shall be conducted between September 15 and May 15.  Ifnatural regeneration will not result in adequate vegetative cover, areas in which clear-cutting is conducted shall be replanted to prevent erosion and to maintain the aesthetic quality of the area.  Where feasible, replanting shall be performed in the same spring or the following spring.

e)	Trimmings and cuttings generated from removal of trees shall not be allowed to remain in designated set-back or land-use districts.

B)	Grading, Filling, Alterations of the Beds of Public Waters.


1)	Any grading and filling work done within the designated land use district(s) of this Division shall require a permit and shall comply with the following:

a)	Grading and filling of the natural topography which is not accessory to a permitted or conditional use shall not be permitted in the land use district(s).

b)	Grading and filling of the natural topography which is accessory to a permitted or conditional use shall not be conducted without a grading and filling permit from the Zoning Administrator.  A grading and filling permit may be issued only if the conditions of this Subparagraph are properly satisfied.
 
c)	Grading and filling of the natural topography which is accessory to a permitted or conditional use shall be performed in a manner which minimizes earth- moving, erosion, tree clearing, and the destruction of natural amenities.

d)	Grading and filling in of the natural topography shall also meet the following standards:

i)	The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a time as feasible.

ii)	Temporary ground cover such as mulch is used and permanent ground cover, such as sod, is planted.

iii)	Methods to prevent erosion and to trap sediment are employed.


iv)	Fill is stabilized to accepted engineering standards.


2)	Excavation of material from or filling in a scenic or recreational river, or construction of any permanent structures or navigational obstructions therein is prohibited unless authorized by a permit from the Commissioner of DNR.

3)	Drainage or filling in of wetlands is not allowed within the land use districts designated by this Chapter.

C)	Utility Transmission Lines. All utility transmission crossings ofland within the Cannon River land use districts shall require a conditional use permit.  The construction of such transmission services shall be subject to the standards and criteria of the Rules, the Plan, and state law.  No conditional use permit shall be required for high voltage transmission lines under jurisdictional authority of the State of Minnesota.

D)	Public Roads.  In addition to such permits as may otherwise be required by state law a conditional use permit shall be required for any construction or reconstruction of new public roads within the Cannon River land use district(s).  Such construction or reconstruction shall be subject to the standards and criteria of the Rules, the Plan, and state law.  A conditional use permit is not required for minor public streets, which are streets intended to serve primarily as an access to abutting properties.  Public roads include township, county, and municipal roads and highways which serve or are designed to serve flows of traffic between communities or other traffic generating areas.

53-80	Subdivisions.


A)	Land Suitability.
 
1)	No land shall be subdivided which is determined by the Council to be unsuitable by reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities or any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision or the City.

2)	The provisions otherwise set forth in this Division and in other applicable City Code provisions shall apply to all plats, except planned cluster developments.

B)	Planned Cluster Developments.  A planned cluster development may be allowed only when the proposed clustering provides a better means of preserving agricultural land, open space, woods, scenic views, wetlands, and other features of the natural environment than traditional subdivision development.  Except for minimum setbacks and height limits, altered dimensional standards may be allowed as exceptions to this Division for planned cluster developments provided:

1)	Preliminary plans are approved by the Commissioner to their enactment by the City Council.

2)	Central sewage facilities are installed which meet the standards, criteria, rules or regulations of the Minnesota Department of Health and the Pollution Control Agency.

3)	Open space is preserved.  This may be accomplished through the use of restrictive deed covenants, public dedications, granting of scenic easements, or other methods.

4)	There is not more than one centralized boat launching facility for each cluster. 53-090 Administration.
A)	Organization Provisions.


1)	The provisions of this Division shall be administered by the City Zoning Administrator.

2)	The Board of Adjustments shall act upon all questions as they arise in the administration of this Division; to hear and decide appeals; and to review any order, requirements, decisions or determination made by the Zoning Administrator, who is charged with enforcing this Division as provided by Minnesota Statutes.

B)	Nonconforming Uses, Substandard Uses.
 
I)  Nonconforming Uses.  Uses which are prohibited by this Division but which are in existence prior to June 22, 2000 shall be non-conforming uses.  Such uses shall not be intensified, enlarged, or expanded beyond the permitted or delineated boundaries of the use or activity as stipulated in the most current permit issued prior to the adoption of this Division.

2)	Nonconforming Sanitary Systems.  All sanitary facilities inconsistent with the performance standards of other applicable City Code provisions and the minimum standards of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and the Minnesota Department of Health shall be brought into conformity or discontinued after June 22, 2000.

3)	Substandard Uses.  All uses in existence prior to the effective date of this Ordinance which are permitted uses within the newly established land use district, but do not meet the minimum lot area, setbacks or other dimensional
requirements of this Division, are substandard uses.  All substandard uses, except for substandard signs, shall be allowed to continue subject to the following conditions and exceptions:

a)	Any structural alteration or addition to a substandard use which will increase the substandard dimensions shall not be allowed.

b)	Where a setback pattern from the ordinary high water mark has already been established on both sides of a proposed building site, the setback of the proposed structure may be allowed to conform to that pattern.  (This provision shall apply to lots which do not meet the minimum lot width requirements of this Division.)

C)	Variances.


I)	The granting of a variance requires the presence of the following conditions:


a)	The strict enforcement of the land use controls will result in practical difficulty.

b)	Granting of the variance is not contrary to the purpose and intent of the zoning provisions herein established by these standards and criteria, and is consistent with the Plan

c)	There are circumstances unique to the subject property which were not created by the landowners.

d)	Granting of the variance will not allow any use which is neither a permitted nor a conditional use in the land use district in which the subject property is located.
 

e)	Granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the locality as established by the management plan, the Plan

2)  All variances to the requirements of this Division must be certified in accordance with Section 53-090 (G).

D)	Plats.


I)	Copies of all plats within the boundaries of the Cannon River Land Use District( s) shall be forwarded to the Commissioner within I 0 days of approval by the City.

2)	Inconsistent Plats.  Approval of a plat which is inconsistent with this Division is permissible only if the detrimental impact of the inconsistency is more than overcome by other protective characteristics of the proposal.

3)	All inconsistent plats approved by the City must be certified in accordance with Section 53-090 (G).

E)	Amendments.


I)	This Division may be amended whenever the public necessity and the general welfare require such amendments by the procedure specified in thisDivision. Amendments to this Division must be certified by the Commissioner as specified in Section 53-090 (G).

2)	Requests for amendments of this Division shall be initiated by a petition of the owner or owners of the actual property; or by action of the City.

3)	An application for an amendment shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator.


4)	Upon receipt in proper form of the application and other requested materials, the Advisory Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing in the manner prescribed by Minnesota Statutes.

5)	Following the public hearing, the Advisory Planning Commission shall make a report of its recommendation on the proposed amendment and shall file a copy with the City within 60 days after the hearing.  Certification from the Commissioner must be obtained as specified in Section 53-090 (G) below before the proposed amendment becomes effective.

6)	To defray the administrative costs of processing requests for an amendment to this Division, a fee not exceeding administrative costs shall be paid by the petitioners.  Such fee shall be determined by the City Council.
 
F)	Conditional Use Permit Review.  A copy of all notices of any public hearing, or where a public hearing is not required, a copy of the application to consider issuance of a conditional use permit shall be sent so as to be received by the Commissioner at least 15 days prior to such hearings or meeting to consider issuance of a conditional use permit.  A copy of the decision shall be forwarded to the Commissioner within 10 days of such action.

G)	Certification.
1)	Certain land use decisions, which directly affect the use of land within the designated land use districts and involve any of the following actions must be certified by the Commissioner:

a)	Adopting or amending City Code provisions regulating the use of land including rezoning of particular tracts of land.

b)	Granting a variance from a provision of this Division which relates to the zoning dimension provisions of Section 53-040 and any other zoning dimension provisions established in the Plan.

c)	Approving a plat which is inconsistent with the zoning provisions of the City Code.

2)	Certification Procedure.


a)	A copy of all notices of any public hearings, or where a public hearing is not required, a copy of the application to consider zoning amendments, variances, or inconsistent plats under City Code provisions shall be sent so as to be received by the Commissioner at least 15 days prior to such hearings or meetings to consider such actions. The notice of application shall include a copy of the proposed Divisions or amendment, or a description of the requested variance.

b)	The City shall notify the Commissioner of its final decision on the proposed action within 10 days of the decision.

c)	The action becomes effective when and only when either


i)	The final decision taken by the City has previously received certification of approval by the Commissioner; or,

ii)	The City receives certification of approval after its final decision; or,
iii)	Thirty days have elapsed from the day the Commissioner received notice of the final decision, and the City has received from the Commissioner either certification of approval or notice of non-approval; or,
 
iv)	The Commissioner certifies his approval within 30 days after conducting a public hearing.

d)	In case the Commissioner gives notice of non-approval of an ordinance, variance or inconsistent plat, either the applicant or the chief executive officer of the City may, within 30 days of said notice, file with the Commissioner a demand for hearing.  If the demand for hearing is not made within 30 days, the notice of non-approval becomes final.

i)	The hearing will be held in an appropriate local community within 60 days of the demand and after at least 2 weeks published notice.

ii)	The hearing will be conducted in accordance with state law.


iii)	The Commissioner shall either certify his approval or disapproval of the proposed action within 30 days of the hearing.

H)	Permits.


I)	The following table summarizes the permit and certification process within the land use districts designated by this Division:

 
Scenic, Recreational Land Use
 
Action Necessary
 
 	District Permits 	

Building Permits	LP


Sign Construction Permits	LP


Septic Permits	LP


Water Supply Permits	LP


Grading, Filling Permits	LP


Conditional Use Permits	PH-LP


Amendments to Ordinance	PH-CC


Amendments to District Boundary	PH-CC


Inconsistent Plats	PH-CC


Planned Cluster Developments	PH-WA
 
Variances	PH-CC


Plats (Notification not Required)	PH-FD


LP- Permit issued by the Council in accordance with this Division and all other City Code provisions.

CC- Certification by the Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to final plat approval.

PH- Public hearing necessary by the Council giving 15 days' notice of the hearing to the Commissioner of Natural Resources.

FD- Council forwards any decisions to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within I 0 days after taking final action.

WA- The Commissioner of Natural Resources shall submit, after notice of public hearing and before the Council gives preliminary approval, a written review and approval of the project.

53-100  Violation a Misdemeanor.   Every person violates a section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this Division when he performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof
 
ARTICLE  IV -REGULATIONS  APPLYING  TO ALL DISTRICTS DIVISION 55:  SPECIAL PROVISIONS
55-010  Purpose.  The Special Provisions set forth herein shall supplement or modify the regulations set forth in Article II, Base District Regulations.  The standards established in this Division are designed to encourage a high quality of development by providing assurance that neighboring land uses will be compatible.  The standards are designed to prevent and eliminate those conditions that cause blight or are detrimental to the environment. These Special Provisions are organized so that standards that relate to all zoning districts are listed first. Standards are then listed that relate to Agricultural Districts, Residential Districts, and then Commercial Districts.

STANDARDS THAT RELATE TO ALL ZONING DISTRICTS

55-20	Lots and Yards.

A)	More Than One Building on a Lot.  Except in the R-1 Zoning District, more than one building housing a principal use may be erected on a single lot provided that yard and other requirements of these regulations shall be met for each building as though it were on an individual lot.

B)	Through Lots.  On through lots or lots with double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on each street.  Through lots where street access on one side is prohibited may treat that side as a rear yard.  On comer lots, the front yard shall be considered that side of the principal structure to which the main entrance faces a public street.

C)	Non-Conforming Lots of Record.  An existing vacant lot having less than the minimum frontage, depth or area required by the provisions of this Chapter may be developed for all uses in the appropriate zone, provided:

I)	All other provisions of this Chapter are satisfied.

2)	Such lots are serviced by public water supply and public sanitary sewer disposal facilities or alternatively meet the requirements of the authority having jurisdiction  for private disposal.

3)	Such lots have a minimum lot frontage of 25 feet on a road or street.

D)	Subdivision of Lots.  Any lot or parcel ofland subdivided by any means after December 31, 1999, for the purposes of erecting a structure must be approved as required by Chapter 12 of the City of Red Wing City Code, Subdivision Regulations.

E)	No Reduction of the Required Yard or Open Space.  No yard shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make it less than the minimum required by the zoning
 
district regulations, and if the existing yard is less than the minimum required, it shall not be further reduced.

F)	Yard Encroachments.  Every part of every required yard shall be open and unobstructed from 30 inches above the general ground level of the graded lot upward to the sky except as hereinafter provided or as otherwise permitted in these regulations:

I)	Roof eaves may project into a required side yard not more than three feet into the required side yard.

2)	Sills, belt courses, cornices, vertical solar screen and other ornamental features may project not over one foot onto the required yard.

3)	Fire escapes, stairways and balconies whether unroofed, open and unenclosed or enclosed that extend above the ground floor of the building shall not intrude into required yards.

4)	Solar collectors which are part of the principal building may extend into a required rear yard for a distance not to exceed ten feet may extend into a required side yard, provided that they have a minimum seven foot clearance from grade and provided further, that such extension shall be at least a five feet distance
from the adjacent lot line and shall not extend more than three feet from the building.

5)	Off-street parking, flues, leaders, open terraces, steps, patios, decks that do not require railings according to City Code, Section 4.01, chimneys, building mounted flag poles, sidewalks, essential services, exposed ramps (wheelchair), uncovered porches, stoops, or similar features may protrude into or onto required yards provided they do not extend above the height of the ground floor level of the principal structure and do not extend a distance less than three feet from any lot line nor less than one foot from any existing or proposed driveway.

6)	Trees, shrubs, plants, and other vegetation may be located within or protrude into required yards except as limited by Section 55-030(E).

7)	Yard lights or other sources of light illuminating authorized illuminated signs, or light standards for illuminating parking areas, loading areas, or yards for safety and security reasons may be located within or protrude into required yards, provided the direct source of light is not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent residential property.

8)	Dog kennels, dog houses or other similar animal enclosures may be located within a required side or rear yard provided they are not located within five feet of a property line.  Dog kennels, dog houses or other similar animal enclosures may not be located in a required front yard.
 
G)	Flag Lots.  Red Wing has varied terrain, severe slopes and erodible soils and there are instances when lot shapes may be created with more flexibility in order to adapt to the above conditions. In these instances, flag lots may be created as part of the subdivision process. For the purposes of these regulations, flag lots shall meet the following guidelines:

l)  Limited frontage but not less than 30 feet on a publicly owned right-of-way.

2)	An access drive paved and constructed to a strength capable of supporting emergency vehicles (fire trucks) to within 50 feet of the structure. Said access drive shall be as straight and level as possible. Access drives fronting onto gravel streets are not required to have paved access driveways until two years following the completion of street paving as certified by the City Engineer.

3)	Said access drive shall conform to the requirements of Section 55-080 of these regulations and shall not be on a parcel of land less than 30 feet wide. This access shall be maintained as a landscaped yard similar to the adjacent properties.

4)	Said lot shall have a lot width at the building setback line of a least 60 feet.

5)	Said lot shall meet all other area, size, and setback requirements of the underlying zoning district regulations in which it is located.

6)	Where two flag lots are located adjacent to each other, an access driveway may be shared by both property owners. Documentation of cross easements providing for both property owners to share a common driveway must be presented to the Zoning Administrator prior to approval of any building permits for flag lots with common driveways. In these instances, frontage on a public right-of-way may be
reduced to 20 feet for each flag lot so that there is a total of 40 feet of frontage on
a public right-of-way for both flag lots.

55-30	Setbacks.  Building setbacks are provided for in the Base District Regulations for each zoning district.  The setback requirements for accessory structures attached to the principal structure shall follow the setback requirements for the principal structure. The following provisions provide special guidelines related to building setbacks.

A)	Vacant Buildable Lots.  Where a vacant buildable lot is adjacent to structures having a substandard setback from that required by the District Regulations of the underlying zoning district, the Zoning Administrator shall determine a reasonable, average, calculated yard setback to implement these requirements.

B)	Setback from Steep Slopes.  No structure shall be set back closer than 30 feet from the top of a bluff  The top of a bluff means the point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from steeper to gentler slope above. Ifno break in the slope is apparent or if there is disagreement in the
 
breaking point, the top of the bluff shall be the highest end of the highest 50-foot segment, as measured on the ground and based on a certified survey, indicating an average slope exceeding 25 percent.

C)	Shopping Centers, Multiple-Use Buildings, Single Family Attached Residential, and Planned Unit Developments.  Subject to regulations contained in the Building Code and other applicable regulations, side and rear setback requirements may be waived provided party walls are used and the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral unit and are part of an approved project.

D)	Private Roads.  All setback requirements of this Division shall also be applicable to private roads and public easement access right-of-way lines.

E)	Corner Visibility.   On a comer lot in all zoning districts and where the intersection is not controlled by a stop sign or traffic signal, no fence, wall, hedge, planting or structure shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to obstruct vision between a height of 2 1h feet and 10 feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such comer lots and line joining the points along said street lines 50 feet from the point of intersection. See illustration as follows:

 


55-040  Height Exceptions.  The height limitations listed in the District Regulations of each underlying zoning district shall not apply to belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, elevator bulkheads, chimneys, spires, flagpoles or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the rooflevel and not intended for human occupancy.

55-50	Accessory Uses and Structures.

A)	Limitation on Establishment.   No accessory building shall be built on a lot without a principal building. No permit for an accessory building shall be issued unless there is an existing principal building or a permit has been issued for the construction of a principal building. An occupancy permit shall not be issued for the accessory building until the substantial completion of the principal building.
 
B)	Accessory Building Number Limits.  The number of accessory buildings allowed are provided for in District Regulations for the underlying zoning district to which the property is located.

C)	Accessory Building Placement on Lot and Height Limit.  Limitations on the size, setback, height, and distance to principal structures are provided for in the District Regulations for the underlying zoning district to which the property is located, with the exception that in all districts, unattached accessory buildings with a total size of 120 square feet or less may be located 5 feet or more from a side or rear property
line and that in no case shall the height of a detached accessory building located in a
residential district exceed the height of the property's principal structure.

D)	Accessory Building Design and Materials. All exterior, exposed walls of any accessory building or structure located within a residential district shall be constructed of similar material used on the principal building or materials that are compatible with the principal building in terms of color and texture as determined by the Zoning Administrator. These materials should be durable all-weather materials;  in no instance shall the exterior exposed walls or roof of an accessory building or structure be constructed of fabric, nylon, canvas, plastic, or a similar material. In no instance shall an accessory structure constructed in a residential district after January 1, 2001, have any metal surface or siding unless it is coated or anodized with a
nonreflective,  glare-free finish.

A Temporary Recreational Shelter that is 120 square feet or less in size shall be exempt from the design and material regulations listed above in this Division, but may not be erected on a property for more than six months in a calendar year and shall not be used to cover or store personal property or equipment and shall not be occupied or used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes, for more than seven consecutive days at a time and for no more than fourteen days during a calendar
year.  Greenhouses are exempt from the accessory building design and material
regulations above.

E)	Attached Garages.  All attached garages shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building.

F)	Accessory Apartments.   Accessory apartments shall require a Certificate of Compliance issued from the Zoning Administrator prior to construction and are permitted in existing single family detached dwellings if the following requirements are met:

1)	The dwelling is owner occupied.

2)	One paved on-site parking stall for the accessory apartment is provided.

3)	The unit shall meet one of the following criteria:
a)	It shall not exceed 600 square feet in size; or
 
b)	It shall not have more than one bedroom.

4)	Entrances for an accessory apartment in dwellings constructed after January 1, 2000 shall not be placed on the building front; no new entrances shall be established along the building front of an existing dwelling to serve as an accessory apartment.

5)	The total number of adults that may occupy an accessory apartment is two.

6)	An accessory apartment may not be established where a home occupation is already located on the property except through a conditional use permit.

G)	Accessory Building Upper Story Square Footage. The upper story useable square footage of any residential detached accessory building shall be limited to 65 percent of  the gross square footage of the  structure's  main  level unless  approved  with  a conditional use permit.  The useable  square  footage  shall  be  determined  by calculating the portion of the upper story that has a height of four feet or greater, as measured from the floor of the upper story to the ceiling or bottom of the roof truss.

55-60	Accessory Parking and Storage.

A)	In all districts, all personal property shall be stored within a building or fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties and public streets, except for agricultural, construction, and landscaping materials and equipment currently (within a period of 12 months) being used on the premises.

B)	No person shall park or store any motor vehicle, vehicular driven sports vehicle, boat, boat trailer, utility trailer, vehicular drawn camper, or any like business or recreational vehicle in the front yard (or comer side yard unless there is at least a six foot fence) of any residential district, except upon the customary driveway emplaced to provide access to a garage attached or adjacent to the principal building, carport, or a rear parking area. Any of the herein vehicles parked within the front yard, on a driveway, shall be parked in such a manner as to maintain all wheels and trailer tongues on the driveway surface.

C)	The Zoning Administrator may waive the prohibition of parking licensed vehicles in any front yard provided that a certificate of compliance is filed and issued to the applicant and the following findings are made:

I)	The applicant demonstrates that no other reasonable parking alternative exists.

2)	Strict compliance would cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration.
 
3)	Applicants who meet these requirements are permitted to park a vehicle in the front yard only during the winter period of November  I to March 31 of each year.

D)	Boats and unoccupied trailers, less than 32 feet in length, are permissible if stored in the side or rear yard of a residential or agricultural district no closer than 2 feet from any property line.

E)	Recreational vehicles may be parked or stored in the side or rear yard of a residential or agricultural district provided the following conditions are met:

I)	No more than one recreational vehicle may be parked or stored outside in the side or rear yard.  Additional recreational vehicles may be kept within an enclosed structure which otherwise conforms to the zoning requirements of the district.

2)	Recreational vehicles must be maintained in a clean, well-kept, operable condition.

3)	Recreational vehicles shall be mobile and shall not be permanently affixed in the ground in a manner that would prevent removal.

4)	Recreational vehicles may be permitted in the side or rear yard if parked or stored at least two feet distance from any property line.  The parking or storage of recreational vehicles on the rear or side yard, as permitted herein, may be on surfaced or unsurfaced areas.

5)	Recreational vehicles may be stored on a lot without regard to the location on the lot for the sole and express purpose of loading and unloading for a period not to exceed 24 hours.

6)	Unmounted slide-in pickup campers must be stored no higher than 20 inches above the ground and must be securely supported on at least four4 comers by solid support blocks or support mechanisms.

7)	Recreational vehicles may not be occupied or used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes, for more than seven consecutive days at a time and for no more than fourteen days during a calendar year. These time limitations apply to individual properties and to individual recreational vehicles, regardless of their location within a residential or agricultural district when used for living,
sleeping, or housekeeping purposes.

8)	Except for routine maintenance or during emergency conditions when power supply is disrupted, the operation of a recreational vehicle power generator plant shall not be permitted in residential districts.  Routine maintenance periods shall not exceed 60 minutes per month.
 
F)	In all districts, all waste, refuse, or garbage shall be kept in an enclosed building or properly contained in a closed container designed for such purposes. The owner of vacant land shall be responsible for keeping such land free of refuse and weeds.

55-70	Fences, Walls.

A)	All fences or walls placed within a required yard and that exceed 30 inches in height shall require a certificate of compliance issued from the Zoning Administrator prior to construction or installation.

B)	Fences or walls may be permitted in any required yard, or along the edge of any required yard, provided no such fence or wall shall exceed a height of four feet along the sides or front edge of any front yard and no such fence or wall shall exceed a height of six feet in any other required yard.

C)	No fence or wall shall be located closer than one foot from any lot line unless permitted in writing from the adjacent property owner.

D)	That side of the fence considered to be the face (finished side as opposed to structural supports) shall face abutting property.

E)	Fences in excess of six feet above ground grade shall be prohibited unless the abutting neighbor consents in writing to a higher fence, except fences located in Commercial,  Special or Industrial Districts may be up to eight feet, which includes any extensions such as security arms for barbed wire.

F)	Where the property line is not clearly defined, a survey may be required by the Zoning Administrator to establish the property line.

G)	Electric fences may be placed around a private garden on a property located in a Residential District for the purpose of keeping deer out, subject to the following:

I)	Any person desiring to construct an electric fence shall make application on a form to be provided by the City for a fence permit.  Said application shall be accompanied by a fee as determined by the City and proof that the property, on which the electric fence is proposed to be constructed (hereinafter "Property"), is covered by a personal liability insurance policy that does not contain an
exclusion of coverage for damage or injury caused by an electric fence against
claims for damage to persons or property arising on the Property in the minimum amount of $1,000,000.

2)	No electric fence shall be constructed or activated on any property within the City unless a fence permit has been obtained therefore from the City.  No permit shall be issued until the applicant signs a hold harmless agreement, which shall
be a condition of such permit.  The hold harmless agreement shall be provided by the Zoning Administrator. No electric fence shall be constructed on any property
 
within the City that is capable of transmitting more than 110 volts.  Any fence constructed and maintained pursuant to this Division shall be interruptible, pulsating, and UL listed.

3)	No person shall activate an electric fence until such time as such electric fence has been inspected by the Zoning Administrator and a certificate of compliance has been issued.

4)	No electric fences shall be permitted within 10 feet of any public rights-of-way, including sidewalks.

5)	Electric fences shall be placed at least five feet from all property lines.  Where the property line is not clearly defined, a certificate of survey may be required by the Zoning Administrator to establish the property line.

6)	A sign, at least 12 inches by 12 inches in size, shall be conspicuously posted on a stake, not more than one foot from the fence, at intervals of not more than 50 feet apart.  Said sign shall read "Warning: Electric Fence in Operation."

7)	Violation.  Any person who violates the provisions of this Section 55-070 (G), and is convicted thereof, shall, in addition to any punishment prescribed by this Chapter or imposed by law, have his fence permit revoked and be required to remove such electric fence.  In the event he or she does not remove such electric fence, the City shall enter the property and remove the same at the property owner's  expense.

55-80	Access Drives and Private Drives.

A)	In all districts access drives shall not be placed closer than five feet to any side or rear lot line except that in a R-1 District access drives may be placed within three feet and within a R-2 District access drives may be placed with no setback to any side or rear lot line. In all districts, access drives shall not be placed closer than five feet to any principal structure except that in the R-1 and R-2 Districts, access drives may be placed within three feet of a single or two-family residential structure.

B)	Access drives onto state, county, or city roads shall require written approval from the State, County or City Engineer.  This permit shall be acquired prior to the issuance
of any building permits.  The Engineer shall determine the appropriate location, size,
and design of such access drives and may limit the number of access drives in the interest of public safety and efficient traffic flow.

C)	Access drives to principal structures which traverse wooded, steep, or open field areas shall be constructed and maintained to a width and base material depth sufficient to support access by emergency vehicles. (See "Construction on Steep Slopes", Section 55- 090 ).  Access drives on steep slopes shall meet the following requirements:
 
I)	All proposed access drives with a proposed slope of more than I 0 percent shall require a certificate of compliance permit and follow the procedures and submission requirements as listed in Section 75-010 of this Chapter.

2)	Proposed access drives with proposed slopes of more than I 0 percent shall be referred to the Police and Fire Departments who shall prepare a written review of the proposed access drive with regard to accessibility for emergency vehicles. Lack of access by emergency vehicles shall be cause to deny a certificate of compliance for a driveway permit.

3)	The Zoning Administrator shall refer the application to the City Engineer and the Building Official for their review and recommendation  concerning the proposed access drive's compliance with accepted City access drive standards.

4)	No principal structure may be constructed where the access drive is longer than two times the length of a straight line from the access drive' s point of origin to the proposed building. No access drive may disturb any part of an area where the slope is greater than 25 percent.

D)	Driveway/Accessway  Standards.


Single-F amity Detached	Commercial/ Multi-Family


I)	Maximum Slope	I 0 feet vertical rise in I 00	8 feet vertical rise in I 00
horizontal feet	horizontal feet

 
2)	Minimum Width	I 0 feet driveway base,
vegetation cleared to 8 feet on each side of driveway centerline
 
I 0 feet driveway base or as approved by the City Engineer
 

3)	Pavement/Surface	Capable of supporting emergency fire or other heavy
strength vehicles


E)	All lots or parcels shall have adequate direct physical access for emergency vehicles along the frontage of the lot or parcel from either an existing dedicated public roadway, or an existing private roadway in order to receive a building permit.  In addition to the required, direct physical access along the frontage of the lot or parcel to the approved public or private roadway, a lot or parcel may have private easement access drives to the lot over adjacent lots or parcels.

F)	Private roads may be utilized in planned unit developments as provided below:

I)	Ownership and maintenance of said roads shall be the responsibility of the property owner or a homeowners association.
 
2)	Said road design shall meet or exceed City standards for public roads including travel by emergency vehicles.

3)	Said road right-of-way shall be platted as an outlot in the final plat, and shall
meet or exceed the right-of-way requirements for an equivalent public road in the City.

4)	The homeowners association shall establish a formal, written procedure for petitioning City takeover of said road.  If a petition is received by the City to take over said road, the association shall provide written evidence that at least 90 percent of the voting members of the association approved the transfer of road responsibilities to the City. Such procedures shall allow the City to take over
such roads at the City's discretion.

5)	The City and the homeowners association shall establish an assessment procedure for all abutting and/or benefiting land in case public dedication and/or upgrading of the previously existing private road is officially petitioned for by the homeowners association.

6)	An easement is granted to the City by the association, which allows the City to use the road and road right-of-way for any reasonable public purpose including, but not limited to, travel by emergency vehicles and installation of public utilities and conveniences.

G)	Private roads shall not connect two or more existing or proposed public roads or road rights-of-way.

H)	Private roadway systems within planned unit developments shall provide access to the City road system only, and shall not connect with private roads of other developments without the formal written approval of each homeowners association and the City Council.

I)	Before final approval is given for a private road by the City Council, the homeowners association shall grant the City an option to acquire the full right-of­ way otherwise required by the Zoning and Subdivision Chapters for public road purposes along the entire length of such private road, at such time as the City Council, in its sole discretion, determines that it is in the public interest to acquire the road without any cost to the City.

55-90	Construction on Steep Slopes.

A)	Construction of a structure on a slope between 13 percent to 18 percent shall require a certificate of compliance for a grading permit and stormwater management plan as set forth in Division 57, Stormwater Management Regulations. This shall be required even if the grading project disturbs less than 50 cubic yards of earthen material and less than one acre of land area is disturbed.  When any land disturbance activity disturbs more than five acres, a conditional use permit shall be required for the
 
grading permit and stormwater management plan. Said grading permit shall address erosion and sediment control as required by the City Engineer.

B)	Construction of a structure on a slope between 18 percent and 25 percent shall require a conditional use permit for a grading permit and stormwater management plan as set forth in Division 57, Stormwater Management Regulations. This shall be required even if the grading project disturbs less than 50 cubic yards of earthen material and less than 5 acres of land area is disturbed. Said grading permit shall address erosion and sediment control as required by the City Engineer.

C)	Construction of a structure on a slope in excess of 25 percent shall not be permitted.

D)	Building setbacks for structures constructed on the top of bluffs shall meet the requirements as set forth in Section 55-030 of this Division.

55-100	Performance  Standards.

A)	Purpose.  The regulations of this Division are designed to protect all uses in zones which allow housing from certain objectionable off-site impacts associated with nonresidential uses.  These impacts include noise, vibration, odors, glare, and others. The standards ensure that uses provide adequate control measures or are located in areas where the community is protected from health hazards and nuisances.  The use of objective standards provides a measurable means of determining off-site impacts. This method protects specific industries or firms from exclusion in a zone based solely on the general characteristics of industries in the past.

B)	Relationship to Other Regulations.  The off-site impact standards are in addition to all other regulations of the City Code.  The standards do not replace or supersede regulations of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, relevant county regulations, or standards such as the Uniform Fire Code.

C)	Measurements.

1)	Measurements for compliance with these standards shall be made from the property line or within the property of the affected site.  Measurements may be made at ground level or at habitable levels of buildings.

2)	If the City does not have the equipment or expertise to measure and evaluate a specific complaint, it may request assistance from another agency or may contract with an independent expert to perform such measurements.  The City may accept measurements made by an independent expert hired by the controller or operator of the off-site impact source.  If the City contracts to have measurements made and no violation is found, the City will bear the expense, if any, of the measurements.  If a violation is found, City expenses will be charged to the violator.  Nonpayment of the costs is a violation of the Zoning Code, and enforced through the provisions of Division 95 Enforcement and Penalties.
 
D)	Non-Conforming Uses by Reason of Off-Site Impact Standards.  Any use existing on January 1, 2000, or any subsequent amendment to the Zoning Chapter and permitted by right that does not meet the requirements of one or more of the off­ site impact standards established explicitly in this Division or by reference shall be subject to the nonconforming use provisions of Division 70 of this Chapter

E)	Exemptions.  The off-site impact standards do not apply to machinery, equipment, and facilities, which were at the site and in compliance with existing regulations on June 22, 2000.  Any new or additional machinery, equipment, or facilities must comply with the standards of this Chapter.  Documentation is the responsibility of the proprietor of the use if there is any question about when the equipment was brought to the site.

F)	Bulk Storage (Liquid).  All uses associated with the bulk storage of oil, gasoline, liquid fertilizer, chemicals, nuclear fuels, reactor elements, and similar liquids shall require a conditional use permit in order that the City Council may have assurance that fire, explosion, or water or soil contamination hazards are not present (that would be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare).  All existing, aboveground liquid storage tanks having a capacity in excess of 10,000 gallons shall be treated as if they have an existing conditional use permit and shall meet all applicable federal and state standards and regulations. For expansion of existing developments and new developments, the City Council may require the development of diking around said tanks.  Diking shall be suitably sealed and shall hold a leakage capacity equal to 115 percent of the tank capacity.  The City Council may require pressure testing of storage tanks on a periodic basis. All developments shall meet federal and state regulations that govern the construction and operation of such Bulk Storage facilities.

G)	Noise.  It shall be unlawful to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any noise in excess of the noise levels set forth unless such noise be reasonably
necessary to the preservation of life, health, safety, or property.

I) Measurement of Noise.  Any activity not expressly exempted by this Division which creates or produces sound, regardless of frequency, exceeding the ambient noise levels at the property line of any property (or of a condominium or apartment house within any adjoining development) by more than six decibels above the ambient noise levels as designated in the following table at the time and place and for the duration then mentioned, shall be deemed to be a violation of this Chapter, but any enumeration herein shall not be deemed to be exclusive.

	Column I	Column II	Column III
Duration of Sound	7:00 AM - 6:00 PM
(all districts)	6:00 PM - 10:00
PM (residential districts) and
6:00 PM - 7:00 AM
(all other districts)	10:00 PM - 7:00 AM
(residential districts)
 

75 db	70 db	60 db

70 db	
60 db	
50 db
60 db	50 db	40 db

2)	In determining whether a particular sound exceeds the maximum permissible sound level in the above table:

a)	Sounds in excess of the residential district limitations as measured in residential districts are in violation of this Division whether the sound originates in a residential district or any other district;

b)	During all hours of Sunday and state and federal holidays, the maximum allowable decibel levels for residential districts are as set forth in Column III of the table above.

3)	Sounds emanating from the operation of motor vehicles on a public highway, aircraft, outdoor implements such as power lawn mowers, snow blowers, power hedge clippers, and power saws, and pile drivers or jackhammers  and other construction equipment are exempt from the provisions of thisDivision.   Sounds emanating from lawful and proper activities at school grounds, playgrounds, parks, or places wherein athletic contests take place are also exempt from the provisions of this Division.

H)	Explosives.  No activities involving the storage, use or manufacture of materials or products, which could decompose by detonation, shall be permitted except such as are specifically permitted by the City Council in designated Industrial Districts. Such materials shall include, but not be confined to, all primary explosives, such as lead azide and mercury fulminate, all high explosives and boosters, such as TNT, tetryl and nitrates propellants and components thereof such as nitrocellulose, black powder and nitroglycerin, and blasting explosives such as dynamite.

I)	Radiation and Electrical Interference.  No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radioactivity beyond enclosed areas.  There shall be no electrical disturbance (except from domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment including, but not limited to, radio and television reception other than that of the creator of the disturbance.

J)	Vibration.   Continuous, frequent, or repetitive vibrations, which exceed 0.002g peak, may not be produced.  In general, this means that a person of normal sensitivities should not be able to feel any vibrations.

I)   Exceptions.  Vibrations from temporary construction and vehicles which leave the site (such as trucks, trains, airplanes, and helicopters) are exempt.  Vibrations lasting less than five minutes per day are also exempt.  Vibrations from primarily on-site vehicles and equipment are not exempt.
 

2)  Measurement.   Seismic or electronic vibration measuring equipment may be used for measurements when there are doubts about the level of vibration.

K)	Odor. Continuous, frequent, or repetitive odors may not be produced which exceed scentometer No. 0.  The odor threshold is the point at which an odor may just be detected.  The scentometer reading is based on the number of clean air dilutions required to reduce the odorous air to the threshold level.  Scentometer No. 0 is 1 to 2 dilutions of clean air.

1)	Exception.  An odor detected for less than 15 minutes per day is exempt.

L)	Particulates.  No solid or liquid particles shall be emitted at any point in concentrations to exceed 0.1 grains per cubic feet of conveying gas in any residential district and 0.3 grains per cubic feet of conveying gas in any other district.  For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from combustion, standard corrections shall be applied to a stack temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit, and 50 percent excess air.

M)	Lighting, Lighting Fixtures and Glare.  In all districts, any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area, or other structure or area, shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining residential zone or from the public streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from high-temperature processes such as combustion or welding shall not be directed into any adjoining property.  The source of light shall not be directed into any adjoining property. The source of light shall be hooded or controlled so as not to light adjacent property. Bare light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public right­ of-way.  No light or combination oflights which cast light on a public street shall
exceed 1 foot candle meter reading as measured from the centerline of said street nor shall any light or combination of lights which cast light on residential property exceed .04 foot candles.

1)	Lighting standards shall not exceed 25 feet or the height of the principal building on the lot; whichever is less, without a conditional use permit.

2)	All lighting in Non-Residential Districts used for the external illumination of buildings, so as to feature said building, shall be placed and shielded so as not to interfere with the vision of persons on adjacent highways or adjacent property.

3)	All illumination of signs and any other outdoor features shall not be of a flashing, moving or intermittent type.  Artificial light shall be maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use.

55-110	Building Moving.
 
A)	Purpose.  No building or structure, which has been wholly or partially erected, shall be moved within the City corporate limits unless a permit to move the building or structure has first been obtained.

B)	Application Requirements for Certificate of Compliance.  A certificate of compliance is required in order to move a building through the City corporate limits or from a site within the City to a site outside the City corporate limits. The applicant for a certificate of compliance permit shall meet all of the requirements and provide all submission materials as listed in Section 90-030 of this Chapter.  In addition to the submission requirements for a certificate of compliance permit as required by Section 90-030 of this Chapter, the applicant shall also meet the following requirements and provide additional submission materials:

I)	A designated route through the City of Red Wing and any stops which the structure must make.

2)	The applicant shall obtain a moving review form from the Zoning Administrator and shall have said form filled out and signed by the following authorities and submitted with the certificate of compliance permit application:

a)	The electrical and natural gas utilities serving the existing and proposed sites.

b)	The telephone and cable utilities serving the existing and proposed sites.

c)	The Engineering Department, Public Works Department, Fire Department.
Police Department, and Building Official.

d)	The County Public Works Department and the Minnesota Department of Transportation if the designated route involves a state or county roadway.

3)	All moving operations of the structure on public property or right-of-way shall be performed only from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., unless otherwise specified in the approval of the certificate of compliance.

4)	No structure shall be raised on moving blocks more than seven calendar days prior to or fourteen calendar days after completion of an approved move. In no case shall an exposed vacant basement be left unfenced by the applicant. A minimum four foot high safety fence shall be placed around the entire perimeter of an exposed basement.

5)	All exposed basements shall be filled in or backfilled with clean granular fill within seven calendar days after removal of the house from the lot.
 
6)	The applicant shall notify the Police Department at least 72 hours prior to the move.  The Police Department shall post temporary no parking signs along both sides of the entire moving route at least 24 hours in advance of the move.

7)	Building movers shall meet all State of Minnesota requirements.

C)	Application Requirements for Conditional Use Permit.  The applicant for a conditional use permit to move a building or structure to a location inside the City of Red Wing shall meet all requirements and provide all submission materials as listed in Section 90-040 of this Chapter.  In addition to the submission requirements for a conditional use permit as required by Section 90-040 of this Chapter, the applicant shall also meet the following requirements and provide the following additional submission materials:

I)	A site plan of both the existing and proposed sites including an illustration of how and where the structure will be located during and after the moving operation.

2)	A designated route and any stops which the structure must make.

3)	The applicant shall obtain a building moving form supplied by the Zoning Administrator and shall have said form filled out and signed by the following authorities and submitted with the conditional use permit application.

a)	The electrical and natural gas utilities serving the existing and proposed sites.

b)	The telephone and cable utilities serving the existing and proposed sites.

c)	The Engineering Department, Public Works Department, Fire Department, Police Department, and Building Official.

d)	The County Public Works Department and the Minnesota Department of Transportation if the designated route involves a state or county roadway.

D)	The Building Official shall prepare a report for the applicant on the Building Code requirements for the house in order for it to comply with the building and housing codes of the City.  Any such building or structure proposed to be moved shall meet the requirements of the City Building and Housing Codes as required by the Building Official. All life safety requirements shall be met.  In addition, the City Council shall review heights, widths, proportions, use of materials, architectural style, and age of the proposed structure to determine compatibility with other adjacent structures.

E)	All moving operations of the structure on public property or right-of-way shall be performed only from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00a.m., unless otherwise specified in the approval of the conditional use permit.
 

F)	No structure shall be raised on moving blocks more than seven calendar days prior to or fourteen calendar days after completion of an approved move unless specifically allowed otherwise in the approval of the conditional use permit. In no case shall an exposed vacant basement be left unfenced by the applicant. A minimum four foot high safety fence shall be placed around the entire perimeter of an exposed
basement.

G)	All exposed basements shall be filled in or backfilled with clean granular fill within seven calendar days after removal of the house from the lot.

H)	All excavations and basements at the proposed site of the house shall be filled in or backfilled within 21 calendar days after completion of the move, unless the Building Official grants an extension of time because of frost conditions, at the Building Official's  discretion.

I)	The applicant shall provide a landscape plan as part of the submission requirements for the conditional use permit.  All fine grading, seeding and sodding in required yards shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Building Official, unless the Building Official grants an extension of time because of frost conditions, at the Building Official's discretion.

J)	The applicant shall notify the Police Department at least 72 hours prior to the move.
The Police Department shall post temporary no parking signs along both sides of the entire moving route at least 24 hours in advance of the move.

K)	The applicant shall enter into a performance agreement to insure performance and cover any damages that may be caused by the building-moving project.  This performance agreement may provide for a performance bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit that is acceptable to the City Attorney.

L)	Farm buildings, pre-built or panelized housing, mobile homes, construction sheds, buildings moved from one lot to another lot without use of public right-of-way, or temporary structures to be located on a site for 12 months or less shall be exempt from the requirement of a conditional use permit.  Buildings of 14 feet or less in width to be moved on public right-of-way shall be exempt from the requirement of a conditional use permit.

M)	Building movers shall meet all State of Minnesota requirements.

55-115	Interim Uses.  This Division allows short-term and minor deviations from the requirements of the Zoning Code for uses which are truly temporary in nature, will not adversely impact the surrounding area and land uses, and which can be terminated and removed immediately.  Temporary uses have no inherent rights within the zone in which they are located.
 
A)	Interim Activities Permitted.  The following temporary uses of land are permitted in any zoning district subject to the specific regulations and time limits which follow and to other applicable regulations of the district in which the use is permitted:

I)	Contractors' office and equipment sheds (containing no sleeping or cooking accommodations) accessory to a construction project are permitted only during the duration of such project and shall be located on the same property or on property in a district in which the use being constructed is allowed.

2)	Real estate offices (containing no sleeping or cooking accommodations unless located in a model dwelling unit) incidental to a new housing or other development to continue only until the sale or lease of all dwelling units in the development.

3)	Garage sales. Garage sales and other sales for items from the site may occur for no more than three consecutive days on two different occasions during a calendar year.

4)	Natural disasters and emergencies. Temporary activities and structures needed as the result of a natural disaster or other health and safety emergencies are allowed for the duration of the emergency.

5)	Temporary recreational shelters over 120 square feet in size shall be allowed on private property for no more than five consecutive days in all zoning districts and on no more than two different occasions during a calendar year in residential zoning districts.  Temporary recreational shelters over 120 square feet in size are subject to all primary structure setbacks required in the zoning district in which they are located.

B)	Temporary Activities Permitted as a Certificate of Compliance.   The following uses of land are permitted as a certificate of compliance in the specific zoning districts listed, subject to the restrictions in this Division and the other applicable restrictions in the district or districts in which the temporary use is permitted as a certificate of compliance.

1)	In the A, AC, AR, I-1, I-2, and RF districts.

a)	An outdoor carnival or circus subject to the following restrictions:

i)	Circuses and carnivals may be operated for a period not to exceed 14 calendar days in one location per year in A, AC, AR, I-1, and I-2 districts provided a certificate of compliance is approved by the Council.  In all other districts a conditional use permit and a public hearing shall be required as per Section 85-020 of this Chapter.
 
ii)	No permit shall be issued for a period exceeding 14 calendar days in one location per year exclusive of a reasonable period during which the amusement rides, concessions, etc. are erected and removed from the site.

iii)	The applicant shall prepare a site plan which clearly illustrates the following: parking for customers and employees, public restrooms and drinking water, fire hydrants, electrical service meters and surface lines, fuel storage, employee housing, light standards, tents and rides.

iv)	The applicant shall provide certificates of insurance which include a clause holding the City harmless regarding the safety of the applicant's  equipment.

v)	When the proposed site is a city park, the applicant shall also include a water deposit and a performance bond.  Upon completion of the circus or carnival operation, the City Clerk shall compile bills accumulated for water usage and park damages and collect such sums from the applicant/operator or utilize the proceeds of the bond sale.

vi)	No carnival or circus shall be located on a parcel ofland less than five acres in size.

vii)	Lighting, amusement activities, noise, or increased traffic associated with a carnival or circus shall not unreasonably disturb surrounding residential neighborhoods.

viii)	The applicant shall provide a reasonable plan for traffic control approved by the City and adequate evidence that said plan will be implemented.

ix)	The carnival or circus shall limit its hours of operation to a daily period extending from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

2)	Interim Uses shall be allowed in Residential Districts with a certificate of compliance permit as follows:

a)	Mobile home use during construction.  Mobile homes may be used for a residence while a permanent residence is being constructed.  Mobile homes may remain on the site until the completion of the construction, or for not more than two years, whichever time period is less.  The mobile home must be removed within one month of issuance of certificate of occupancy.
 
b)	Residential sales offices.  Sales offices for major subdivisions or planned unit developments are allowed at the development site until all lots or houses are sold.  Use of the sales office for sites outside of the project is prohibited.

c)	Seasonal outdoor sales.  Seasonal outdoor sales of plants and produce are allowed twice a year for up to five consecutive weeks each time.

d)	Show of model homes.  The viewing of model homes within a subdivision for a fee is allowed for a period not to exceed one month.  Only one showing is allowed per phase of a subdivision.

e)	Staging areas for public road and utility installation.  Staging areas for public utility improvement projects such as the installation of sewer pipes, water pipes, and road improvements, are allowed without a certificate of compliance.

f)	Temporary storage container/portable storage unit (POD).  One POD may be located on a property for a maximum of 14 consecutive days, including the days of delivery and removal.  An extension may be granted to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator, subject to conditions, for a reasonable additional time period in an amount not to exceed 30 days.  A residential property is limited to a maximum of four PODs per calendar year, and a minimum of 15 days shall elapse between the removal of a POD and the placement of a new POD.  PODs shall only be placed on the property's driveway or in an off-street parking area.

3)	Interim Uses shall be permitted in the Commercial, Industrial, and Mixed Use zoning districts, as follows:

a)	Parking lot sales.  Parking lot sales in zones where outdoor display is not otherwise allowed are allowed for up to two consecutive weeks at any one time.

b)	Seasonal outdoor sales.  Seasonal outdoor sales are allowed for up to one month at any one time.

c)	Warehouse sales.  In industrial zones, retail warehouse sales are allowed for up to one week at any one time.

d)	Natural disasters and emergencies.  Temporary activities and structures needed as the result of a natural disaster or other health and safety emergencies are allowed for the duration of the emergency.

e)	Staging areas for public road and utility installation.  .
 
C)	Interim Uses Allowed with a Conditional Use Permit.  The following uses of land are permitted as a conditional use permit in the specific zoning districts listed, subject to the restrictions in this Division and the other applicable restrictions in the district or districts in which the temporary use is permitted:

1)	Interim Uses shall be allowed with a conditional use permit in Residential Districts as follows:

a)	Community Services

D)	General Regulations.  All interim uses and activities are subject to the following:

1)	Permanent changes to the site are prohibited.

2)	Temporary parking areas are allowed only during construction on the site.  They must be removed within one month of completion of the interim use.

3)	Permanent signs are prohibited.  All temporary signs associated with the interim use must be removed when the activity ends.

4)	Interim uses may not cause the elimination of required off-street parking.

5)	Interim uses on sites where the primary use is a conditional use may not violate the conditions of approval for the primary use.

6)	These regulations do not exempt the operator from any other required permits such as sanitation facility permits, building permits, etc.

7)	Any interim use that does not meet the dimensional requirements listed in this Division shall be considered an interim use not meeting criteria and shall require a variance following the regulation established by Section 90-110 of this Chapter.

55-117	Outdoor Biomass Burner/Boiler.   Outdoor biomass burners/boilers are permitted in all zoning districts with the issuance of a certificate of compliance, with the following standards to apply:

A)	An application for a certificate of compliance permit shall include information showing the type and size of the outdoor biomass burner/boiler proposed, the energy/hot water loads (i.e., pool, house, outbuildings, domestic hot water) to be used by the outdoor biomass boiler, a copy of the manufacturer's installation and operation recommendations,  a manufacturer's list of approved fuels, and a site plan showing: the size and location of the proposed outdoor biomass burner/boiler, proposed stack height, location of house, garage, fencing, and other improvements on the applicant's lot, location of structures on all adjacent lots, location of existing overhead or underground wiring, utility easements, trees, and similar features.
 

B)	Outdoor biomass burners/boilers may only be installed on a lot/property of one  acre or more m size.

C)	Outdoor biomass burners/boilers that use a fuel source that contains more than 10 percent moisture content must be set back from public rights-of-way by at least 150 feet and must be set back from all other property lines by at least 200 feet.  Outdoor biomass burners/boilers that use a fuel source that contains a moisture content of 10 percent or less must be set back from public rights-of-way by at least 50 feet and must be set back from all other property lines by at least 100 feet.

D)	Any new or existing (as of August 31, 2007) outdoor biomass burners/boilers shall only use fuels recommended by the device's manufacturer.  The burning of garbage, treated lumber, plastic, rubber, leaves, gasoline, and petroleum-based products are strictly prohibited.  The City may determine the property to be a public nuisance and may revoke the certificate of compliance for failure to comply with these regulations.

E)	Any new or existing (as of August 31, 2007) outdoor biomass burners/boilers that use a fuel source that contains more than 10 percent moisture content and are located within 500 feet of a residential structure(s) or a primary structure(s) not located on the same property as the outdoor biomass fuel burner/boiler may not be operated between the dates of April 1 and October 15 unless written permission is granted by the owner(s) of said structure(s), on a yearly basis.  Any new or existing (as of August
31, 2007) outdoor biomass burners/boilers that use a fuel source that contains a
moisture content of 10 percent or less and are located within 300 feet of a residential structure(s) or a primary structure(s) not located on the same property as the outdoor biomass burner/boiler may not be operated between the dates of April 1 and October 15 unless written permission is granted by the owner(s) of said structure(s), on a yearly basis.  A copy of the written permission must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator prior to the use of the outdoor solid fuel burner/boiler for the season.

F)	The chimney/stack of a solid fuel burner/boiler shall extend a minimum of at least 15 feet above the ground surface adjacent to the device, but shall also extend at least 2 feet above the peak of any residence or primary structure within 300 feet of the
device and shall extend at least to the eave line of any residence or primary structure within 500 feet of the device.

G)	All chimneys/stacks shall meet or exceed the minimum recommendations of the manufacturer. All chimneys/stacks must be classified as "Class A" and shall be designed and constructed to withstand high winds or other related elements.

H)	Any dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable quantities from a new or existing (as of August 31, 2007) outdoor biomass burner/boiler, may
be declared a public nuisance by the Zoning Administrator, Fire Marshall, or Building
Official.
 
I)	Any outdoor biomass burner/boiler installed and/or operating as of August 31, 2007, in any zoning district may continue in such operation until the property is sold, in which case the outdoor biomass burner/boiler must be brought into compliance with all of the provisions of this Division; however, any existing outdoor biomass burner/boiler is subject to and must comply with Section 55-117 D), E) and H) above.

J)	Any new outdoor biomass burner/boiler installed after January 1, 2008, must meet the emissions level for the U.S. EPA's Phase II Voluntary Program.

K)	All new and existing outdoor biomass burners/boilers  must follow the U.S. EPA's current Best Burn Practices.

L)	Where the use of a legally existing outdoor biomass burner/boiler has been discontinued for any reason for a period of one year or longer, the outdoor biomass burner/boiler shall be considered to be non-conforming and must come into full conformance with these regulations, including the issuance of a new certificate of compliance.

55-118	Solar Energy Systems.

A)	Purpose: To meet the goals of the Red Wing Comprehensive Plan by promoting the safe, effective, and efficient use of on-site solar energy systems within the City of Red Wing, while maintaining the community's character and aesthetic qualities.


B)	Definitions - For the purpose of this Division, certain terms and words are defined below.


1)	Building Mounted Solar Energy Systems. An active solar energy system that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate mechanical device, preplacing or substituting for an architectural or structural component of the building.  Building-integrated systems include but are not limited to photovoltaic or hot water/air solar energy systems that are contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights, and awnings.

2)	Community Solar Garden.  A facility or grouping of solar collectors mounted on the ground or on a building at a centralized location designed to offset the energy use of not less than five subscribers by selling the electrical output to the
utility and whereby individual subscribers receive a bill credit from the utility for the electricity generated in proportion to the size of their subscription.

3)	Freestanding Solar Energy Systems. Freestanding solar panels mounted to the ground by use of stabilizers or similar apparatus.
 
4)	Renewable Energy System. A solar energy or wind energy system.  Renewable energy systems do not include passive systems that serve a dual function, such as a greenhouse, sunspace, or window.

5)	Solar Access. A view of the sun, from any point on the collector surface, that is not obscured by any vegetation, building, or object located on parcels of land other than the parcel upon which the solar collector is located, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. Central Standard Time on any day of the year.

6)	Solar Collector. A device, structure or a part of a device or structure for which the primary purpose is to transform solar radiant energy into thermal, mechanical,  chemical or electrical energy.

7)	Solar Collector Surface. Any part of a solar collector that absorbs solar energy for use in the collector's energy conversion process.  Collector surface does not include frames, supports, and mounting hardware.

8)	Solar Energy. Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in the form of heat or light by a solar collector.

9)	Solar Energy System. A device or structural design feature, a substantial purpose of which is to provide daylight for interior lighting or provide for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling, electricity generating, or water heating.

C)	As a Permitted Accessory Use - Freestanding and building mounted solar energy systems located on a parcel with a principal structure and that meet the provisions below shall be allowed as permitted accessory uses in all districts.  Off-grid freestanding solar energy systems located on parcels without principal structures that have a solar collector surface of I 00 square feet or less in size that meet the provisions below shall be allowed as a permitted  accessory use in all districts.


I)	Height. Solar energy systems must meet the following height requirements:


a)	Building mounted solar energy systems.


i)	Building mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed the maximum height allowed in any zoning district.


ii)	Building mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed the height of a building's roof by more than 15 feet above the highest point of a flat roof or by more than I foot above the highest point of a pitched roof
 
b)	Freestanding solar energy systems.


i)	Freestanding solar energy systems shall not exceed the maximum height allowed for an accessory building per the zoning district in which it is located.  In zoning districts with no maximum height regulations for an accessory building, a freestanding solar energy system shall not exceed 24 inches in height and may not be taller than the principal structure on the site.


ii)	The height of a freestanding solar energy system shall be determined by measuring the vertical distance of the system's highest point to the average grade level adjoining the system.


2)	Setbacks. Solar energy systems must meet the following setback requirements:


a)	No part of a building-mounted  solar energy system, including mounting devices, shall extend into the required yard setbacks of the building on which it is mounted, per the zoning district in which the building is located.


b)	Freestanding solar energy systems are not allowed to be placed in a required front yard.


c)	No part of a freestanding solar energy system, including mounting devices, shall extend into the required yard setbacks established for an accessory building, per the zoning district in which the building is located, with the exception that a freestanding solar energy system with the collector surface oriented toward an adjacent property  line shall have a setback equal to or greater than the system's maximum height.


d)	Freestanding solar energy systems located in zoning districts that have no accessory building setback requirements shall meet the established minimum setback requirements for principal buildings in that zoning district.


3)	Maximum Number and Coverage.


a)	In addition to any detached accessory buildings, no more than two  freestanding solar energy systems may be located on residentially zoned parcels.


b)	In residentially zoned districts, 50 percent of the square footage of a freestanding solar energy system's collector surface shall be counted toward a property's
 
maximum accessory building square footage allowance, per the zoning district in which it is located.


4)	Visibility and Aesthetics.


a)	Pitched roofs


i)	In residentially zoned districts and zoning districts regulated by Division 45 of the Red Wing Zoning Code, pitched roof mounted solar energy systems on the front roof, or on a roof visible from the primary frontage, must match the pitch of the roof and be designed to blend with the architecture of the building.
Rear roof mounts, or mounts not visible from the primary frontage, may have a steeper pitch for optimal solar collection, and do not need to blend with the architecture of the building.


b)	Flat Roofs.


i)	In residentially zoned districts and zoning districts regulated by Division 45 of the Red Wing Zoning Code, roof mounted solar energy systems must be set back from the edge of the roof line as described below:


a.	A forward facing collector surface, parallel to a corresponding roofline, must be set back from the corresponding roofline a distance of at least four feet.


b.	A backward or side facing collector surface, parallel to a corresponding roofline, must be set back from the corresponding roofline a distance equal to or greater than 50 percent of the system's overall height above the roof surface.


c)	Freestanding Solar Energy Systems.


i)	In residentially zoned districts, freestanding solar systems with the collector surface oriented away from an adjacent property line must be screened on the rear side equivalent to at least 50 percent of the system's height, if the system is located within I 0 feet from a side or rear property line, and is taller than I 0 feet tall at its maximum height.  Screening may be accomplished through architectural or vegetative materials.
 
ii)	The underside of a freestanding solar energy system shall not be used to store personal property unless fully screened from adjoining properties, with the exception that freestanding solar energy systems located in a parking lot in a non-residential zoning district may be used to park vehicles under.


iii)	The underside of a freestanding solar system shall not be fully enclosed; such a structure will be considered an accessory building and must meet all zoning regulations and building code regulations.


d)	Historic Buildings and Districts.


i)	In addition to the provisions included in this Division, any solar energy system located on a locally designated historic site or within a locally
designated historic district or conservation district must be in compliance with the provisions found in Chapter 16 Heritage Preservation of the Red Wing City Code.


5)	Solar Access.


i)	No homeowners'  agreement, covenant, common interest community, or other contract between multiple property owners within a subdivision of Red Wing shall restrict or limit solar energy systems to a greater extent than the Red Wing Zoning Ordinance and Chapter 16 Heritage Preservation of the Red Wing City Code.


ii)	Red Wing encourages solar access to be protected in all new subdivisions and allows for existing solar to be protected consistent with Minnesota Statutes. Any solar easements filed, must be consistent with Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 500, Section 500.30.


6)	General Standards.


i)	Solar energy systems shall be certified by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., the Solar Rating and Certification Corporation, or other body as determined by
the Zoning Administrator.


ii)	Prior to the installation or erection of a solar energy system, the operator must provide evidence showing their regular electrical service provider has been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected, customer-
 
owned solar energy system.  Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.


iii)	With the exception of a Community Solar Garden system, all solar energy systems shall be limited to the purpose of on-site energy production, except that any additional energy produced above the total onsite demand may be sold to the operator's regular electrical service provider in accordance with any agreement provided by the same or applicable legislation.


iv)	Any lines accompanying a solar energy system, other than those attached to on-site structures by leads, shall be buried within the interior of the subject parcel.


v)	A solar energy system that is allowed to remain in a nonfunctional or inoperative state for a period of 12 consecutive months shall be presumed abandoned and may be declared a public nuisance subject to removal by the owner or removal by the City at the expense of the operator.


D)	Certificate of Compliance Required.


1)	A proposed off-grid freestanding solar energy system to be located on a parcel without a principal structure that has a solar collector surface larger than 100 square feet but less than 250 square feet must be approved with the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance.


E)	Conditional Use Permit Required.


1)	A proposed solar energy system not meeting the provisions in Division 55-118 C) above must be approved with the issuance of a conditional use permit.


2)	A proposed off-grid freestanding solar energy system to be located on a parcel without a principal structure and that has a solar collector surface of 250 square feet or larger must be approved with the issuance of a conditional use permit.


3)	A proposed freestanding community solar garden to be located on a parcel without a principal structure must be approved with the issuance of a conditional use permit.


STANDARDS THAT RELATE TO AGRICULTURAL  DISTRICTS AND USES

55-120	Farming Operations.
 
A)	Existing Farms.  All farms in existence on June 22, 2000, shall be a permitted use.
However, all regulations contained herein and other City Code provisions in effect shall apply to all changes of the farming operation which will cause all or part of the area to become more intensively used or more urban in character.  Setback and other regulations shall apply to farming operations just as they do to urban developments.

B)	Rural Farm Operations.  Rural farm operations may occur on parcels of 10 or more contiguous acres in Agricultural Districts.  Rural farm operations may include the production of farm crops, such as vegetables, fruit trees, grain, and other crops and their storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereof of farm poultry, domestic pets, and domestic farm animals.

I)	Rural farm operations may include necessary uses for treating, storing, or producing retail farm market products; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the primary agricultural activity.

2)	Rural farm operations may not include commercial livestock pen feeding (feedlots) without first receiving a conditional use permit from the City and a Minnesota Pollution Control Agency feedlot permit.

3)	Commercial feeding operations shall not include the feeding of garbage to swine or other animals.

C)	Suburban Farm Operations.   Suburban agricultural operations may occur on parcels of less than I 0 contiguous acres in Agricultural Districts.  Suburban agricultural operations may include the production of crops such as fruit trees, shrubs, plants and flowers, vegetables, and domestic pets, provided such produce is intended for the use of the residents on the property or sale away from the property, or for temporary seasonal produce sales which require no roadside stand.

I)	Suburban farm operations may include domestic farm animals provided:

a)	The parcel is greater than five contiguous acres in area with at least two acres of grazeable acreage per animal.

b)	An adequate animal shelter structure can be constructed.

c)	A Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Permit can be obtained by the owner/applicant.

2)   Suburban farm operations shall not include the raising of domestic farm animals (no parcels ofless than five acres), roadside stands for sale of products, processing or packaging operations, or similar uses.
 
D)	The Council may require any farm operation not located in an Agricultural District to secure a conditional use permit to continue said operations in the event of the following:

I)	A nuisance on a farm is adjacent to or within 200 feet of any property line and may be detrimental to living conditions by emitting noise, odor, vibrations, hazards to safety, and the like.

2)   The farm operations are so intensive as to constitute an industrial type use consisting of the compounding, processing, and packaging of products for wholesale or retail trade and further, that such operations may tend to become a permanent industrial type operation that cannot be terminated as can a normal farming operation.  Excessive trucking operations shall be considered as intensive use.

55-130	Livestock.

A)	Prohibition of Deposit of Manure Without Safeguards.  No manure or livestock waste shall be deposited, stored, kept, or allowed to remain in or upon any storage site or feedlot without reasonable safeguards adequate to prevent the escape or movement of such manure or wastes or a solution thereof from the site which may result in pollution of any public waters or any health hazard.

B)	Pollution Control Agency Standard Minimum Requirement.   All regulations imposed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency relating to keeping of livestock shall be adhered to and such regulations shall be considered the minimum safeguards necessary to prevent pollution of public waters or creation of a health hazard.

C)	Permit Required.  No feedlot or manure storage site shall be maintained unless a permit therefore has first been issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
and by the Zoning Administrator as provided herein.  The application for a permit by the owner or other person responsible for a feedlot or manure storage site shall be accompanied by plans showing the features and method of construction and  operation and existing or proposed safeguards or disposal systems.  The governing
body may thereafter issue a permit therefore upon such conditions, as it shall prescribe to prevent pollution of any public waters or creation of a health hazard.

D)	Inadequate Safeguards.  In case the Zoning Administrator shall find that any manure is stored or kept on any feedlot or storage site without a safeguard, or that any existing safeguard is inadequate, he may order the owner or other responsible person to immediately remove the manure from the feedlot or storage site and refrain from further storage or keeping of any manure thereat unless and until an adequate safeguard is provided as hereinbefore prescribed.

E)	Notice Concerning Loss.  It shall be the duty of the owner of a feedlot or manure storage site or other responsible person in charge thereof to immediately notify the
 
Zoning Administrator of any loss of stored manure either by accident or otherwise when such loss involves a substantial amount which would be likely to enter any public waters.  Said notice shall be by telephone or other comparable means and shall be made without delay after discovery of the loss.  The notification shall include the location and nature of the loss and such other pertinent information as may be available at the time.

F)	Hazards and Nuisances.  On parcels of less than 40 acres which are not part of a larger crop producing commercial agriculture farm, the keeping of horses, cattle or other grazing animals on a site with less than 2 acres of existing grazeable land per animal is hereby declared to be a nuisance.  No domestic animals, livestock, or kennels shall be placed on any site of less than 5 acres.

1)	Grazeable acreage shall be defined as open, non-treed acreage currently providing enough pasture or other agricultural crops capable of supporting summer grazing at a density of one cow, or its equivalent, per two acres.

55-140	Second Farm Dwelling.

A)	"Second Farm Dwelling" means a Dwelling, One Family.  A dwelling, one family is defined in Section 10-020 of this Zoning Code. A second farm dwelling is not the principal structure and shall house only the operators of the farm or the operator's employees who are directly involved in the operation of the farm.

B)	A maximum of one second farm dwelling may be placed in a farmyard located within an A-Agricultural District, when the farm is a size of 80 acres or more of contiguous land, 40 of which are tillable acres, and provided that the second farm dwelling meets all of the other provisions of these regulations.

STANDARDS THAT RELATE TO THE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

55-150	Commercial Historic Sites in Residential Districts.

A)	Historic sites with limited commercial uses may be permitted by conditional use permit in any residential district provided:

1)	Commercial activities are limited to shops and galleries for the showing and sale of historical or art items such as sculpture, glassware, pottery, stained glass,  paintings, antiques, and artifacts.

2)	The sale of food may be permitted as a secondary use provided no alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed on the premises.

3)	The sit-down food serving capacity shall not exceed 30 persons.
 
4)	No outdoor advertising shall be permitted other than the official designation as a historical site and the normal signs allowed in the district by the provisions of Division 65, Sign Regulations.

5)	Off-street public or private parking in the quantities required in Division 60, Off­ Street Parking and Loading Regulations of this Chapter shall be provided within 1,000 feet of the structure.

6)	Manufacture of art items for sale shall be permitted subject to fire and safety regulations and Building Code requirements.

7)	The commercial uses shall not be detrimental to the neighborhood and shall be in appropriate harmony with the residential character of the neighboring area if
such area exists.

B)	An applicant for a commercial historic site shall apply for a conditional use permit following the procedures and submission requirements as set forth in Section 90-040 of this Chapter.

C)	The Council shall stipulate on the permissible hours and days of operation on the conditional use permit issued for a historical site which has commercial activities in a residential neighborhood.

55-160	Bed and Breakfast Establishments.

A)	Bed and breakfast establishments shall be permitted in all residential zones within the City subject to the following criteria and upon approval of a conditional use permit.

B)	Application for a conditional use permit shall follow the procedures and submission requirements as set forth in Section 90-040 of this Zoning Code.  Additional requirements are listed below:

I)	Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit for a bed and breakfast establishment, the Zoning Administrator's Office shall refer the application to the City Building Inspection Office. The City Building Inspection Office shall provide the Zoning Administrator with a report concerning the use of the proposed building for a bed and breakfast use and shall recommend improvements that are required by the City's Building Code.

2)	The applicant must furnish evidence that licenses required by the State of Minnesota either have been issued or will be issued before commencing operation.
 
3)	Dining facilities, except for the purpose of the special events described herein, must not be open to the public and must be used exclusively for registered guests.

4)	A bed and breakfast establishment may host an unlimited number of special events with fewer than 25 non-registered guests and may host up to 12 special events per calendar year with 25 or more non-registered guests.  "Special events" include, by way of example, weddings, business meetings, retreats, and other functions at which non-registered guests are present.  Special events are subject to the following requirements:

a)	At least two weeks prior to an event with 25 or more non-registered guests, the bed and breakfast owner/operator must notify the City Clerk in writing of the event.  The notice shall include:  the event organizer and nature of the event, the date of the event, the expected number of guests, and information demonstrating adequate off-street parking has been arranged for event guests. It shall also include information on how the property's exterior areas will be used during the event (music, temporary structures, etc.).

b)	The maximum number of guests allowed at a special event shall be limited to the maximum occupancy of the bed and breakfast establishment as determined by City Building and Fire Code Inspectors.  Prior to hosting any special events or charitable not-for-profit events, a bed and breakfast establishment shall arrange for an inspection to determine maximum occupancy.  The determination of an occupancy limit shall remain valid absent any change in law and/or alteration of the establishment, in which case the City Inspectors shall re-evaluate the limit.

c)	Special events must comply with Section 10.17 (Noise) of the City Code which is in effect from 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.

d)	A bed and breakfast owner/operator and/or the operator's designee must be present during special events, and the operator or designee shall provide adequate supervision of the event.  The individual responsible for supervision of a special event shall be identified in the notification required by paragraph 4(a) hereof

e)	Food and/or alcoholic beverages may be furnished by and to special event guests provided all necessary local, state and/or federal permits, licenses or authorizations have been obtained.

A bed and breakfast establishment may also host, in addition to the 12 special events described above, up to three charitable not-for-profit events per year. The provisions of paragraphs 4(a) - (c) shall also apply to charitable special events.
 
5)	Identifying signs shall be no more than four square feet in total, located on the building, or if freestanding, located at least ten feet off any property line and consistent with the character and architectural features of the building.

6)	All exterior lighting to be concealed or screened.

7)	One off-street parking space shall be provided for each bed and breakfast room for rent. Two additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the owner, one of which shall be located in a garage.  Off-street parking is to be screened from the surrounding residences.

8)	The bed and breakfast shall provide eight or fewer rooms for rent and shall be the owner's personal residence and occupied by the owner at the time ofrental.

55-170	Home Occupations.

A)	Home occupations, which meet the following criteria, may be permitted through the issuance of a certificate of compliance permit which is issued by the Zoning Administrator.   The procedures and submission requirements are listed in Section
90-030 of this Zoning Code.  Additional requirements are listed below:

I)	The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and shall under no circumstances change the residential character thereof.

2)	No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation.

3)	There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation, and no signs displayed on the premises other than those signs normally permitted in the Residential District, as listed in Section 65-130 of this Chapter.

4)	No home occupation shall occupy space in the home that is more than 25 percent of the first floor area of the residence.  No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building or structure.  No home occupation shall be conducted within an attached garage nor shall space within an attached garage be considered in calculating the first floor area of the residence.

5)	No pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in the required front yard.  Such parking shall be limited to three or fewer off-street customer parking spaces.
 
6)	No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot.  In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates audible or visual interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises.

B)	Uses not meeting the criteria in this Section shall be considered a "proposed home occupation not meeting criteria" and shall require a conditional use permit in those underlying zoning district that allow such uses (See Base District Regulations in Division 25 of this Chapter).

55-180	Swimming Pools.  In all districts, swimming pools are allowed as a certificate of compliance with the following standards to apply:

A)	Certificates of compliance shall be required for any swimming pool with a capacity of over 3,000 gallons or a depth in excess of 3 1h feet of water. Smaller pools shall be allowed without a certificate of compliance permit.

B)	An application for a certificate of compliance permit shall include a site plan showing: the type and size of pool, location of house, garage, fencing, and other improvements on the lot, location of structures on all adjacent lots, location of filter unit, pump, location of back flush and drainage outlets, grading plan, finished elevations and final treatment (decking, landscaping, etc.) around pool, location of existing overhead or underground wiring, utility easements, trees, and similar features, and location of any water heating unit.

C)	Pools shall not be located within 14 feet of any side or rear lot line nor within 6 feet of any principal structure or frost footing.  Pools shall not be located within any required front yard.

D)	Pools shall not be located beneath overhead utility lines nor over underground utility lines of any type.

E)	Pools shall not be located within any private or public utility, walkway, drainage or other easement.

F)	All access for construction shall be over the owner's land and due care shall be taken to avoid damage to public streets and adjacent private or public property.

G)	To the extent feasible, back-flush water or water from pool drainage shall be directed onto the owner's property or into approved public drainage ways.  Water shall not drain onto adjacent or nearby private land.

H)	The filter unit, pump, heating unit, and any other noise-making mechanical equipment shall be located at least 25 feet from any adjacent or nearby residential structure and not closer than I 0 feet to any lot line.
 

I)	Lighting for the pool shall be directed toward the pool and not toward adjacent property.

J)	A structure or safety fence at least five feet in height shall completely enclose the pool.  Any required permit for the fence shall be obtained at the same time that the pool permit is obtained.

STANDARDS THAT RELATE TO COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS AND USES

55-190	Drive-In Use.  Any application to develop a site as a drive-in use, where permitted under this Chapter, shall comply with the following special provisions:

A)	Site Area and Coverage.   In the case of establishments where the customer normally remains in a vehicle for service, the minimum site area shall be 10,000
square feet with a minimum area of building to be erected thereon of 400 square feet. The area of buildings permitted thereon shall not exceed six percent of the total area of any site.  In the case of establishments where the customer parks his vehicle for a short period for the purpose of doing business on the premises, the minimum site
area shall be 4,000 square feet with a minimum area of buildings to be erected thereon of 400 square feet.  The area left clear of buildings permitted shall be sufficient for the parking of a minimum of eight cars of customers.

B)	Access Driveways and Permits.   Access drives onto any city, county, or state highway and or street shall require a written permit from the respective authority. This permit shall be acquired prior to the issuance of any building permit.  The engineer for each road authority shall determine the appropriate location, size, and design of such access drives and may limit the number of access drives in the interest of public safety and efficient traffic flow.

C)	Maximum Width of Driveway.   The maximum width of a driveway shall not exceed 32 feet not including the tapered end section.

D)	Standard Driveway Approach.   The standard driveway approach on file in the office of the City Engineer shall be used unless otherwise approved in writing by the City Engineer.

E)	Minimum  Distance Between Adjacent  Driveways.   The minimum  distance between adjacent driveways on the same side of the property shall not be less than a distance of 20 feet from each other, measured at the property line, provided that the City Engineer may increase said minimum clear distance in any cases, where, because of the width of adjacent sidewalks or boulevards or traffic conditions, in his opinion, such increase is necessary for reasons of public safety or convenience. In addition, the public authorities regulating access driveways onto state or county roadways may require additional minimum clear distance between driveways.
 
F)	Driveways and Parking Spaces. All parts of the site to which vehicles may have access shall be hard-surfaced and drained to provide a durable dust free surface to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.

G)	Drainage of Site.  Sufficient on-site detention shall be provided as to result in no net increase in storm discharge unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.  Run­ off calculations and points of discharge shall be provided to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.  No connectors to the City's storm sewer system shall be constructed without a permit from the office of the City Engineer.  All projects shall meet the requirements as set forth in Division 57, Stormwater Management Regulations.

H)	Lighting.  Any lighting proposed to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be located and arranged so that all direct rays of light are directed upon the site only and not on any adjoining properties.  All projects shall meet the requirements as set forth in Section 55-100 (M) Lighting, Lighting Fixtures and Glare of this Division.

I)		Setback of Buildings.  The front wall of a building or structure on a site shall not be less than 10 feet, measured at right angles, from the front property line of the site or such greater distance as prescribed for the district within which the building is located.

J)	Maintenance of Site and Buildings and Businesses.   The owner, tenant, operator, or person in charge of a drive-in shall at all times:

1)	Maintain the site and the buildings, structures, and improvements thereon in a clean, neat, tidy, and attractive condition and free from all rubbish and debris.

2)	Provide receptacles for the purpose of depositing therein garbage, rubbish, and debris, sufficient in number and size as may be required by the City Engineer and shall use such receptacles for such purpose.

3)	Be responsible for the proper, safe, and orderly operation of the business and of motor vehicles using the site and, without restricting the generality of the foregoing, shall ensure:

a)	That operators of motor vehicles do not obstruct the sidewalks and boulevards abutting or adjacent to the site; and

b)	That operators of motor vehicles enter and leave the site only at the entrances and exits provided for such purposes and not elsewhere.

4)	Maintain around the boundaries of the site an appropriate fence not less than 30 inches in height, designed so as to contain rubbish or debris, and landscape and keep landscaped the site to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator.
 
55-200	Vehicle Sales and Showrooms.  The buildings and premises for vehicle sales and showrooms shall meet the following requirements:

A)	Setbacks and Lot Requirements.

I)	Sales Unit Setbacks.  For all vehicles for sale on the premises, the bumper (or bow/stem) line shall be a minimum of five feet from any front or side property line and five feet from any rear property line.

2)  Building Setbacks.  All buildings on the vehicle sales site shall meet or exceed the required building setbacks for the district in which the site is located.

B)	Access Driveways.

I)	Driveways to the site shall be setback a minimum of 50 feet from curb line comer intersections.

2)	Driveways shall be spaced a minimum of 50 feet apart.

3)	Driveways shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from all adjacent property lines, except where a joint driveway access agreement exists.

4)	Driveways shall be a maximum of 24 feet in width, with curb openings a maximum of 32 feet in width.

C)	Screening.  An earthen tone wood, metal, or masonry screen of no less than five feet in height shall be erected and maintained along all interior side and rear lot lines, which abut institutional or residential use districts.

D)	Site and Landscape Plans.  Prior to issuance of any permits for construction of a vehicle sales operation, the applicant shall submit a site plan, which illustrates the following required improvements on the site prior to receiving an occupancy permit:

I)	Interior concrete, asphalt, or landscape timber curbing shall be constructed within the property, separating all parking or storage surfaces at the required setbacks and establishing a five foot parking (curbline) setback from any building.

2)	The entire parking surface used to park or display autos and trucks shall be paved with a hard surface of concrete or blacktop.  Recreational vehicles, boats, and trailers may be parked or displayed on a dustless, hard-packed, non-erodible gravel surface if approved by the Zoning Administrator.

3)	Parking for employees shall include one space per employee.
 
4)	Parking for customers shall include one space per 200 square feet of usable indoor display-sales floor space, and one for each service room or bay or 16 spaces per acre for outdoor sales lots, whichever is greater.

5)	Landscaping shall be with grass, trees and shrubs; all areas not paved or built upon shall be illustrated on the plan. Landscaping plan shall comply with the requirements of Division 62 of this Chapter.

6)	All areas to be lighted for night sales and security lighting purposes shall be designated.  All lights shall shine down on the vehicle sales area rather than diffusing floodlight to adjacent properties or on to rights-of-way.  All lighting shall comply with the requirements of this Division.

7)	A surface drainage plan and other improvements which illustrate how all parking display areas will drain on and off the site shall be provided by the applicant. This drainage plan shall comply with all requirements of Division 57, Stormwater Management Regulations.

55-210	Automobile Maintenance Service and Gasoline Stations.

A)	Before a Permit for an automobile maintenance service and/or gasoline station is granted, the minimum requirements of the Zoning District in which the service station is to be located shall be met.  Additional requirements are set forth below.

B)	Pump islands shall not be placed closer than 25 feet to a property line.  A landscaped area shall be maintained not less than 5 feet from any interior side yard property line or 10 feet from a street right-of-way.  No driveways at a property line shall be less than 30 feet from the intersection of 2 street right-of-way lines.  A gasoline station shall have at least 2 driveways with a minimum distance of 85 feet between centerlines when located on the same street.  Driveway access on state and county streets or highways requires the review and approval of the permitting authority.

C)	No vehicles shall be parked on the premises other than those utilized by employees or waiting service.  No vehicle shall be parked or be awaiting service longer than 15 days.

D)	Exterior storage besides vehicles shall be limited to service equipment and items offered for sale on pump islands; exterior storage of items offered for sale shall be within yard setback requirements and shall be located in containers such as the racks, metal trays, and similar structures designed to display merchandise.

E)	All areas utilized for the storage of trash, discarded parts, or recyclables shall be fully screened.  All structures and grounds shall be maintained in an orderly, clean, and safe manner.

F)	Business activities not listed in the definition of automobile service stations in this Chapter are not permitted on the premises of a service station unless a conditional
 
use permit is obtained specifically for such business.  Such activities include but are not limited to the following: automatic car and truck wash, rental of vehicles, equipment or trailers, general retail sales.

55-220	Hazardous and Infectious Waste.

A)	All treatment, storage, incineration, disposal, or management of hazardous or infectious waste, other than household hazardous waste as defined in Minnesota Statutes Section l 15A.96, by anyone other than the generator of said hazardous or infectious waste shall require a conditional use permit for a) the 1-2 district in the case of incineration, and b) the 1-1 and 1-2 districts in the case of treatment, storage, disposal, or management.  Said uses shall be prohibited in all other districts within the City of Red Wing.

I)	For the purpose of this Section, "Generator" means a person whose activities produce hazardous or infectious waste and includes establishments such as gas stations and retail stores, whose primary purpose is something other than the handling or disposal of waste, that are required by law to accept from consumers used goods or products such as tires, batteries, or automobile oil for recycling and disposal.

B)	All applications for conditional use permits shall be accompanied by:

I)	A detailed explanation of the proposed use stating the sources and types of hazardous or infectious waste, the process to be undertaken at the site, hours of operation, the final disposition of the hazardous waste and/or end product, safety precautions followed, and such other information as may be required by city staff; and,

2)	A site plan and data showing:

a)	Building locations, dimensions purposes, and elevations; all signs, structures, entry areas, storage sites, and other structural improvements to the site.

b)	Circulation plans for traffic, including, but not limited to, parking, loading and unloading facilities.

c)	Fences and screening devices.

d)	Firefighting and other public safety facilities and provisions such as hydrant locations and fire lanes.

e)	The location of structures on all adjacent lots.
 
f)	Where applicable, 25 copies of the proposed management plan as required pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 116.79 (subject to review and approval to the extent permitted by law).

g)	Exterior wall materials and design information.

h)	A landscape plan specifying the size, type and location of all trees and shrubbery and the location of all seeded and sodded areas.

C)	In addition to compliance with Division 75 of this Chapter, Section 75-020, a hazardous or infectious waste conditional use permit shall not be issued unless the City Council can make all of the following findings:

1)	With respect to infectious waste, that the proposed use complies with all requirements set forth in Minnesota Statutes Sections 116.76 - 116.82, the Infectious Waste Control Act.

2)	That the proposed use complies with all applicable fire, health, building and safety codes.

3)	With respect to incineration, that the applicant is in compliance with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations.

4)	That the applicant has submitted proof of the issuance of, or ability to obtain, a certificate of occupancy pursuant to Division 90-020 of this Zoning Code.

5)	That appropriate hours of operation for the proposed use have been approved by City personnel.

6)	That all time periods during which hazardous or infectious waste shall remain on the permit site, including specific procedural times and total duration, have been reviewed and approved by City personnel.

7)	That inspection by City personnel shall be allowed at any time during hours of operation.

8)	That adequate security and safety precautions taken shall be provided to protect the public health and safety.

D)	The findings, site plans, and explanation of use, when approved, shall be made part of the conditional use permit and non-compliance with any of them may be deemed by the Council as grounds for the revocation of the conditional use permit.

55-230	Adult Entertainment  Establishments.
 
A)	Purpose and Intent.  The Red Wing City Council recognizes that adult entertainment establishments, because of their very nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics, thereby generating harmful secondary effects upon the use and enjoyment of adjacent areas.  These effects have been documented in studies reviewed by the City of Red Wing, including but not limited to studies conducted by the cities of Cottage Grove, Brooklyn Park, Woodbury, St. Paul, Minneapolis, Hopkins, and Rochester, Minnesota.  Special regulation of these uses is necessary to insure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood.  It is, therefore, the purpose of this Division to regulate adult entertainment establishments in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Red Wing, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of adult entertainment establishments within the City.  The provisions of this Division have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials protected by the First Amendment.

B)	Definitions.  For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms and words are defined in Division I 0, Definitions.

C)	Adult Entertainment Establishment.  Any of the activities and businesses defined in Section I 0-020 including Adult Book and Media Store, Adult Cabaret, Adult Hotel or Motel, Adult Theater, Adult Massage Parlor, Adult Rap Parlor, Adult Sauna, and Specified Sexual Activities shall constitute "Adult Entertainment" and shall be subject to the regulations of this Chapter.

D)	Location and Conditions.  The location and conditions for operation of an adult entertainment establishment shall be as follows:

I)	An adult entertainment establishment may be located in B-2 (General Business) or PUD (Planned Unit Development) zoned districts upon obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 90-040 of this Zoning Code, and providing such establishment meets the following:

a)	No adult entertainment establishment shall be operated or maintained in or within 500 feet ofa R-1, R-2, RM-I, RM-2, or PUD in a residentially zoned district, any municipal boundary, unless adult entertainment establishments as defined herein are a permitted use at the municipal boundary, other adult entertainment establishment, or within 500 feet of a lot line upon which any school, daycare center, or place of worship is located.  Distances shall be determined by a straight-line horizontal measurement from the nearest existing residential district or municipal boundary, lot line for any school daycare center, or place of worship, or other adult entertainment establishment to the nearest point of the proposed adult entertainment establishment.
 
b)	No adult entertainment establishment shall sell or dispense non-intoxicating or intoxicating liquor or be located in a building which contains a business that sells or dispenses non-intoxicating or intoxicating liquor.

c)	No adult entertainment establishment shall be conducted in any manner that permits the perception or observation from any property not approved as an adult entertainment establishment of any materials depicting, describing, or related to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas by any visual or auditory media, including display, decoration, sign, show window, sound transmission or other means.

d)	No adult entertainment establishment shall permit any person under the age
of 18 onto the premises of said establishment.  Nor shall any person under the age of 18 be permitted access to material displayed or offered for sale or rent by the adult entertainment establishment.

E)	Separability.  Every section, provision or part of this Section shall be separable from every other section, provision, or part thereof to the extent that if any section, provision, or part of this Section shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,  it shall not invalidate any other section, provision, or part thereof.

55-240	Wireless Communications  Facilities.

A)	Purpose.  The zoning regulation of wireless telecommunications facilities is intended to provide for the appropriate location, development and installation of telecommunications towers and antennae within the City of Red Wing.  The provisions of the Zoning Code are intended to protect the health, safety and aesthetic concerns of the community by minimizing the adverse visual effects of towers and antenna through careful design, siting and screening; by avoiding potential damage from tower failure to adjacent properties through structural standards and setback requirements; and by maximizing the use of existing towers, structures or buildings to accommodate new telecommunications antenna in the City.

B)	Definitions.  For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms and words are defined in Division 10, Definitions.  Particular terms that apply include Accessory Equipment Structure; Antenna; Antenna, Concealed; Base Transceiver Station; Co-location; Tower; Tower, Lattice; Tower, Monopole; Utility Pole; and Wireless Telecommunication  Services.

C)	Allowance for Towers and Antennae by Zoning District.

1)	Permits are not required for:
a)	Antennae and towers used by the City for City purposes.

b)	Adjustment or replacement of the elements of an antennae array affixed to a tower or antenna, provided that replacement does not reduce the safety factor.
 

c)	Antennae and/or towers erected temporarily for test purposes or emergency communications.

d)   Antennae and microwave dishes which are not located on a transmission structure such as the mounting of antennae and dishes upon buildings so long as they do not rise above the highest elevation of the building by more than
15 feet. This includes educational facilities, religious institutions, government
or public utility buildings, or in "upward thrusting architectural elements" such as church steeples, bell towers, or smokestacks.

2)	Wireless telecommunications towers and antennae shall be allowed in any district as a Certificate of Compliance use permit only as provided below:

a)	Water Tower. Wireless telecommunication  antennae shall be permitted upon City-owned water towers and park properties provided the applicant has an approved lease agreement with the City and has obtained a Certificate of Compliance use permit and paid all applicable fees.  The height of the antennae on water towers shall not exceed 15 feet and shall not extend more than 15 feet above the water tower.

b)	Co-location on Existing Towers. Wireless communication antennae shall be permitted to be attached to existing towers within the City in accordance with the applicable siting guidelines and design criteria in Section 55-230 (E) after the applicant has provided to the City a written statement of approval from  the tower owner or lessor and has obtained a Certificate of Compliance use permit and paid all applicable permit fees.

c)	Utility Poles. Wireless telecommunications  antennae shall be permitted to be attached to utility poles after the applicant has provided a written statement of approval from the utility pole owner or lessor and has obtained a
certificate of compliance use permit from the City and paid the necessary fee.
The height of the antennae shall not exceed 15 feet and shall not extend more than 15 feet above the pole.

3)	Conditional Uses, Specific Districts.  Wireless telecommunication  towers and antennae shall be allowed with the approval of a conditional use permit in the zoning districts specified in the table below and in accordance with the co­ location requirements stated in Section 55-230 (D), siting requirements and design criteria stated in 55-230 (E), and the procedural requirements stated in 55- 230 (F). The procedure for review and action on Conditional Use Permits shall
be as stated in Section 90-040 of this Chapter.  The height limitations listed in
the following table shall include all parts of the wireless telecommunication tower and antenna structures except for that space needed for lightning diffusion apparatus.
 

Zoning Districts Location	Height Limitations	With Co-location

RM-2, B-1, and B-2

1-1, 1-2


F-2	
90 feet

100 feet

300 feet	
150 feet *

190 feet*

400 feet*

* Co-location height bonus subject to applicant providing to the City proof of a signed lease arrangement, shared use agreement, or other like document.

D)	Co-location Requirements.

I)	A proposal for a new wireless communication tower shall not be approved unless the applicant documents to the satisfaction of the City that the antenna planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or commercial or industrial building within a one-half mile radius, transcending municipal borders, due to one or more of the following:

a)	The antenna would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or commercial building.

b)	The antenna would cause interference with other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building.

c)	Existing or approved towers and commercial buildings cannot reasonably accommodate the antenna at a height necessary for the proposed antenna to function.

d)	Existing or approved towers and commercial buildings are outside of the documented search area.

e)	The owners or lessors of existing or approved towers and commercial buildings are unwilling to allow co-location upon their facilities or are unavailable to grant such an allowance.

f)	Approval cannot be obtained for co-locating upon an existing tower or antenna site, which is within the documented search area, but outside the Red Wing municipal boundaries.

2)	It is the City's intent to encourage co-location providers to share accessory equipment building space whenever possible and practical so as to minimize the number of necessary accessory buildings and their impact upon the surrounding community.  An applicant co-locating on another provider's tower shall incorporate its base transceiver station and all other equipment into an existing
 
accessory equipment building or suitable principal structure except as otherwise provided below.  If this requirement cannot be met due to insufficient space within the existing accessory building, security issues, competition or compatibility concerns, or for other reasons, one of the following options, ranked in preferential order, shall be utilized:

a)	The existing accessory building shall be expanded to a size sufficient to house the co-locator's equipment.  Such building expansion shall match the design and features of the existing accessory equipment building.  The applicant shall obtain a building permit from the City prior to construction.

b)	A support platform shall be constructed alongside and adjacent to the existing accessory equipment building upon which the co-locator's equipment shall
be attached.  The applicant shall obtain a building permit from the City prior
to construction.

c)	A separate building shall be constructed that conforms to all the requirements set forth in this Chapter.

3)	Whenever an application for a new wireless telecommunications  tower includes a proposal for co-location, the applicant shall present information that describes how the proposed tower is designed to accept additional antennae.  In addition, approval of any conditional use permit for such an application shall include a condition that the applicant accepts future co-location projects.

E)	Siting and Design Requirements.   The requirements of this Section apply to all wireless telecommunications  towers and antennae erected, constructed, placed, or replaced in the City.  All wireless telecommunication towers and antennae shall be designed and situated to be visually unobtrusive to minimize the impact upon the neighboring uses and shall conform to the following design and siting criteria.

I)	Setbacks.  The minimum setback from any property line or public right-of-way for a wireless telecommunication tower is as follows:

a)	Front yard, side yard, and rear yard in a non-residential zone shall be the setback required for the underlying zone.

b)	All other towers in residential zones shall be located a minimum distance from any property line equal to 125 percent of the proposed tower height or 200 feet, whichever is greater.

c)	Towers shall not be placed between a principal building and any street (not including alleyways) abutting the property.
 
d)	All equipment buildings/boxes or equipment areas shall comply with the minimum property line setbacks for a principal building in the underlying zone.

e)	No wireless telecommunication  site shall be located within 200 feet of an existing residence.

f)	No tower exceeding 60 feet in height shall be located within 1,000 feet of the boundary of a locally designated historic district as per Chapter 16 of the City Code.

2)	Accessory Equipment Structures.  The base transceiver station and all other related equipment shall be housed in an existing building whenever possible. If an existing building is unavailable, a new accessory equipment building may be constructed according to Chapter 4  requirements of the City Code and shall be of the same or better construction, design and appearance as any principal structure or adjacent buildings.  If the equipment is to be housed in a
weatherproof cabinet-like structure in lieu of a building, it shall be mounted upon
a suitable support platform.

3)	Fencing.  The wireless telecommunication  antenna tower and/or accessory equipment structure shall be surrounded with a six to eight foot high security fence acceptable to the Zoning Administrator.

4)	Landscaping and Screening.  The wireless telecommunications  tower and/or accessory equipment building shall be landscaped and screened with a mixture of six-foot tall evergreens and one and one-half inches caliper ornamental
deciduous trees at a ratio of four evergreens per every one deciduous tree, spaced
on less than eight feet apart on center so as to achieve at least a 50 percent
opaque screen.  Trees may be clustered to create a more natural appearance to the screening.  The Zoning Administrator, as applicable, may waive the landscaping and/or screening requirements upon request of the applicant if the existing landscaping and screening is deemed sufficient.  In addition, the Zoning Administrator may allow alternatives to the landscape plats listed above in order to match existing landscape.

5)	Color.  The wireless telecommunication tower and antenna shall be of a neutral color such as light grey or sky blue unless another color is dictated by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and be designed to minimize visibility and to blend into the surrounding environment.

6)	Roof-Mounted Wireless Telecommunication  Antennae.   Roof-mounted wireless telecommunication  antennae shall not be permitted on buildings with pitched-roofs, unless they are concealed antennae incorporated into upward thrusting architectural elements, such as a church steeple, spire or bell-tower, smokestack, etc. On flat roofs, the height of the antennae and mounting hardware
 
may not be more than 15 feet above the highest point of the roof to which the antennae is attached.

7)	Structurally-Mounted Wireless Telecommunications  Antennae.
Telecommunication antennae mounted upon sides of buildings shall be attached flush against the building side, not to protrude more than the depth of the antenna. Structurally mounted antennae not affixed to towers shall be made to blend into the design and contours of the structure.

8)	Prevention of Radiation.  Wireless telecommunication  antennae shall be subject to state and federal regulations regarding non-ionizing radiation and other health hazards related to such facilities.  If the federal government adopts new, more restrictive standards, the antenna shall be made to comply or the antenna shall be removed by the owner or the City at the tower owner's expense.  The owner or operator of the tower shall pay any associated costs of compliance verification.

9)	Lights.  No wireless telecommunication tower or antenna shall have affixed or attached to it in any way except during time of repair or installation, any lights, reflectors, flashers, daytime strobes or steady nighttime light or other illumination devices, except as required by the Federal Aviation Agency, the
Federal Communications Commission, or the City.  This restriction against lights shall not apply to towers which have been combined with light standards for illumination of ball fields, parking lots, playgrounds, or other similar public uses.

10)	Signs and Advertising.   The use of any portion of a tower for signs or advertising other than required warning signs shall be prohibited.

11) Interference with Public Safety Telecommunications.   No new or existing telecommunications  service shall interfere with public safety telecommunications.

F)	Procedural Requirements.

1)	Certificate of Compliance and Conditional Use Permit.  Applicants requiring a certificate of compliance shall follow the procedures as set forth in Section 90- 030 of this Chapter.  Applicants requiring a conditional use permit shall follow the procedures as set forth in Section 90-040 of this Chapter.  Specific submission requirements for both permit applications include the following:

a)	A notarized document from the property owner or lessor that allows the applicant to apply for a certificate of compliance or conditional use permit to erect a wireless telecommunication tower and/or antenna.

b)	Demonstration of need in accordance with the Zoning Code.
 
c)	A site plan, which shows property lines, location of wireless telecommunication tower or antenna, setback distances, any accessory equipment structure, fencing and landscaping proposed.

d)	Sufficient information to show that construction, installation and
maintenance of the wireless telecommunication tower and/or antenna will not create a safety hazard or damage to the property of other persons.

e)	Proof of insurance in accordance with the Zoning Code.

f)	Ifproposing a tower that will allow for co-location, a letter of intent that commits the applicant to allow for the future co-location.

g)	Any other information necessary for the City to evaluate the permit.

2)	Building Permits.  Applicants proposing to erect wireless telecommunication towers and/or antennae shall obtain a building permit.  The towers and antennae are subject to inspection by the City Building Official to determine compliance with the City's building code construction standards.  No building permit shall be issued by the City without prior approval of a certificate of compliance or conditional use permit if applicable.  When no certificate of compliance or conditional use permit is required, the applicant shall provide to the City all information as required by Section 55-240 (F) of this Division at the time of application for building permits.  Building permits shall not be required for the repair, replacement, adjustment and Ior alteration of the elements of antennae arrays if such work does not reduce acceptable safety standards.  The following information shall be provided at the time of the building permit request:

a)	A report and plan from a qualified and registered engineer or firm that specifies and includes the following:

i)	The tower height and design including a cross section and elevation.

ii)	The height above grade for all potential mounting positions for co­ location antennae and the minimum separation distances between antennae.

iii)	The capacity of the tower, including the number and type of antennae that the tower can accommodate.

iv)	The steps that the applicant will take to avoid interference with established public safety telecommunications.

v)	An engineer's stamp and registration number.
 
3)	Demonstration of Need.  The applicant shall provide a diagram showing the cell site configuration illustrating the coverage area of the proposed wireless telecommunication tower and/or antenna.  This diagram shall demonstrate the frequency re-use and spacing needs of the wireless system in order to provide adequate coverage and capacity to address that cannot be adequately served by locating the antenna on an existing structure.

4)	Proof of Insurance.   The applicant shall provide the City with proof of liability insurance which protects against losses due to personal injury or property damage relating in any way to the construction, use, or failure of the tower, antenna or accessory equipment.  Such proof shall be supplied to the City by the wireless telecommunication tower owner or lessee at the time of application and shall be made available to the City from time to time upon its request.

5)	Removal of Abandoned or Damaged Towers.  Any wireless telecommunications tower and/or antenna that are not used for one year shall be deemed abandoned and the property owner shall remove the tower and /or antenna. If the owner fails to remove the tower and/or antenna after one year, it may be removed by the City with the costs of such removal assessed against the property owner of the tower site.

6)	Violations. Deviations from the approved construction plans and certificate of compliance or conditional use permit is a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Division 95 of this Zoning Code.

G)	Nonconforming Wireless Telecommunications Antennae and Towers.  Any wireless telecommunications tower and/or antenna in existence as of June 22, 2000, that does not meet or comply with the provisions of this Division are subject to Division 70 of this Zoning Code.

STANDARDS THAT RELATE TO LAND USES CONCERNING NONMETALLIC RESOURCES

55-250	Resource Extraction Activities.


A)	Purpose.  The purpose of regulating resource extraction land uses is to provide minimum standards for all resource extraction operations within City limits in order to protect public health and safety, to preserve the scenic beauty of Red Wing's landscapes and environment, to protect the public from damage to both the quality and quantity of ground and surface waters, to minimize or prevent adverse impacts from on-site and off-site operations, and to promote the general welfare of the people of Red Wing and the surrounding communities.  This purpose will be fulfilled through the following means:

I)	Identification of areas in the City where resource extraction is most appropriate and not in conflict with other nearby land uses.
 
2)	Establishment of permitting requirements, environmental review procedures and performance standards to regulate resource extraction.

3)	Establishment of standards that prevent or minimize environment and aesthetic impacts on extracted properties, adjacent properties, and the City as a whole.

4)	Establishment of standards and financial guarantees that restore extracted land to a condition compatible with adjacent properties and suitable for future uses that are consistent with the City of Red Wing Comprehensive Plan.

B)	Definitions.  For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms and words are defined below and also in Division I 0, Definitions.  Particular terms that apply include Resource Extraction, Silica Sand (defined in Section 55-260), and those listed below.

C)	Resource Extraction Activities Defined.

I)	Nonmetallic resource or resource means a product, commodity or material consisting principally of naturally occurring, organic, inorganic, nonmetallic, and/or non-renewable material.  Nonmetallic minerals include, but are not limited to, stone, rock, sand, silica sand, gravel, asbestos, beryl, diamond, clay, coal, feldspar, peat and talc.

2)	Resource extraction includes any or all of the following activities:

a)	Extraction from the earth of mineral aggregates or nonmetallic minerals
for off-site use or sale, including drilling and blasting as well as associated activities such as excavation and grading of such materials.

b)	On-site manufacturing or processing operations that may involve the use of equipment for the crushing, screening, separation, washing, compounding, mixing or blending of mineral aggregates or nonmetallic resources obtained by extraction from the mining site or with materials transferred from off-site.

c)	On-site manufacturing processes aimed at producing nonmetallic resource products for sale or use by the operator.

d)	Stockpiling of nonmetallic products for sale or use off-site and stockpiling of waste materials.

e)	Transport of the extracted nonmetallic resources, finished products or waste materials from the extraction site.

f)	Disposal of waste materials.

g)	Reclamation of the extraction site.
 
3)	Resource extraction facility means any area that is being used for on-site removal, stockpiling, processing, transferring, or storage of resources.

D)	Exempted uses and operations.  The following are exempted from the performance standards applicable to resource extraction activities:

1)	Excavations or grading by a person solely for domestic or farm use at a person's residence or farm.

2)	Excavations or grading conducted for the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of a highway, railroad, or any other transportation facility where the excavation or grading is entirely within the property boundaries of the highway, railroad, or other transportation facility.

3)	Grading conducted for preparing a construction site or restoring land following a flood or natural disaster.

4)	Excavations for building construction purposes conducted on the building site.

5)	Resource extraction at sites where less than one acre of total affected acreage occurs over the life of the mine.

6)	Removal from the earth of products or commodities that contain only minor or incidental amounts of nonmetallic minerals, such as commercial sod, agricultural crops, ornamental or garden plants, forest products, Christmas trees, or plant nursery stock.

7)	Stockpiling of resources by retailers, such as nurseries and home improvement stores, for the purpose of resale to the public for non-industrial uses.

8)	Stockpiling, storage, and transportation of sand, salt, and/or gravel by state, county, and/or city entities.

9)	Stockpiling, storage, and transportation of dredge spoils removed from public waters.

10)	Stockpiling, storage, and transportation of sand and gravel for construction purposes and private snow plowing purposes.

E)	Resource Extraction Facility Permit Required.  All persons having a legal or equitable interest in any resource extraction facility from and afterOctober 17, 2012, shall obtain a conditional use permit which shall be processed in accordance with Division 90 of this Chapter and the additional procedures and requirements of this Division.   Such persons are referred to hereinafter as "owner," "operator," and/or "permittee."  These terms are interchangeable for the purposes of this Division.
 
F)	Resource Extraction Facility Permit Application Requirements.   All persons seeking to engage in resource extraction activities within the City must submit the following:

1)	Name, address, phone number(s), e-mail address, and website of the operator of the resource extraction facility.

2)	Name, addresses, phone number(s), and e-mail addresses of all owners or lessors of the land on which the mining operation will occur.

3)	Acreage and complete legal description of the subject property on which the facility will be located, including all contiguous property owned by the landowners.

4)	A narrative outlining the type of material to be excavated, mode of operation (including any screening, drying, washing, coating, processing and storage  of material), estimated quantity of material to be extracted, plans for
blasting, and other pertinent information to explain the request in detail.

5)	Estimated time frame to operate the facility, to include hours per day, days per week, months per year, and number of years in operation.

6)	A description of all vehicles and equipment estimated to be used by the operator in the operation of the facility.

7)	A description of the estimated average daily and peak daily number of vehicles accessing the facility.  If more than one access to the facility is proposed, provide a breakdown of anticipated daily and peak number of vehicles using each access.

8)	Any other information or documentation required for issuance of a conditional use permit under the Zoning Code.

9)	Site maps of the proposed operations that show the entire site(s) and include areas within 600 feet of the site. All maps shall be drawn at a scale of I inch to 200 feet unless otherwise stated below:

a)	Map A.  Existing site conditions, to include:

i)	Property boundaries to be surveyed by a Minnesota licensed land surveyor.

ii)	A survey which provides contour lines at five foot intervals.

iii)	Existing vegetation including plant community, evaluation of condition of plant community, and dominant species.

iv)	Existing structures.
 
v)	Existing pipelines, power lines, and other utilities.

vi)	Easements affecting the permitted property.

vii)	Adjacent public road right-of-way.

viii)	Existing access points to public roads.

ix)	Test borings and monitoring wells used to characterize the site.

x)	Threatened and endangered species on the site and within one­ fourth mile of the site.

xi)	Distribution, thickness and type of existing topsoil and subsoil.

xii)	Location of existing historical, cultural, and archaeological features identified in the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) and Goodhue County databases and those not identified but discovered on-site.

xiii)	Location of areas previously affected by mining on-site, including location of stockpiles, wash ponds, and sediment basins.

GEOLOGY

xiv)	Geologic units and contacts.

xv)	Depth to bedrock (if applicable).

xvi)	Confining units (clays, shale, siltstone).

xvii)	Fracture patterns and traces (for rock quarries).

xviii)	Location of any known caves, joints, fractures, sinkholes, stream sinks, and springs.

HYDROLOGY

xix)	Drainage patterns and permanent water areas within  600 feet of the property lines.

xx)	Water table elevations with ground water flow direction.

xxi)	Wells within a one-mile radius of property lines showing location, depth, static water-level, age, and construction.
 
xxii)	Location and elevation of any known springs within - 600 feet of the property lines.

xxiii)	General location of septic systems within 600 feet of the property lines.

xxiv)	Location of designated trout streams within 600 feet of the property lines.

b)	Map B.  Proposed operations, to include:

i)	Property boundaries surveyed by a Minnesota licensed land surveyor.

ii)	Vegetation protection plan for vegetation remaining on site.

iii)	Soil salvage plan, including storage areas, methods of protection from erosion, compaction and weeds.

iv)	Structures to be erected.

v)	Location of sites to be mined showing depth of proposed excavation.

vi)	Location of tailing (strippings or overburden) deposits showing a maximum height of deposits.

vii)	Location of processing areas and machinery to be used in the mining operation.

viii)	Location of storage of mined materials, showing height of storage deposits.

ix)	Location of vehicle parking.

x)	Location of storage of explosives.

xi)	Location of fuel storage.

xii)	Erosion and sediment control structures.

xiii)	Water retention ponds.

xiv)	Drainage plan including revisions to existing drainage patterns.

xv)	Proposed internal road system including typical cross sections.

xvi)	Proposed new access points to adjacent public roads.
 
xvii)	Proposed haul routes of vehicles removing material from the pit including current spring weight restrictions on the proposed routes.

c)	Map C.  Reclamation Plan.  The reclamation plan must take into account the performance standards listed in this Division in addition to:

i)	Property boundaries surveyed by a Minnesota licensed land surveyor.

ii)	Final grade of proposed site showing elevations and contour lines at 5 foot intervals.

iii)	Proposed land use after mining.

iv)	Location, species, rate, and density of vegetation to be seeded and planted.

v)	Location and nature of any structure to be erected in relation to the end use plan.

vi)	Proposed improvements such as roads, paths, ponds, etc.

vii)	Topsoil restoration plan.

viii)	Rates, kinds, and location of soil amendments.

ix)	Mulching, erosion control fabric, and other soil stabilization methods.

x)	Include the grading plans, topsoil protection and replacement, seeding, revegetation, mulching, erosion control, and sedimentation control specifications for each phase and final restoration.

xi)	Include quantified performance standards for the reclamation and maintenance of each plant community to be restored. These shall be based on a minimum percent cover of acceptable vegetation, maximum percent cover of unacceptable vegetation, and minimum species diversity at reclamation milestones: 0-24 months; 2-5 years; and 6 years or more after substantial completion.  Acceptable and unacceptable vegetation shall be defined in the plan.

I 0) Supporting documentation: Every application for a resource extraction facility permit shall include submission of supporting documentation.   The documentation must take into account the performance standards listed in
 
this Division and may be presented in descriptive or map form.  Supporting documentation shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

a)	A description of existing land uses on the subject property.

b)	A description of land use designations in the Comprehensive Plan and zoning classifications of the subject property.

c)	A description of the soil, vegetation, mineral content and topography of the subject property.  A minimum of three soil boring logs representative of the site and a description of the subsurface materials on the subject property must be submitted.

d)	A general description of surface waters, existing drainage patterns and groundwater conditions within one-fourth of a mile of the subject property.

e)	A general description of the depth, quantity, quality and intended uses of the mineral deposits on the subject property.

f)	Copies of all state, federal, and county application documents and operating permits, including but not limited to: Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) permits, wetland permits
(Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act and/or Corps of Engineers),
historical and archaeological permits, stormwater permits, mine safety and health administration permits, and the required environmental assessment worksheet (EAW) for the subject property.

g)	A description of the site hydrology and drainage characteristics during extraction for each phase of mineral extraction including plans to control erosion, sedimentation, and water quality of stormwater runoff

h)	If there are any proposed changes to the existing drainage patterns, include proposed mitigation plans to control downstream off-site damage caused by any increase to the natural flow of water or any diversion of the existing natural flow of water.

i)	A description of actions to be taken to mitigate potential impacts resulting from mineral extraction and processing, including potential impact related to: wetlands, erosion, noise, air pollution, surface water contamination, traffic, dust, or vibrations.

j)	A description of site screening, buffering, landscaping, and security fencing.
 
k)	A description of the method in which complaints about any aspect of the resource extraction facility or off-site transportation are to be received and the method by which complaints are to be resolved, such as neighbor notifications, meetings, or property value guarantees.

1)	A plan for groundwater quality protection.  The plan shall include a minimum of three borings showing depth to groundwater.  If washing or processing are not proposed, and if groundwater is not
encountered at a depth of 15 feet below the bottom of the proposed pit floor, the applicant need not extend borings any further.  If washing/processing  is proposed, a minimum of three monitoring wells shall be installed to evaluate the hydrogeologic environment. The City reserves the right to require additional borings or monitoring wells if necessary.

m)	A minimum of three cross-sections showing the extent of overburden, extent of mineral deposits, the water table, and any evidence of the water table in the past.

n)	A water budget, including an estimate of the amount of daily water use, water sources, and methods for disposing of water. Descriptions of methods used for filtration and control of water runoff are to be included also.

o)	Identification of all proposed off-site trucking routes, together with the frequency and the common schedule of travel to be used for transporting extracted materials or products to and from the site.

p)	Description of methods to control the weight of vehicles leaving the facility and the methods to ensure vehicles do not travel on roads with weight limits lower than the weight of the vehicles.

q)	Description of methods to prevent mud and debris from being tracked onto public roads.

r)	A listing of any hazardous materials, including all fuel supplies, that will be stored on-site and a description of measures to be used for securing and storing these materials.

s)	A listing of all chemicals used in the manufacturing and processing operations and in controlling dust.

t)	If a mineral extraction facility proposes to dewater the site, a plan must be submitted that includes:

i)	Dewatering points and their elevations;
 
ii)	Hydrogeologic parameters of the unit dewatered including hydraulic conductivity, transmissivity, and storativity;

iii)	Proposed volume and rate of dewatering;

iv)	Discharge point; and

v)	Duration of dewatering.

u)	Contingency Plans.  A plan for responding to spills and berm/earthen dam failure, or accidental release of chemicals, dust, waste, process water, or tailings.

v)	Seismic Monitoring.   If a resource extraction facility proposes using explosives, a pre-blast survey performed by a Minnesota licensed engineer of surrounding dwellings and buildings within one-half mile of the facility shall be conducted prior to initial
blasting.  Yearly seismic surveys shall be offered and conducted by the applicant's engineer if blasting has occurred within the
previous year.

w)	Description of site security and property boundary signage to be utilized at the facility.

11)	Additional requirements for underground resource extraction facilities:

a)	A description of the stability oflands overlaying the underground workings.

b)	Locations of adits, ventilation shafts, and other surface openings.

c)	Detailed description of water handling procedures, including dewatering and processing water.

d)	Detailed description of the fate and transport of groundwater into and out of the mine workings.

e)	No resource extraction activities shall occur within a 500 foot radius of any residential or farm well.

f)	Designs for mining under public roads require approval of the road authority.

g)	Mining or tunneling must maintain a 200 foot vertical extension setback from permanent surface structures.

G)	Resource Extraction Facility Permit Application Process.
 
I)	Application.  A request for a resource extraction conditional use permit, as provided within this Division, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form, the required application fee shall be paid, and a deposit made to reimburse the City for its out-of-pocket costs in processing the application.

a)	The application shall also be accompanied by ten hard copies and one electronic copy of the detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use as specified in this Division.

b)	The Zoning Administrator shall refer the application along with all related information, to the appropriate zoning authorities for consideration.

2)	Notice.  The Zoning Administrator shall notice a public hearing as specified in Section 85-020 of this Chapter.

3)	Additional Information.  The City shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant if said information is declared to be necessary by the City to review the request or to establish performance conditions in relation to this Division.  Failure by the applicant to provide such additional information or consent to such testimony may lead to a determination by the City that the application is incomplete.

4)	Referrals.  The City may refer the application for review and comment to other agencies, including, but not limited to, the Soil and Water Conservation District, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, or the Goodhue County Mining Technical Evaluation Panel.

5)	Recommendation.   The Advisory Planning Commission shall make findings of fact and recommend such actions or conditions relating to the request to the City Council.  The City Council may impose restrictions or conditions as deemed necessary to protect the public interest.  These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

a)	Matters relating to the appearance of the facility.

b)	Hours of operation.

c)	Limiting the number of loaded trucks leaving the facility per day.

d)	Requiring all access drives to be watered and/or conditioned regularly to minimize dust.

e)	Increasing setbacks.
 
f)	Blasting notifications and frequency.

g)	Limiting the height, size, or location of buildings or stockpiles.

h)	Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points.

i)	Increasing street width and improving access conditions, including tum lanes, bypass lanes, etc.

j)	Increasing the number, size, location, or lighting of signs.

k)	Requiring diking, berming, fencing, buffering, screening, landscaping, or other facilities to protect adjacent or nearby property.

1)	Designating sites for open space.

m)	Delineating the area to be mined, total size, and open area at any one time.

n)	Requiring phased reclamation.

o)	Requiring financial security to guarantee compliance with the conditions of approval.

p)	Air and Water quality monitoring.

q)	On-site and off-site improvements to mitigate impacts caused by revisions to the natural flow of surface waters.

r)	Requiring the owner/operator to enter into a road maintenance agreement with the City which shall specify the owner/operator's responsibilities with regard to road maintenance costs based on the life expectancy of the operations at the facility.

6)	City Council's Action and Findings.  The City Council shall approve, modify, or deny the request and state the findings of its actions.  The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the City Council's action.

7)	Reapplication/Lapse  of Conditional Use Permit.  The City shall not accept reapplication for the same or substantially similar conditional use permit within 12 months of denial.

8)	Amended Conditional Use Permit.  Any material change to the operations or use of the land approved under a current conditional use permit shall require an amended conditional use permit and all procedures shall apply as if a new permit were being issued. The determination of whether any change constitutes a material change shall be made at the sole discretion of the City.
 
H)	Annual Registration Required.  Annual registration of all resource extraction facilities is required.  The purpose of the annual registration is to maintain an updated listing of active mineral extraction facilities in the City, to decertify any permits where the activity has ceased, to monitor compliance with the conditions of approval, to review the applicability of the conditions, and to review bonding requirements.

I)	Permit holders must complete and return registration forms provided by the City.  Failure to maintain registration shall be cause for revocation of the permit.

2)	Conditional use permits for resource extraction facilities will not automatically expire if there are no activities as authorized within a year's time as long as the permittee complies with the annual registration specified herein.

3)	Annual registration is done administratively by the Zoning Administrator and will not require review by the Advisory Planning Commission or the City Council, provided all conditions are being met and the activity meets all standards as outlined in this Division, other permits, and road impact agreements.

4)	For underground resource extraction facilities, a map prepared by a Minnesota licensed land surveyor showing the property boundaries, the location, depth, size, and elevation of the tunnels and extent of the area mined must be submitted with the annual registration fee.

I)	Security Required.  The City shall require the owner of the property in which resource extraction is occurring to post a letter of credit, bond, or cash escrow in such form and sum as determined by the City Council as part of the permit.  The security shall be sufficient to reimburse the following costs:

I)	Costs of bringing the operation into compliance with the resource extraction permit requirements including site monitoring and enforcement costs.

2)	Extraordinary costs of repairing roads due to special burden resulting from the hauling of materials and traffic associated with the operation.

3)	Extraordinary costs of providing an alternative water supply to potentially affected residences or agricultural operations located within one-half mile of the resource extraction facility or other such areas shown to be impacted by the resource extraction operations.

4)	Site restoration.

5)	Costs the City may incur in enforcing the terms of the conditional use permit, including consultant's  and attorney's fees.
 
6)	Bonds shall have an initial term of at least one year and shall include a provision for notification of the City at least thirty days prior to cancellation or non-renewal.

7)	Bonds must be renewed in such a manner that sufficient security is in existence at all times throughout the duration of the resource extraction activities.

8)	In the event the City determines that the amount of security provided by an owner/operator must be increased or if the amount provided has been exhausted, the City shall notify the owner/operator of the amount of additional security needed and the basis of that request.  The owner/operator shall provide the additional security within 30 days of the request.

J)	Additional Performance Standards for Resource Extraction Facilities.  The following performance standards apply to all resource extraction facilities located in the City and are supplemental and in addition to the other performance standards contained in this Division and this Chapter:

1)	Normal hours of operation.  Resource extraction facilities shall operate only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless specified otherwise in the conditional use permit for the facility.

a)	Exceptions to the hours of operation must be approved by the Zoning Administrator.  Approval may only be granted in conjunction with the furnishing of material for a public improvement, public safety, or a public good project that is underway during the hours that the resource extraction facility is not otherwise allowed to operate.  Approval will be limited to
those functions that cannot occur during normal hours of operation.

2)	Fencing.  Fencing, signs, and barriers are required around the outer boundaries of the entire resource extraction site and around any ponding areas and steep sloped excavation areas unless, because of their location, they are not deemed to create a safety hazard.

3)	Access.  The permittee must obtain a permit from the road authority for all proposed new access points to public roads.  The road authority may restrict the weight of vehicles allowed to use any permitted access.

4)	Environmental Assessment Worksheet.  To mitigate public nuisances, environmental, and public health concerns, the City shall require all operators of resource extraction facilities with on-site silica sand processing operations to submit an environmental assessment worksheet (EAW).

5)	Roadway dust control.  Operators shall be responsible for providing continuous dust control during facility operation on unpaved roads that are the primary routes to or from a resource extraction facility.  Watering
 
roadways or other dust control measures along paved roads accessing the facility such as pavement sweeping and wheel washing may be required.

6)	Resource extraction facility dust control and air quality.  To mitigate public nuisances and public health concerns, the City shall require dust control in all resource extraction facilities.

a)	Remedies to control dust may include methods such as berming, landscaping, enclosures for processing equipment, and watering stockpiled materials and all roads within the site.

b)	All equipment used for mining operations shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in such a manner as to minimize, as far as practicable, dust conditions which are injurious or substantially annoying to persons living within 600 feet of the facility lot line.

c)	The City may require air quality/air particulate monitoring of a resource extraction facility.  If required, facilities that excavate, transfer, process or stockpile silica sand shall monitor air quality/air particulates as described herein.  Monitoring equipment shall be in accordance with best practices standards of the MPCA or the City, whichever are more stringent.

i)	If required, the operator shall begin air quality/air particulate and weather monitoring at least six months prior to operation to create a baseline of the area.

ii)	Stationary monitors shall be located at strategic locations
along the resource extraction facility property lines, within the site, and may also be required to be located at neighboring residences within 600 feet of the facility property lines.

iii)	Continuous remote readings shall be taken and reported to the City when requested. A summary report shall accompany the operation's annual renewal documentation and fees.

7)	Blasting permit required.  The owner/operator shall obtain a blasting permit from the City, if applicable.

8)	Noise.  Maximum noise levels at the facility will be consistent with the standards established by the MPCA.  To mitigate public nuisances, the facility shall use best management practices including building berms, enclosing generators, and leaving existing trees at the property boundaries to minimize noise impacts.

9)	Vibration.  Operators shall use all practical means to eliminate adverse impacts on adjacent properties from vibration of equipment according to all federal and state laws, rules, regulations and statutes.
 
10)	Water resources.  The resource extraction operation shall not allow surface water to leave the site in a manner that causes flooding, erosion, or alteration of natural drainage patterns.  The resource extraction operation shall not adversely affect the quantity or quality of surface or subsurface water. Surface water leaving the site shall be of equal quality as water originating off-site before it passes through the site.  The operator shall perform any water treatment necessary to comply with this provision.

11)	Screening/buffering.   Screening barriers shall be subject to the approval of the City.

a)	To minimize problems of dust and noise and to shield mining operations from public view, a screening barrier may be required between the mining site and adjacent properties.

b)	A screening barrier may be required between the resource extraction facility and any public road.

c)	A screening barrier may be required to mitigate visual impacts of the resource extraction facility from existing historical, cultural, recreational features and dwellings, including but not limited to trails, navigable waters, and sites identified in the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) and Goodhue County cultural databases.

d)	A buffer yard and screening that complies with "Buffer Yard D" as set forth in Section 62-030 of this Chapter is required for all resource extraction facility boundaries that abut residential, parks and open areas, and public assembly land uses.

12)	Unauthorized storage.  Vehicles, equipment, or materials not associated with the resource extraction facility or not in operable condition may not be kept or stored at the facility.

13)	Setbacks.  The following minimum setbacks shall be maintained from property boundaries at the surface and their vertical extensions below the surface:

a)	One hundred feet of adjoining property lines, except for visual screening, reclamation, and berming of overburden material, unless written consent of the owner of the adjoining property is first secured, recorded with the Goodhue County Recorder, and a copy submitted to the Zoning Administrator.

b)	One thousand feet of any existing dwelling or platted residential subdivision, not owned by the operator or owner, unless written consent of the owner of the adjoining property is first secured,
 
recorded with the Goodhue County Recorder, and a copy submitted to the Zoning Administrator.

c)	Three hundred feet of the boundary of any zoning district where such operations are not permitted.

d)	One hundred feet of any right-of-way of any existing or platted street, road or highway, except berm construction, vegetative screening, or maintenance activities unless by written consent of the adjacent road authority having jurisdiction  over the right-of­ way and a copy is submitted to the Zoning Administrator.

e)	The City Council may increase the setbacks based upon residential locations, social or economic concerns, type of mining, or to mitigate public nuisance concerns.

14)	Phasing.  Phasing plans must be prepared for all mineral extraction facilities.
The proposed size of the extraction, processing, staging, and stockpiling operations are to be identified.  Resource extraction activities shall be conducted so active extraction operations expose no more than 40 acres at any one time, unless specifically approved in the Conditional Use Permit.

15)	Weed control.  The operators shall be required to control noxious weeds and mow or harvest other vegetation to maintain reasonable appearance of the site.

16)	Waste disposal.  Any waste generated from the mining operation, including waste from vehicle or equipment maintenance, shall be disposed of in accordance with federal, state, county, and city requirements.

a)	Portable asphalt and concrete plants must be approved on a per project basis by the City.

b)	An estimate of the amount of recycled concrete and asphalt material to be processed must be submitted.  An estimate of the time required and the amount required to be stockpiled before being processed must be submitted.

17)	Water quality monitoring.  Water quality monitoring shall be performed when a resource extraction facility is (a) mining below the water table; (b) if the property lines are within 600 feet of known karst features, springs, streams, or lakes; (c) if the operation is proposing to dewater the site; (d) if the site is using chemicals as part of the washing or ponding process; (e) if otherwise required by the City Council or the MPCA; or (f) if mining silica sand, as defined in Section 55-260 of this Division.

a)	Ifwashing/processing  operations are proposed, a minimum of three monitoring wells shall be installed to evaluate the
 
hydrogeologic environment.  The City reserves the right to require additional borings or monitoring wells if necessary.

b)	A water monitoring plan shall include placing a sufficient number of monitoring wells in strategic locations along the property lines and within the site to adequately characterize and monitor surface and groundwater.

c)	Monitoring of residential wells within 600 feet of the property lines may also be required.

d)	Continuous remote readings shall be taken and reported to the City when requested.  A summary report shall accompany the operation's annual registration  documentation.

18)	General compliance.  The operators must comply with all federal, state, regional, county, and local laws and regulations applicable to the operation of the resource extraction facility, including, but not limited to, floodplain management regulations, shoreland management regulations, and Zoning Code regulations.

19)	Additional regulations.  The City may impose additional regulations and requirements on the resource extraction facility to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

20)	Land reclamation.  The following minimum land reclamation standards and conditions shall apply:

a)	For gravel pits, final grades may not exceed one vertical to three horizontal slope except for rehabilitated areas in existenceon October 17, 2012.  In completing final grading in each phase, the top of the slope may begin twenty feet from property lines.

i)	Proposed topography shall fit in with regional topography and mirror landforms typical of the area.

b)	For rock quarries, the permittee shall submit a plan to explain how the quarries are to be rehabilitated.

c)	A minimum of three inches of topsoil shall be placed on all graded surfaces.

d)	Seeding and mulching shall be consistent with Minnesota Department of Transportation specifications for rights-of-way. Areas returned to agricultural production are exempt from the seeding and mulching requirements.
 
e)	Soil restoration, seeding, and mulching must occur within each phase as soon as final grades, or interim grades identified in the phasing plans, have been reached.

i)	Land shall be reclaimed to native vegetation unless inconsistent with the final proposed land use.

ii)	Proposed land uses shall be consistent with the Comprehensive  Plan, zoning code requirements, and applicable federal, state, and local regulations in effect at the
time the plan is submitted, and may be required to be amended over time.

f)	Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be consistent with MPCA 's protecting water quality in urban areas and MPCA' s general stormwater permit.

g)	Unless otherwise amended or approved by the City, all final grades and site restoration efforts shall be consistent with the reclamation plan.

h)	Within 12 months after completion of resource extraction or after termination of the permit, all equipment, vehicles, machinery, materials, and debris shall be removed from the subject property.

i)	Within 12 months after completion of resource extraction or after termination of the permit, site reclamation must be completed. Failure to annually register the resource extraction facility will be considered termination of the resource extraction facility and the 12-month period for site reclamation begins.

j)	All water areas resulting from excavation shall be addressed upon reclamation of the site.  In unique circumstances where the City Council has reviewed proposals for water bodies at the time of approval of the overall plan and has determined that such would be appropriate as an open space or recreational amenity in subsequent reuse of the site, water bodies may be permitted.

21)	Transportation Impact Study and Road Impact Agreement.  The City shall require the owner/operator of a silica sand processing facility to complete a transportation impact study and may require the owner/operator to enter into road impact agreements as conditions of their permit and registration.

a)	Transportation Impact Studies.  When a proposed or amended conditional use permit is requested, the City shall require a transportation impact study.
 
b)	Road Impact Agreements.  When a proposed or amended conditional use permit is requested, the City may require a road impact agreement to alleviate the additional burden on the City's financial resources associated with the road infrastructure maintenance affected by granting the request.

K)	Bi-Annual and Annual Reporting.

1)  During the first two years of operations, the owner of all resource extraction operations in the City shall submit a report twice per year to the Zoning Administrator between the dates of January 1through February 1 and July 1 through August 1.

2)	After two years of consecutive operations, the owner/operator of all resource extraction operations in the City shall submit an annual report to the Zoning Administrator between the dates of January 1through February 1.

3)	The bi-annual and annual reports shall include the following information:

a)	An identification of the owner/operator and the location of the resource extraction site.

b)	A map accurately showing the area of existing excavation, the unclaimed areas and reclaimed areas of the mine site.  These maps shall include the acreage of each area.

c)	A written, detailed description of activities and operations on the site for the previous half-year (for bi-annual reports) or year (for annual reports).

d)	A written, detailed description of activities and operations planned for the following calendar year of operations.

e)	A written report demonstrating how the owner/operator has been in compliance with all the terms set forth in this Chapter and the conditional use permit.  The report shall include all water and air quality monitoring results.

f)	A summary of all areas of noncompliance and a detailed plan for bringing noncompliant areas of operation into compliance for the next calendar year of operations.

L)	Inspection, Violations, Penalties and Enforcement.

1)  Inspection.  In addition to the reporting requirements, the City may make inspections of the facility upon reasonable notice to determine the condition of the resource extraction sites in order to ensure and safeguard the health
 
and safety of the public and determine compliance with the minimum standards under the applicable law.

2)	Violation a Misdemeanor.  Any firm, person, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of these regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment as provided by law, unless a more severe penalty is provided by state or federal law.  Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.

3)	Additional violations.  The following also constitute violations of the Zoning Code:

a)	Engaging in resource extraction without properly obtaining a conditional use permit as required by the Zoning Code.

b)	Making incorrect or false statements in the information and documentation submitted in the reporting or during inspection by an authorized representative of the City.

c)	Failure to provide a bi-annual or annual report by the applicable deadline.

d)	Failure to take appropriate or reasonable action to remediate a known violation, citation, request for additional information or financial assurance, or any other order by the City.

4)	Enforcement. In the event of a violation or threatened violation of any of the terms of this Division, the City may take appropriate action to enforce this Division, including exercising the performance bonds, application for injunctive relief, action to compel performance, revocation of the
conditional use permit, civil fines, and/or other appropriate action before the City Council or in court if the City deems it necessary to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violations or threatened violations.  Upon motion, the court may award costs, disbursements and reasonable attorney's fees and witness fees, which costs and fees can be assessed against the property.

55-260	Heavy Industrial Land Use - Silica Sand Processing that does not include Resource Extraction.

A)	Purpose.  The purpose of this zoning regulation is to provide minimum standards for all silica sand processing operations (heavy industrial land use) within the City limits in order to protect public health and safety, to preserve the scenic beauty of Red Wing's landscapes and environment, to protect the public from damage to both the quality and quantity of ground and surface waters, to minimize or prevent adverse impacts from on-site and off-site operations, and to promote the general
 
welfare of the people of Red Wing and the surrounding communities.  This purpose will be fulfilled through the following means:

1)	Identification of areas in the City where silica sand processing is most appropriate and minimizes conflicts with other land uses.

2)	Establishment of permitting requirements, environmental review procedures and performance standards to regulate silica sand processing operations.

3)	Establishment of standards that prevent or minimize environment and aesthetic impacts on extracted properties, adjacent properties, and the City as a whole.

4)	Establishment of standards and financial guarantees that restore any affected property to a condition compatible with adjacent properties and suitable for future uses that are compatible with the City of Red Wing Comprehensive Plan.

B)	Definitions.  For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms and words are defined below and also in Section 55-250 Resource Extraction Activities and Section 55- 270 Silica Sand Motor Freight and Warehousing. Additional terms are also defined in Division 10, Definitions. Particular terms that apply include heavy industrial land use and those listed below.

C)	Silica Sand Processing Defined.

1)	Silica sand means silica/frac sand having composition and grain-size distribution suitable for industrial applications, including, but not limited to, use in the hydraulic fracturing process.  Characteristics of silica sand/frac sand include: spherical shape, high silica (quartz) content, hardness (can withstand high pressure), uniform particle shape, and larger grain size.  This definition specifically includes silica sand obtained from Jordan and St. Peter Sandstone.

2)	Silica sand processing means any or all of the following:

a)	Manufacturing or processing operations that may involve the use of equipment for the crushing, screening, separation, washing, compounding, coating, mixing or blending of mineral aggregates or nonmetallic resources extracted from off-site involving silica sand.

b)	Manufacturing processes aimed at producing silica sand and silica sand products for sale or use by the owner.

c)	Stockpiling of nonmetallic resources used in the silica sand manufacturing process for sale or use off-site, and stockpiling of waste materials.
 
d)	Transport of nonmetallic resources, finished products or waste materials from the silica sand processing site.

e)	Disposal of waste materials.

f)	Exclusion: Silica sand processing as defined in this Division does not include processing operations that take place on-site at resource extraction facilities.

3)	Silica sand processing facility means any area that is being used for silica sand processing.

D)	Silica Sand Processing Facility Permit Required.  All persons having a legal or equitable interest in any silica sand processing facility commencing on or after October 17, 2012, shall obtain a conditional use permit which shall be processed in accordance with Division 90 of this Zoning Code and the additional procedures and requirements of this Division.   Such persons are referred to hereinafter as "owner," "operator," and/or "permittee."  These terms are interchangeable for the purposes of this Division.

E)	Silica Sand Processing Facility Permit Application Requirements.  All persons seeking to engage in silica sand processing activities within the City must submit the following:

1)	Name, address, phone number(s), e-mail address, and website of the operator of the silica sand processing facility.

2)	Name, addresses, phone number(s), and e-mail addresses of all owners or lessors of the land on which the processing operation will occur.

3)	Acreage and complete legal description of the subject property on which the facility will be located, including all contiguous property owned by the landowners.

4)	A narrative outlining the type of material to be processed, mode of operation, including any screening, drying, washing, coating and storage of material, estimated quantity of material to be processed, and other pertinent information to explain the request in detail.

5)	Estimated time frame to operate the facility, to include hours per day, days per week, months per year, and number of years in operation.

6)	A description of all vehicles and equipment estimated to be used by the operator in the operation of the facility.

7)	A description of the estimated average daily and peak daily number of vehicles accessing the facility.  If more than one access to the facility is
 
proposed, provide a breakdown of anticipated daily and peak number of vehicles using each access.

8)	Any other information or documentation required for issuance of a conditional use permit under the Zoning Code.

9)	Supporting documentation: Every application for a silica sand processing facility permit shall include submission of supporting documentation.   The documentation must take into account the performance standards listed in this Division and may be presented in descriptive or map form.  Supporting documentation shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

a)	A description of existing land uses on the subject property.

b)	A description of land use designations in the Comprehensive Plan and zoning classifications of the subject property.

c)	Copies of all federal, state, and county application documents and operating permits, including but not limited to: U.S. and Minnesota Department of Transportation permits and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) permits.

d)	A description of actions to be taken to mitigate potential impacts resulting from silica sand processing, including potential impact related to: wetlands, erosion, noise, air pollution, surface water contamination, traffic, dust, or vibrations.

e)	A description of site screening, buffering, landscaping, and security fencing.

f)	A description of the method in which complaints about any aspect of the facility or off-site transportation are to be received and the method by which complaints are to be resolved, such as neighbor notifications, meetings, or property value guarantees.

g)	A water budget, including an estimate of the amount of daily water use, water sources, and methods for disposing of water. Descriptions of methods used for filtration and control of water runoff are to be included also.

h)	Identification of all proposed off-site trucking routes, together with the frequency and the common schedule of travel to be used for transporting materials or products to and from the site.

i)	Description of methods to control the weight of vehicles leaving the facility and the methods to ensure vehicles do not travel on roads with weight limits lower than the weight of the vehicles.
 
j)	Description of methods to prevent mud and debris from being tracked onto public roads.

k)	A listing of any hazardous materials, including all fuel supplies that will be stored on site and a description of measures to be used for securing and storing these materials.

1)	A listing of all chemicals used in the processing operations and in controlling dust.

m)	Contingency Plans.  A plan for responding to spills or accidental release of chemicals, dust, waste, or process water.

n)	Description of site security and property boundary signage to be utilized at the facility.

F)	Silica Sand Processing Permit Application Process.

1)	Application.  A request for a silica sand processing conditional use permit, as provided within this Division, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form, the required application fee shall be paid, and a deposit made to reimburse the City for its out-of-pocket costs in processing the application.

a)	The application shall also be accompanied by ten hard copies and one electronic copy of the detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use as specified in this Division.

b)	The Zoning Administrator shall refer the application along with all related information to the appropriate zoning authorities for consideration.

2)	Notice.  The Zoning Administrator shall notice a public hearing as specified in Section 85-020 of this Chapter.

3)	The City shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant if said information is declared to be necessary by the City to review the request or to establish performance conditions in relation to this Division.  Failure by the applicant to provide such additional information or consent to such testimony may lead to a determination by the City that the application is incomplete.

4)	Referrals.  The City may refer the application for review and comment to other agencies, including but not limited to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency or the Minnesota Department of Transportation.
 
5)	Recommendation.   The Advisory Planning Commission shall make findings of fact and recommend such actions or conditions relating to the request to the City Council.  The City Council may impose restrictions or conditions as deemed necessary to protect the public interest.  These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

a)	Matters relating to the appearance of the facility.

b)	Hours of operation.

c)	Limiting the number of loaded trucks entering or leaving the facility per day.

d)	Requiring all access drives to be watered and/or conditioned regularly to minimize dust.

e)	Increasing setbacks.

f)	Limiting the height, size or location of buildings or stockpiles.

g)	Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points.

h)	Increasing street width and improving access conditions, including tum lanes, bypass lanes, etc.

i)	Increasing the number, size, location, or lighting of signs.

j)	Requiring berming, fencing, buffering, screening, landscaping, or other facilities to protect adjacent or nearby property.

k)	Requiring financial security to guarantee compliance with the conditions of approval.

1)	Air and water quality monitoring.

m)	On-site and off-site improvements to mitigate potential impacts to surface and subsurface waters.

n)	Requiring the owner/operator to enter into a road maintenance agreement with the City which shall specify the owner/operator's responsibilities with regard to road maintenance costs based on the life expectancy of the operations at the facility.

6)	City Council's Action and Findings.  The City Council shall approve, modify, or deny the request and state the findings of its actions.  The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the City Council's action.
 
7)	Reapplication/Lapse  of Conditional Use Permit.  The City shall not accept reapplication for the same or substantially similar conditional use permit within 12 months of denial.

8)	Amended Conditional Use Permit.  Any material change to the operations or use of the land approved under a current conditional use permit shall require an amended conditional use permit and all procedures shall apply as if a new permit were being issued. The determination of whether any change constitutes a material change shall be made at the sole discretion of the City.

G)	Security Required.  The City shall require the owner of the property in which silica sand processing is occurring to post a letter of credit, bond, or cash escrow in such form and sum as determined by the City Council as part of the permit.  The security shall be sufficient to reimburse the following costs:

1)	Costs of bringing the operation into compliance with the silica sand processing permit requirements including site monitoring and enforcement costs.

2)	Extraordinary costs of repairing roads due to special burdens resulting from the hauling of materials and traffic associated with the operation.

3)	Extraordinary costs of providing an alternative water supply to potentially affected residences or agricultural operations located within one-half mile of the resource extraction facility or other such areas shown to be impacted by the silica sand processing operations.

4)	Costs the City may incur in enforcing the terms of the conditional use permit, including consultant's  and attorney's fees.

5)	Bonds shall be for a minimum of one year and shall include a provision for notification of the City at least thirty days prior to cancellation or non­ renewal.

6)	Bonds must be renewed in such a manner that sufficient security is in existence at all times throughout the duration of the silica sand processing operation.

7)	In the event the City determines that the amount of security provided by an owner/operator must be increased, or if the amount provided has been exhausted, the City shall notify the owner/operator of the amount of additional security needed and the basis of that request.  The owner/operator shall provide the additional security within 30 days of the request.

H)	Additional Performance Standards for Silica Sand Processing Facilities.  The following performance standards apply to all silica sand processing facilities located in the City and are supplemental and in addition to the other applicable performance standards contained in this Division and in the Zoning Code:
 
I)	Normal hours of operation.  Silica sand processing facilities shall operate only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless specified otherwise in the conditional use permit for the facility.

a)	Exceptions to the hours of operation must be approved by the Zoning Administrator.  Approval may only be granted in conjunction with the furnishing of material for a public improvement, public safety, or a public good project that is underway during the hours that the facility is not otherwise allowed to operate.  Approval will be limited to those functions that cannot occur during normal hours of operation.

1)	Fencing.  Fencing, signs, and barriers are required around the outer boundaries of the entire facility.

2)	Access.  The permittee must obtain a permit from the road authority for all proposed new access points to public roads.  The road authority may restrict the weight of vehicles allowed to use any permitted access.

3)	Roadway dust control.  Operators shall be responsible for providing continuous dust control during facility operation on unpaved roads that are the primary routes to or from a silica sand processing facility.  Watering roadways or other dust control measures along paved roads accessing the facility such as pavement sweeping and wheel washing may be required.

4)	Environmental Assessment Worksheet.  To mitigate public nuisances, environmental, and public health concerns, the City shall require all operators of silica sand processing facilities to submit an environmental assessment worksheet (EAW).

5)	Dust Mitigation Plan.  To mitigate public nuisances and public health concerns, the City shall require operators to present a dust mitigation plan for approval by the City.

a)	Remedies to control dust may include methods such as berming, landscaping, enclosures for processing equipment, and watering stockpiled materials and all roads within the site.

b)	All equipment used for processing operations shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in such a manner as to minimize, as far as practicable, dust conditions which are injurious or substantially annoying to persons living within 600 feet of the facility lot line.

c)	The City shall require continuous air qualityIair particulate monitoring of a silica sand processing facility.  Monitoring equipment shall be in accordance with the Minnesota Pollution
 
Control Agency (MPCA) or the City's best practices standards, whichever are more stringent.

i)	The operator shall begin air quality/air particulate and water monitoring at least six months prior to operation to create a baseline of the area.

ii)	Stationary monitors shall be located at strategic locations along the silica sand processing facility property lines, within the site, and may also be required to be located at
neighboring residences within 600 feet of the facility property lines.

iii)	Continuous remote readings shall be taken and reported to the City when requested.  A summary report shall be included in all bi-annual or annual reports, and shall be made available upon request by the City.

6)	Noise.  Maximum noise levels at the facility will be consistent with the standards established by the MPCA.  To mitigate public nuisances, the facility shall use best management practices including building berms, enclosing generators, and leaving existing trees at the property boundaries to minimize noise impacts.

7)	Vibration.  Operators shall use all practical means to eliminate adverse impacts on adjacent properties from vibration of equipment according to all federal and state laws, rules, regulations, and statutes.

8)	Water resources.  The silica sand processing operation shall not allow surface water to leave the site in a manner that causes flooding, erosion, or alteration of natural drainage patterns.  The facility shall not adversely affect the quantity or quality of surface or subsurface water.  Surface water leaving the site shall be of equal quality as water originating off-site before it passes through the site.  The operator shall perform any water treatment necessary to comply with this provision.

I 0) Screening/buffering.   Screening barriers shall be subject to the approval of the City.

a)	To minimize problems of dust and noise and to shield silica sand processing operations from public view, a screening barrier may be required between the mining site and adjacent properties.

b)	A screening barrier may be required between the silica sand processing facility and any public road.

c)	A screening barrier may be required to mitigate visual impacts of the silica sand processing facility from existing historical, cultural,
 
recreational features and dwellings, including but not limited to trails, navigable waters, and sites identified in the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) and Goodhue County cultural databases.

d)	A buffer yard and screening that complies with "Buffer Yard D" as set forth in Section 62-030 of this Chapter is required for all silica sand processing facility boundaries that abut residential, parks and open areas, and public assembly land uses.

11)	Unauthorized storage.  Vehicles, equipment, or materials not associated with the silica sand processing facility or not in operable condition may not be kept or stored at the facility.

12)	Waste disposal.  Any waste generated from the silica sand processing operation, including waste from vehicle or equipment maintenance, shall be disposed of in accordance with federal, state, county, and city requirements.

13)	Water quality monitoring.  Water quality monitoring shall be performed at all silica sand processing facilities.

a)	A minimum of three monitoring wells shall be installed to evaluate the hydrogeologic environment.  The City reserves the right to require additional borings or monitoring wells if necessary.

b)	A water monitoring plan shall include placing a sufficient number of monitoring wells in strategic locations along the property lines and within the site to adequately characterize and monitor surface and groundwater.

c)	Monitoring of residential wells within 600 of the property lines may also be required.

d)	Continuous remote readings shall be taken and reported to the City when requested.  A summary report shall be included in all bi­ annual or annual reports, and shall be made available upon request by the City.

14)	Stormwater Management Plan.  The City may require an operator to submit a stormwater management plan to the City for approval.

15)	General compliance.  The operators must comply with all other federal, state, regional, county, and local laws and regulations applicable to the operation of the silica sand processing facility, including but not limited to floodplain management regulations, shoreland management regulations, and Zoning Code regulations.
 
16)	Additional regulations.  The City may impose additional regulations and requirements on the silica sand processing facility to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

17)	Transportation Impact Study and Road Impact Agreement.  The City shall require the owner/operator of a silica sand processing facility to complete a transportation impact study and may require the owner/operator to enter into road impact agreements as conditions of their permit and registration.

a)	Transportation Impact Studies.  When a proposed or amended conditional use permit is requested, the City shall require a transportation impact study.

b)	Road Impact Agreements.  When a proposed or amended conditional use permit is requested, the City may require a road impact agreement to alleviate the additional burden on the City's financial resources associated with the road infrastructure maintenance affected by granting the request.

I)	Bi-Annual and Annual Reporting.

1)	During the first two years of operations, the owner of all silica sand processing facilities in the City shall submit a report twice per year to the Zoning Administrator between the dates of January 1through February 1 and July 1through August 1.

2)	After two years of consecutive operations, the owner of all silica sand processing facilities in the City shall submit an annual report to the Zoning Administrator between the dates of January 1 through February 1.

3)	The bi-annual and annual reports shall include the following information:

a)	An identification of the owner/operator and the location of the silica sand processing facility.

b)	A written, detailed description of activities and operations on the site for the previous half-year (for bi-annual reports) or year (for annual reports).

c)	A written, detailed description of activities and operations planned for the following calendar year of operations.

d)	A written report demonstrating how the owner/operator has been in compliance with all the terms set forth in the zoning ordinance and the conditional use permit.  The report shall include all water and air quality monitoring results.
 
e)	A summary of all areas of noncompliance and a detailed plan for bringing noncompliant areas of operation into compliance for the next calendar year of operations.

J)	Inspection, Violations, Penalties and Enforcement.

1)	Inspection. In addition to the annual reports, the City may make inspections of the facility upon reasonable notice to determine the condition of the silica sand processing site in order to ensure and safeguard the health and safety of the public and determine compliance with the minimum standards under the applicable law.

2)	Violation a Misdemeanor.  Any firm, person, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of these regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment as provided by law, unless a more severe penalty is provided by federal or state law.  Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.

3)	Additional violations.  The following also constitutes violations of the Zoning Code:

a)	Engaging in silica sand processing without properly obtaining a conditional use permit as required by the Zoning Code.

b)	Making incorrect or false statements in the information and documentation submitted in the reporting or during inspection by an authorized representative of the City.

c)	Failure to provide a bi-annual or annual report within the required time period.

d)	Failure to take appropriate or reasonable action to remediate a known violation, citation, request for additional information or financial assurance, or any other order by the City.

4)	Enforcement. In the event of a violation or threatened violation of any of the terms of this Division, the City may take appropriate action to enforce this Division, including exercising the performance bonds, application for injunctive relief, action to compel performance, revocation of the
conditional use permit, civil fines, and/or other appropriate action before the
City Council or in court if the City deems it necessary to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violations or threatened violations.  Upon motion, the court may award costs, disbursements and reasonable attorney's fees and witness fees, which costs and fees can be assessed against the property.

55-270	Silica Sand Motor Freight and Warehousing.
 
A)	Purpose.  The purpose of this zoning regulation is to provide minimum standards for all silica sand motor freight and warehousing operations (motor freight and warehousing land use) within the City limits in order to protect public health and safety, to preserve the scenic beauty of Red Wing's landscapes and environment, to protect the public from damage to both the quality and quantity of ground and surface waters, to minimize or prevent adverse impacts from on-site and off-site operations, and to promote the general welfare of the people of Red Wing and the surrounding communities.  This purpose will be fulfilled through the following means:

1)	Identification of areas in the City where silica sand motor freight and warehousing is most appropriate and minimizes conflicts with other land uses.

2)	Establishment of permitting requirements,  environmental review procedures and performance standards to regulate silica sand motor freight and warehousing operations.

3)	Establishment of standards that prevent or minimize environment and aesthetic impacts on adjacent properties and the City as a whole.

4)	Establishment of standards and financial guarantees that restore any affected property to a condition compatible with adjacent properties and suitable for future uses that are compatible with the City of Red Wing Comprehensive Plan.

B)	Definitions.  For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms and words are defined below and also in Division 10, Definitions.  Particular terms that apply include motor freight and warehousing, silica sand (defined in Section 55-260), and those listed below.

C)	Silica Sand Motor Freight and Warehousing Defined.

1)	Silica sand motor freight and warehousing means motor freight and warehousing operations (motor freight and warehousing land use) that involve silica sand, as that term is defined in Section 55-260.  Such operations include any or all of the following:

a)	Operations involving the loading, unloading, transfer, storage, warehousing, stockpiling or shipping of silica sand, regardless of the mode of transportation (truck, rail, barge, etc.).

b)	Operations that involve the transfer or movement of silica sand from one mode of transportation to another, such as from truck to barge, or from barge to rail, etc.
 
2)	Silica sand motor freight and warehousing facility means any area that is being used for silica sand motor freight and warehousing operations.

D)	Silica Sand Motor Freight and Warehousing Facility Permit Required.  All persons having a legal or equitable interest in any silica sand motor freight and warehousing facility commencing on or after October 17, 2012, shall obtain a conditional use permit which shall be processed in accordance with Division 90 of this Zoning Code and the additional procedures and requirements of this Division. Such persons are referred to hereinafter as "owner," "operator," and/or "permittee." These terms are interchangeable for the purposes of this Division.

E)	Silica Sand Motor Freight and Warehousing Facility Permit Application Requirements.  All persons seeking to engage in silica sand motor freight and warehousing activities within the City must submit the following:

1)	Name, address, phone number(s), e-mail address, and website of the operator of the silica sand motor freight and warehousing facility.

2)	Name, addresses, phone number(s), and e-mail addresses of all owners or lessors of the land on which the silica sand motor freight and warehousing operation will occur.

3)	Acreage and complete legal description of the subject property on which the facility will be located, including all contiguous property owned by the landowners.

4)	A narrative outlining the type of material to be handled, mode( s) of operation, including a description of the equipment and buildings/containers to be used in the movement and  storage of silica sand, estimated quantity of material involved in the operation, and other pertinent information to
explain the request in detail.

5)	Estimated time frame to operate the facility, to include hours per day, days per week, months per year, and number of years in operation.

6)	A description of all vehicles and equipment estimated to be used by the operator in the operation of the facility.

7)	A description of the estimated average daily and peak daily number of vehicles, barges, trains, etc. accessing the facility.  If more than one access to the facility is proposed, provide a breakdown of anticipated daily and peak number of vehicles barges, trains, etc. using each access.

8)	Any other information or documentation required for issuance of a conditional use permit under the Zoning Code.

9)	Supporting documentation: Every application for a silica sand motor freight and warehousing facility permit shall include submission of supporting
 
documentation.  The documentation must take into account the performance standards listed in this Division and may be presented in descriptive or map form.  Supporting documentation shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

a)	A description of existing land uses on the subject property.

b)	A description of land use designations in the Comprehensive Plan and zoning classifications of the subject property.

c)	Copies of all federal, state, and county application documents and operating permits, including but not limited to: U.S. and Minnesota Department of Transportation permits and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) permits.

d)	A description of actions to be taken to mitigate potential impacts resulting from silica sand silica sand motor freight and warehousing, including potential impact related to: wetlands, erosion, noise, air pollution, surface water contamination, traffic, dust, or vibrations.

e)	A description of site screening, buffering, landscaping and security fencing.

f)	A description of the method in which complaints about any aspect of the facility or on-site and off-site transportation are to be received and the method by which complaints are to be resolved, such as neighbor notifications, meetings, or property value guarantees.

g)	A water budget, including an estimate of the amount of daily water use, water sources, and methods for disposing of water. Descriptions of methods used for filtration and control of water runoff are to be included also.

h)	Identification of all proposed off-site trucking, barge, and rail routes, together with the frequency and the common schedule of travel to be used for transporting materials or products to and from the site.

i)	Description of methods to control the weight of vehicles leaving the facility and the methods to ensure vehicles do not travel on roads with weight limits lower than the weight of the vehicles.

j)	Description of methods to prevent mud and debris from being tracked onto public roads.
 
k)	A listing of any hazardous materials, including all fuel supplies that will be stored on site and a description of measures to be used for securing and storing these materials.

1)	A listing of all chemicals used in the silica sand motor freight and warehousing operations and in controlling dust.

m)	Contingency Plans.  A plan for responding to spills or accidental release of chemicals, dust, waste, or hazardous materials.

n)	Description of site security and property boundary signage to be utilized at the facility.

F)	Silica Sand Motor Freight and Warehousing Facility Permit Application Process.

1)	Application.  A request for a silica sand motor freight and warehousing facility conditional use permit, as provided within this Division, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form, the required application fee shall be paid, and a deposit made to reimburse the City for its out-of-pocket costs in processing the application.

a)	The application shall also be accompanied by ten hard copies and one electronic copy of the detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the proposed change, development, or use as specified in this Division.

b)	The Zoning Administrator shall refer the application along with all related information to the appropriate zoning authorities for consideration.

2)	Notice.  The Zoning Administrator shall notice a public hearing as specified in Division 85-020 of this Zoning Code.

3)	The City shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant if said information is declared to be necessary by the City to review the request or to establish performance conditions in relation to this Division.  Failure by the applicant to provide such additional information or consent to such testimony may lead to a determination by the City that the application is incomplete.

4)	Referrals.  The City may refer the application for review and comment to other agencies, including but not limited to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency or the Minnesota Department of Transportation.

5)	Recommendation.   The Advisory Planning Commission shall make findings of fact and recommend such actions or conditions relating to the request to
 
the City Council.  The City Council may impose restrictions or conditions as deemed necessary to protect the public interest.  These conditions may include but are not limited to, the following:

a)	Matters relating to the appearance of the facility.

b)	Hours of operation.

c)	Limiting the number of loaded trucks, railcars, barges, etc. entering or leaving the facility per day.

d)	Requiring all access drives to be watered and/or conditioned regularly to minimize dust.

e)	Increasing setbacks.

f)	Limiting the height, size, or location of buildings or stockpiles.

g)	Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points.

h)	Increasing street width and improving access conditions, including tum lanes, bypass lanes, etc.

i)	Increasing the number, size, location, or lighting of signs.

j)	Requiring berming, fencing, buffering, screening, landscaping, or other facilities to protect adjacent or nearby property.

k)	Requiring financial security to guarantee compliance with the conditions of approval.

1)	Air quality monitoring.

m) Requiring the owner/operator to enter into a road maintenance agreement with the City which shall specify the owner/operator's responsibilities with regard to road maintenance costs based on the life expectancy of the operations at the facility.

6)	City Council's Action and Findings.  The City Council shall approve, modify, or deny the request and state the findings of its actions.  The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the City Council's action.

7)	Reapplication/Lapse  of Conditional Use Permit.  The City shall not accept reapplication for the same or substantially similar conditional use permit within 12 months of denial.

8)	Amended Conditional Use Permit. Any material change to the operations or use of the land approved under a current conditional use permit shall require an amended conditional use permit and all procedures shall apply as if a new
 
permit were being issued. The determination of whether any change constitutes a material change shall be made at the sole discretion of the City.

G)	Security Required.  The City shall require the owner of the property in which silica sand motor freight and warehousing is occurring to post a letter of credit, bond, or cash escrow in such form and sum as determined by the City Council as
part of the permit.  The security shall be sufficient to reimburse the following costs:

1)	Costs of bringing the operation into compliance with the silica sand motor freight and warehousing facility permit requirements, including site monitoring and enforcement costs.

2)	Extraordinary costs of repairing roads due to special burden resulting from the hauling of materials and traffic associated with the operation.

3)	Costs the City may incur in enforcing the terms of the conditional use permit, including consultant's  and attorney's fees.

4)	Bonds shall be for a minimum of one year and shall include a provision for notification of the City at least thirty days prior to cancellation or non­ renewal.

5)	Bonds must be renewed in such a manner that sufficient security is in existence at all times throughout the duration of the resource extraction activities.

6)	In the event the City determines that the amount of security provided by an owner/operator must be increased, or if the amount provided has been exhausted, the City shall notify the owner/operator of the amount of additional security needed and the basis of that request.  The owner/operator shall provide the additional security within 30 days of the request.

H)	Additional Performance Standards for Silica Sand Motor Freight and Warehousing Facilities.  The following performance standards apply to all silica sand motor freight and warehousing facilities located in the City and are supplemental and in addition to the other applicable performance standards contained in this Division and in the Zoning Code:

1)	Normal hours of operation.  Silica sand motor freight and warehousing facilities shall operate only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless specified otherwise in the conditional use permit for the facility.

a)	Exceptions to the hours of operation must be approved by the Zoning Administrator.  Approval may only be granted in conjunction with the furnishing of material for a public improvement, public safety, or a public good project that is underway during the hours that the facility is not otherwise
 
allowed to operate.  Approval will be limited to those functions that cannot occur during normal hours of operation.

2)	Fencing.  Fencing, signs, and barriers are required around the outer boundaries of the entire facility.

3)	Access.  The permittee must obtain a permit from the road authority for all proposed new access points to public roads.  The road authority may restrict the weight of vehicles allowed to use any permitted access.

4)	Roadway dust control.  Operators shall be responsible for providing continuous dust control during facility operation on unpaved roads that are the primary routes to or from a resource extraction facility.  Watering roadways or other dust control measures along paved roads accessing the facility such as pavement sweeping and wheel washing may be required.

5)	Dust Mitigation Plan.  To mitigate public nuisances and public health concerns, the City shall require operators to present a dust mitigation plan for approval by the City.

a)	Remedies to control dust may include methods such as berming, landscaping, enclosures for equipment, and watering stockpiled materials and all roads within the site.

b)	All equipment used for silica sand motor freight and warehousing operations shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in such a manner as to minimize, as far as practicable, dust conditions which are injurious or substantially annoying to persons living within 600 feet of the facility lot line.

c)	The City shall require continuous air qualityIair particulate monitoring of a silica sand motor freight and warehousing facility. Monitoring equipment shall be in accordance with MPCA or the City best practices standards, whichever are more stringent.

i)	The operator shall begin air quality/air particulate and water monitoring at least six months prior to operation to create a baseline of the area.

ii)	Stationary monitors shall be located at strategic locations along the silica sand motor freight and warehousing facility property lines, within the site, and may also be required to be located at neighboring residences within 600 feet of the facility property lines.

iii)	Continuous remote readings shall be taken and reported to the City when requested.  A summary report shall be submitted to the City annually, and upon request by the City.
 
6)	Noise.  Maximum noise levels at the facility will be consistent with the standards established by the MPCA.  To mitigate public nuisances, the facility shall use best management practices including building berms, enclosing generators, and leaving existing trees at the property boundaries to minimize noise impacts.

7)	Vibration.  Operators shall use all practical means to eliminate adverse impacts on adjacent properties from vibration of equipment according to all federal and state laws, rules, regulations, and statutes.

8)	Screening/buffering.   Screening barriers shall be subject to the approval of the City.

a)	To minimize problems of dust and noise and to shield silica sand motor freight and warehousing operations from public view, a screening barrier may be required between the mining site and adjacent properties.

b)	A screening barrier may be required between the silica sand motor freight and warehousing facility and any public road.

c)	A screening barrier may be required to mitigate visual impacts of the silica sand motor freight and warehousing facility from existing historical, cultural, recreational features and dwellings, including but not limited to trails, navigable waters, and sites identified in the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) and Goodhue County cultural databases.

d)	A buffer yard and screening that complies with "Buffer Yard D" as set forth in Section 62-030 of this Chapter is required for all silica sand motor freight and warehousing facility boundaries that abut residential, parks and open areas, and public assembly land uses.

9)	Unauthorized storage.  Vehicles, equipment, or materials not associated with the silica sand motor freight and warehousing facility or not in operable condition may not be kept or stored at the facility.

10)	Waste disposal.  Any waste generated from the silica sand motor freight and warehousing operation, including waste from vehicle or equipment maintenance, shall be disposed of in accordance with federal, state, county, and city requirements.

11)	Stormwater Management Plan.  The City may require an operator to submit a stormwater management plan to the City for approval.

12)	General compliance.  The operators must comply with all other federal, state, regional, county, and local laws and regulations applicable to the
operation of the silica sand motor freight and warehousing facility, including
 
but not limited to floodplain management regulations, shoreland management regulations, and zoning ordinance regulations.

13)	Additional regulations. The City may impose additional regulations and requirements on the silica sand motor freight and warehousing facility to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

14)	Transportation Impact Study and Road Impact Agreement.  The City shall require the owner/operator of a silica sand processing facility to complete a transportation impact study and may require the owner/operator to enter into road impact agreements as conditions of their permit and registration.

a)	Transportation Impact Studies.  When a proposed or amended conditional use permit is requested, the City shall require a transportation impact study.

b)	Road Impact Agreements.  When a proposed or amended conditional use permit is requested, the City may require a road impact agreement to alleviate the additional burden on the City's financial resources associated with the road infrastructure maintenance affected by granting the request.

I)	Bi-Annual and Annual Reporting.

1)	During the first two years of operations, the owner of all silica sand motor freight and warehousing facilities in the City shall submit a  report twice per year to the Zoning Administrator between the dates of January 1 through February 1 and July 1 through August 1.

2)	After two years of consecutive operations, the owner of all silica sand motor freight and warehousing facilities in the City shall submit an annual report
to the Zoning Administrator between the dates of January 1 through February 1.

3)	The bi-annual and annual reports shall include the following information:

a)	An identification of the owner/operator and the location of the silica sand motor freight and warehousing facilities.

b)	A written, detailed description of activities and operations on the site for the previous half-year (for bi-annual reports) or year (for annual reports).

c)	A written, detailed description of activities and operations planned for the following calendar year of operations.

d)	A written report demonstrating how the owner/operator has been in compliance with all the terms set forth in the Zoning Code and the
 
conditional use permit.  The report shall include all air quality monitoring results.

e)	A summary of all areas of noncompliance and a detailed plan for bringing noncompliant areas of operation into compliance for the next calendar year of operations.

J)	Inspection, Violations, Penalties and Enforcement.

1)	Inspection.  In addition to the reporting requirements, the City may make inspections of the facility upon reasonable notice to determine the condition of the silica sand motor freight and warehousing site in order to ensure and safeguard the health and safety of the public and determine compliance with the minimum standards under the applicable law.

2)	Violation a Misdemeanor.  Any firm, person or corporation who violates any of the provisions of these regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment as provided by law, unless a more severe penalty is provided by federal or state law.  Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.

3)	Additional violations.  The following also constitute violations of the Zoning Code:

a)	Engaging in silica sand motor freight and warehousing without properly obtaining a conditional use permit as required by the Zoning Code.

b)	Making incorrect or false statements in the information and documentation submitted in the reporting or during inspection by an authorized representative of the City.

c)	Failure to provide any required reports or failure to provide reports upon request by the City.

d)	Failure to take appropriate or reasonable action to remediate a known violation, citation, request for additional information or financial assurance, or any other order by the City.

4)	Enforcement. In the event of a violation or threatened violation of any of the terms of this Division, the City may take appropriate action to enforce this Division, including exercising the performance bonds application, for injunctive relief, action to compel performance, revocation of the
conditional use permit, civil fines, and/or other appropriate action before the City Council or in court if the City deems it necessary to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violations or threatened violations.  Upon motion, the
 
court may award costs, disbursements and reasonable attorney's fees and witness fees, which costs and fees can be assessed against the property.
 
ARTICLE IV - REGULATIONS APPLYING TO ALL DISTRICTS DIVISION 57:  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
57-010  Statutory Authorization.   This regulation is adopted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 462.351 - 462.365 and in order to be compliant with the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's (MPCA's) General Permit to Discharge Stormwater Associated with Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems Under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System/State Disposal System (NPDES/SDS) Permit Program and the General Permit Authorization to Discharge Stormwater Associated with Construction Activity Under the NPDES/SDS Program.

57-020  Findings.  The City of Red Wing hereby finds that uncontrolled and inadequately planned use of wetlands, woodlands, natural habitat areas, areas subject to soil erosion and areas containing restrictive soils adversely affects the public health, safety, and general welfare by impacting water quality and contributing to other environmental problems, creating nuisances, impairing other beneficial uses of environmental resources, and hindering the ability of the City of Red Wing to provide adequate water, flood control, and other community services.  In addition, extraordinary public expenditures may be required for the protection of persons and property in such areas and in areas which may be affected by unplanned land usage.

57-030  Purpose.  The purpose of this Division is to promote, preserve, and enhance the natural resources within the City of Red Wing; to protect them from adverse effects occasioned by poorly sited development or incompatible activities; to regulate land-disturbing or development activities that would have an adverse and potentially irreversible impact on water quality, stormwater runoff rates/volumes, and unique and fragile environmentally­ sensitive lands, waterways, and wildlife; to alleviate current flooding problems and prevent future flooding problems; to minimize conflicts and encourage compatibility between land-disturbing and development activities and water quality and environmentally sensitive lands, waterways, and wildlife; and to require detailed review standards and procedures for land-disturbing or development activities proposed for
such areas, thereby achieving a balance between urban growth and development and
protection of water quality, water quantity, and natural resources. This Division also specifically sets forth the minimum requirements for stormwater management that will prevent or reduce water pollution after construction activity is completed on new development and/or redevelopment projects with land disturbance of greater than or equal to one acre. This also includes projects less than one acre that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale. In order to achieve these purposes, this Division seeks to comply with the MPCA 's General Permit Authorization to Discharge Stormwater and the General Permit Authorization to Discharge Stormwater Associated with Construction Activity (cited above in Section 57-010) by being no less stringent in application and enforcement than those permits prescribed.
 
57-40	Special Definitions.

A)	For the purposes of these Stormwater Management Regulations, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the meaning stated below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future
tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the
singular number include the plural number.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directive.

I)	Applicant.  Any person who wishes to obtain a building, erosion control, or grading permit, or zoning or subdivision approval.

2)	Architect.  A person duly registered or authorized to practice architecture in the State of Minnesota.

3)	Bedrock.  In-place solid rock.

4)	Best Management Practices (BMPs).  Practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of the waters of the state, including schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, and other management practices, and also includes treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge, or waste disposal or drainage from raw material  storage. (Minn. R. 7001.1020, subp.5)

5)	Bluff.  A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having the following characteristics   (Note: an area with an average slope ofless than 18 percent over a distance of 50 feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff):

a)	Part or the entire feature is located in a shoreland area;

b)	The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water level of the water body; and

c)	The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages 18 percent or greater.

6)	Borrow.  Earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site.

7)	Civil Engineer.  A professional engineer registered in the State of Minnesota to practice in the field of civil works.

8)	Clearing and Grubbing.  The cutting and removal of trees, shrubs, bushes, windfalls, and other vegetation including removal of stumps, roots, and other remains in the designated areas.
 
9)	Common plan of development or sale.  A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct land disturbing activities may be taking place at different times, on different schedules, but under one proposed plan. One plan is broadly defined to include design, permit application, advertisement or physical demarcation indicating that land-disturbing activities may occur.

10)	Construction Activity.  Any disturbance to the land that results in a change in the topography, existing soil cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative),  or the existing soil topography that may result in accelerated stormwater runoff, leading to soil erosion and movement of sediment into surface waters or drainage systems. Examples of construction activity may include clearing, grading, filling, and excavating. Construction activity includes the disturbance of less than one acre of total land area that is a part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb one  acre or more. This definition includes construction activity as defined in 40 CFR9 122.26(b)(14)(x) and small construction activity as defined in 40 CFR9 122.26(b)(15).

11)	Control Measure.  A practice or combination of practices to control erosion and resulting pollution.

12)	Detention Facility.  A permanent natural or man-made structure, including wetlands, for the temporary detention of storm and snowmelt runoff water.

13)	DNR catchment area.  The Hydrologic Unit 08 areas delineated and digitized by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (DNR). DNR catchment areas may be locally corrected, in which case the local corrections may be used.

14)	Developer.  Any person, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, state agency, or political subdivision thereof engaged in a land disturbance activity.

15)	Drainage Ordinance Map/Drainage Plan Map.  A map classifying areas of the city based on the drainage system's capacity to handle existing and future potential stormwater flow.

16)	Erosion.  The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, ice, and/or land disturbance activities.

17)	Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.  A plan which includes a set of best management practices or equivalent measures designed to control surface runoff and erosion, and to retain sediment on a particular site during the period in which pre-construction and construction-related  land disturbances, fills, and soil storage occur, and before final improvements are completed, all in accordance with the specific requirements set forth in Section 57-080.  An erosion and sediment control plan is part of the stormwater management plan submittal.

18)	Excavation.  The mechanical removal of earth material.
 
19)	Fill.  A deposit of soil or other earth materials placed by artificial means.

20)	Flood Fringe.  That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.  Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the Flood Insurance Study for Goodhue County, Minnesota, and Incorporated Areas.

21)	Flood Plain. The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake, or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.

22)	Floodway. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge

23)	General Stormwater Permit.   The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's (MPCA) general National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) construction stormwater permit covering anyone conducting a land-disturbing activity which disturbs more than a set amount of total land area as established by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and the Federal Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.

24)	Grade.  The vertical location of the ground surface.

a)	Existing grade is the grade prior to grading.

b)	Rough grade is the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan.

c)	Finish grade is the final grade of the site, which conforms to the approved plan.

25)	Green Infrastructure.   A wide array of practices at multiple scales that manages wet weather and that maintains or restores natural hydrology by infiltrating, evapotranspiring, or harvesting and using stormwater. On a regional scale, green infrastructure is the preservation or restoration of natural landscape features, such as forests, floodplains and wetlands, coupled with policies such as infill and redevelopment that reduce overall imperviousness in a watershed. On the local scale, green infrastructure consists of site and neighborhood-specific practices.

26)	Hydric Soils.  Soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.

27)	Hydrophytic Vegetation. Macrophytic plant life growing in water, soil or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content
 
28)	Intensive Vegetation Clearing.  The complete removal of vegetation (trees, shrubs, and/or grasses) in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.

29)	Karst (active).  A geographic area underlain by carbonate bedrock (or other forms of bedrock that can erode or dissolve) with less than 50 feet of sediment cover.

30)	Land Disturbance Activity.  Any land change that may result in soil erosion from wind, water, and/or ice and the movement of sediments into or upon waters, lands, or rights-of-way within the City of Red Wing, including but not limited to building demolition, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, transporting,
and filling of land.  Land disturbance activity does not include the following:

a)	Minor land disturbance activities including, but not limited to, underground utility repairs, home gardens, minor repairs, and maintenance work which do not disturb more than 500 square feet of land.

b)	Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles.

c)	Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property and emergency repairs. If the land-disturbing activity would have required an approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan except for the emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the requirements of
Section 55-080.

31)	New development.  All construction activity that is not defined as redevelopment.

32)	Outfall.  The point of discharge to any watercourse from a public or private stormwater drainage system.

33)	Person.  Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchisee, association or governmental entity.

34)	Public Waters.  Waters of the state as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.005, subdivision 15.

35)	Receiving water.  Any lake, river, stream, or wetland that receives stormwater discharges from a Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4).

36)	Redevelopment.	Defined as the act of improving by renewing or restoring any developed property that results in the land disturbance of one acre or greater, and that has 15 percent or more of that disturbed area covered by an existing impervious surface.
 
37)	Regional Flood.  A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of a 100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood" used in the flood insurance study.

38)	Retention Facility. A permanent natural or artificial basin or structure that provides for the storage of storm and snowmelt runoff waters.

39)	Sediment.  Solid matter carried by water, sewage, or other liquids.

32) Sanitary Sewer System. The combination of public and private pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main pipe, and all other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for conveying domestic sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal in a public sewage treatment facility.

40)	Saturated soil.  The highest seasonal elevation in the soil that is in a reduced chemical state because of soil voids being filled with water. Saturated soil is evidenced by the presence of redoximorphic features or other information.

41)	Storm Sewer System. The combination of public and private pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main piping and all other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for conveying stormwater runoff and snowmelt runoff to various locations throughout the city.

42)	Stormwater.  Rainwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. (Minn. R. 7090.0080, subp.12.)

43)	Stormwater Management Plans. Drainage computations, grading plan, and erosion control plan, prepared to show the orderly management of storm and snowmelt runoff water.

44)	Structural Stormwater BMPs. Stationary and permanent BMPs designed, constructed, and operated to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants in stormwater.

45)	Structure.  Anything manufactured, constructed, excavated, or erected which is normally attached to or positioned on land, including portable structures, earthen structures, earthen depressions, roads, parking lots, utilities, and paved storage areas.

46)	Trout Streams.  Waters of the state designated as trout waters by Minnesota Rules 6264.0050.  Designated trout streams are capable of supporting trout and other cold water species.  Designated trout streams in Red Wing are Hay Creek, Trout Brook and the upper portion of Spring Creek.
 
47)	Utility.  The owner/operator of any underground, at-grade, or overhead facility including an underground line, facility, system, and its appurtenances used to produce, store, convey, transmit, or distribute communications, data, electricity, power, heat, gas, oil, petroleum products, water (including stormwater), steam, sewage, and other similar substances.

48)	Wetlands.  Lands, transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems, where the water table is usually at or near the ground surface or the land is covered by shallow water.  For purposes of this definition, wetlands must have the following three attributes (Minnesota Rules 8420 lists the exemptions for which certain lands are not considered wetlands with respect to the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act):

a)	Have a predominance  ofhydric soils;

b)	Are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence  ofhydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and

c)	Under normal circumstances support a prevalence of such vegetation. 57-050  Scope and Effect.
A)	Applicability.  Every applicant for subdivision approval or a permit to allow land disturbing activities of one acre or greater, including projects that are less than one acre that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale, must meet the requirements of this Division. Stringent post-construction  stormwater site management rules concerning volume, total suspended solids, and total phosphorus apply. No subdivision approval or permit to allow land disturbing activities shall be issued until the stormwater management plan is approved in accordance with the provisions of this Division.

Owners and/or operators of construction activity must submit site plans to the City that meet the requirements of Section 57-060  of this Division  prior to start of construction activity  No building, zoning, or subdivision permits for such construction activity shall be issued until approval of the grading plan and the stormwater management plan (if required).  The following permits/reviews may be required from the City for a project/construction  activity:

I)	Grading Permit. The following projects or a series of projects that involve more than 50 cubic yards of earthen material shall require a grading and erosion control permit:

a)	The raising or lowering of ground elevations.

b)	The removal of topsoil.
 
c)	The alteration of the contours of land.

d)	The utilization, disturbance, or removal of earthen material.

Single Family residential construction shall be exempt from the requirement of obtaining a grading and erosion control permit, except that said development shall follow any requirements for grading and erosion control set forth in the approval process for the subdivision or conditional use permit or if the area to be graded with a single family residential construction is one acre or more.

2)	Grading Plan Review.  Required for all projects that require a grading permit.
Applicants must submit grading plans to the City of Red Wing's Zoning Administrator.   The City Engineer or the City Engineer's representative shall review and provide recommendations for all grading plans.  When any land disturbance project or a series of projects will disturb less than one acre of land, the City Engineer and the Zoning Administrator shall determine the submission requirements.  When any disturbance project or a series of projects will disturb one acre or more of land, submittal requirements shall include a grading plan prepared by a Minnesota licensed professional. The grading plan must address erosion and sediment control as follows:

a)	If the area to be graded is less than one acre, the project proposer will be required to install approved temporary erosion and sediment controls at locations as directed by the City Engineer or his/her representative.

b)	If the area to be graded is one or more acres, the project proposer must obtain an NPDES Construction Stormwater Permit from the MPCA and shall meet erosion and sediment controls and waste controls which meet the standards for the general permit authorization to discharge stormwater associated with construction activity under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System/State Disposal System permit program permit MNRlOOOOl (NPDES General Construction Stormwater Permit) issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, as amended. Also, the project proposer must meet the requirements listed for Stormwater Management Plan Review below.

3)	Stormwater Management Plan Review.  When any land disturbance project or a series of projects will disturb less than one acre ofland, the City Engineer and the Zoning Administrator shall determine if a stormwater management plan is required, and what submittals, if any, are required.  When any disturbance project or a series of projects will disturb one acre or more of land, submittal
requirements shall include a stormwater management plan, in accordance with this division, prepared by a Minnesota licensed professional.

B)	Trout Streams.  The City of Red Wing seeks to preserve and prevent the degradation of the trout streams located in and near the city.  To this end, different approval
 
standards will be applied to projects located within watersheds that drain to designated trout streams.

C)	Cannon River Watershed.   The Cannon River from the northern city limits of Faribault to its confluence with the Mississippi River is designated as an Outstanding Resource Value Waters in the State of Minnesota.  Stricter standards apply for development within watersheds designated with ORVW status.  These stricter standards are found in the_National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA).

D)	Public Nuisances.

1)  Policy.  It is the policy of the City of Red Wing to prevent and remedy the degradation of the quality of surface and ground waters as well as public and private land resources in order to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.  All acts or failures to act by persons which may result in the degradation of such water and land resources is considered to be a public nuisance in accordance with, but not limited to, Minnesota Statutes, Section 609.74,
561.19, and 144.37, and as hereinafter specifically defined.

2)	Specific Public Nuisances.  The following items are public nuisances and shall be considered in violation of this Division:

a)	Excavation and fill activities.  The excavation of any material from or placement of any fill material into or adjacent to any watercourse, wetland, lake, or other water body without necessary local, state, or federal authorizations is a public nuisance.

b)	Sump pump discharge to property other than where the water originates.

E)	Exemptions.  The provisions of this Division do not apply to:

1)	The plowing, tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or silvicultural crops.

2)	Site development of individual lots for which a stormwater management plan was approved as part of a larger common development plan in accordance with this Division.

3)	Property for which a grading permit was approved by the city on or before February 28, 2015.

4)	Subdivisions for which a preliminary plat was approved by the city council on or before February 28, 2015.

5)	Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles.
 
6)	Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property.

57-60	Stormwater Management Plan - Submittal Requirements.

A)	Application.   A written application for stormwater management plan approval, along with the proposed stormwater management plan, shall be filed with the City of Red Wing's Zoning Administrator and shall include a statement indicating the grounds upon which the approval is requested, that the proposed use is permitted by right or as an exception in the underlying zoning district, and adequate evidence showing that the_proposed use will conform to the standards set forth in this Division.  Prior to applying for approval of a stormwater management plan, an applicant may have the stormwater management plans reviewed by the appropriate departments of the city.

1)	Two sets of clearly legible blue or black lined copies of drawings and other required information shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator, and shall be accompanied by a receipt from the City evidencing the payment of all required  fees for processing and approval as set forth in the Ordinance Affixing Fees, and a bond when required by Section 57-070 in the amount to be calculated in accordance with Section 57-070.  All drawings shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the site of the project and suitable for the review to be performed.
At a minimum, the scale of the drawings shall be 1 inch equals 100 feet (1 inch
equals 50 feet is preferred). At the discretion of the City Engineer, developers shall provide drawings as electronic files on AutoCAD with georeferences to State Plane Coordinates.

B)	Stormwater Management Plan Submittal Materials.  At a minimum, the stormwater management plan submittal materials shall contain the following information:

1)	Existing Site Map.  A map of existing site conditions showing the site and immediate adjacent areas, including:

a)	The name and address of the applicant, the section, township and range, north point, date and scale of drawing, and number of sheets;

b)	Location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to clearly identify the location of the property and giving such information as the names and numbers of adjoining roads, railroads, utilities, subdivisions, towns and districts or other landmarks, and preferably georeferenced to the State Plane coordinate system;

c)	Existing topography relative to mean sea level (MSL) with a contour interval appropriate to the topography of the land, but in no case having a contour interval greater than two feet;

d)	Location and dimensions of all slopes of 18 percent or more;
 
e)	A delineation performed by a certified wetland delineator (or a wetland delineator who has successfully completed a wetland delineation training course) of all streams, rivers, public waters, and wetlands located on and immediately adjacent to the site, including depth of water, a description of all vegetation which may be found in the water or wetland, a statement of general water quality and any classification given to the water body or wetland by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers;

f)	Location and dimensions of existing stormwater drainage systems and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site delineating the direction of stormwater flows, identifying the receiving stream, river, public water, or wetlands and setting forth those areas of the unaltered site where stormwater collects;

g)	A description of the soils on the site, including a map indicating soil types of areas to be disturbed, as well as a soil report containing information on the suitability of the soils for the type of development proposed, for the type of sewage disposal proposed, and describing any remedial steps to be taken by the developer to render the soils suitable;

h)	Vegetative cover, clearly delineating any vegetation proposed for removal;

i)	One hundred-year floodplains, flood fringes, and floodways;

j)	Portions of site located within trout stream watershed( s), name of trout stream watershed( s), and location of trout streams within I 000 feet of proposed project/development;  and,

k)	Portions of site located within the Cannon River Watershed.

2)	Computations.  The applicant must provide both drainage and water quality computations as part of the submittal package.

a)	Drainage computations include providing the following information for each subwatershed:

i)	The peak discharge rate and runoff volume for the 2-year, I 0-year and I 00-year rainfall and snowmelt events under existing and proposed conditions.

ii)	The drainage computations must show the discharge requirements for the site are met as referenced in Section 57-080 (G).

b)	Water quality computations must be submitted that show the project meets all the requirements of Section 57-080 (G).
 
c)	Computations must be submitted that show the project meets the requirements of Section 57-080 (I) (trout streams).

d)	Water quality computations must be submitted that show the project meets the stricter standards that apply to the Cannon River Watershed.

3)	Site Construction Plan.  A site construction plan, including:

a)	Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing activities and any phasing of those activities;

b)	Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt stockpiles;

c)	Erosion and sediment control plan showing locations and dimensions of all construction site erosion and sediment control measures and other permanent erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the requirements of Section 57-080;

d)	Schedule of anticipated starting and completion time frame of each land­ disturbing activity including the installation of construction site erosion and sediment control measures needed to meet the requirements of this division; and,

e)	Provisions and schedule for maintenance of the construction site erosion and sediment control measures during construction.

4)	Plan of Final Site Conditions.  A plan of final site conditions on the same scale as the existing site map showing the site changes, including:

a)	Finished grading plan showing contours at the same contour interval as provided for the "existing site map" or as required to clearly indicate the relationship of proposed changes to existing topography and remaining features, including any impacts to wetlands (Note: finished grade contours may be shown on the "existing site map" provided the existing and final grades are clearly distinguishable from each other);

b)	A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, including dimensions and distances and the location, type, size, and description of all proposed
landscape materials which will be added to the site as part of the development;

c)	A drainage plan of the developed site delineating in which direction and at what peak discharge rate stormwater will be conveyed from the site and setting forth the areas of the site where stormwater will be allowed to collect and be managed;
 
d)	An internal drainage plan showing the direction flows will be routed including overflow swales where water will flow if the storm sewer system has reached its capacity;

e)	The proposed size, alignment, and intended use of any structures to be erected on the site;

f)	A clear delineation and tabulation of all areas which shall be paved or surfaced, including a description of the surfacing material to be used;

g)	All drainage easements dedicated to the City of Red Wing, including ponding, flowage, and maintenance easements (see also Section 57-080, Mand P);

h)	Minimum building elevations (see Section 57-080, Q); and,

i)	Any other information pertinent to the particular project which in the opinion of the applicant or the City is necessary for the review of the project.

57-70	Plan Review Procedure.

A)	Process. Grading permit and Stormwater Management Plan review and approval shall be processed as follows:

I)	Project Requiring a Grading Permit or Certificate of Compliance.

a)	If a grading permit is required, as outlined in Section 57-050, for projects that disturb more than 50 cubic yards or less than one acre, application materials meeting the requirements of Section 90-060 shall be submitted by the project proposer to the Zoning Administrator.   The Zoning Administrator shall forward the application to the City Engineer for review and comment.  Said grading permit shall be processed in accordance with Section 90-060.

b)	If a Stormwater Management Plan is required as outlined in Section 57-050 for projects that disturb less than one acre, materials meeting the requirements of Section 57-060 shall be submitted by the project proposer to the Zoning Administrator.   The Zoning Administrator shall forward the application to the City Engineer for review and comments.  Said Stormwater Management Plan shall be processed as a Certificate of Compliance as per Section 90-030 of this Zoning Code.  Administrative Review shall be conducted in accordance with Section 57-080 of these regulations.

2)	Project Requiring a Conditional Use Permit.  Application material for Stormwater Management Plans meeting the requirements of Section 57-060 for projects that disturb one or more acres shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator.   The Zoning Administrator shall forward the application to the City Engineer for review and comment. Stormwater management plans for one or more acres of disturbed property shall be processed as a Conditional Use
 
Permit as per Section 90-040 of this Zoning Code.  The Conditional Use Permit review shall be conducted in accordance with Sections 57-080 and 57-090.

3)	Projects that are Part of another Zoning or Subdivision Process. Stormwater Management Plans that are required as part of a permit review involving a Planned Unit Development, Zoning Amendment, or Subdivision shall be processed by following the permit process for that permit or application as established in this Chapter and Chapter 12, Subdivision Regulations (Platting) of the City Code.

B)	Duration.  Approval of a Stormwater Management Plan submitted under the provisions of this Division shall expire one year after the date of approval unless construction has commenced in accordance with the plan.  However, if prior to the expiration of the approval, the applicant makes a written request to the Zoning Administrator for an extension of time to commence construction, setting forth the reasons for the requested extension, the Zoning Administrator may grant one extension of not greater than one single year.  Receipt of any request for an extension shall be acknowledged by the Zoning Administrator within 15 days.  The Zoning Administrator shall make a decision on the extension within 30 days of receipt of the request.  Any plan may be revised in the same manner as originally approved.

C)	Conditions.  A Stormwater Management Plan may be approved subject to compliance with conditions reasonable and necessary to insure that the requirements contained in this ordinance are met.  Such conditions may, among other matters, limit the size, kind, or character of the proposed development; require the construction of structures, drainage facilities, storage basins, and other facilities; require replacement of vegetation; require specific protective measures related to trout stream runoff; establish required monitoring procedures; stage the work over time; require alteration of the site design to insure buffering; and require the conveyance to the City of Red Wing or other public entity of certain lands or interests therein.

D)	Developer's Agreement and Performance Bond or Letter of Credit.  After approval of any grading permit or Stormwater Management Plan, but prior to the commencement of any approved building or grading activities, the applicant may be required to enter into a developer's agreement to construct such required physical improvements, to dedicate property or easements, or to comply with such conditions as required in the approved grading permit or Stormwater Management Plan.  At the discretion of the City, such agreement may require the applicant to submit a bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit to cover the amount of the established cost of complying with the agreement.  The agreement and bond, if required, shall guarantee completion and compliance with conditions within a specific time, which time may be extended in accordance with Section 57-070. The City may withhold the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for projects that have not complied with the conditions of approval.  The adequacy, conditions and acceptability of any agreement and bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit shall be determined by the Red Wing City Council or any official of the City of Red Wing as may be designated by resolution of the Red Wing City Council.
 

E)	Fees.  An application fee as determined by ordinance shall accompany all applications. Applications are not complete without the required fee payment.
57-80	General Standards.

A)	Applicability.   The City shall approve no stormwater management plan which fails to meet the standards contained in this Section.

B)	Site Dewatering.   Water pumped from the site shall be treated by temporary sedimentation basins, grit chambers, sand filters, upflow chambers, hydro-cyclones, swirl concentrators, or other appropriate controls as appropriate.  Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion or flooding of off-site property, receiving channels, or a wetland.

C)	Waste and Material Disposal.  All waste and unused building materials (including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic materials, or hazardous materials) shall be properly disposed of off-site and not allowed to be carried by runoff or wind into a receiving channel, storm sewer system, neighboring property, or tracked onto off-site streets or property by construction vehicles.  The site shall be policed daily by the contractor or the owner and all such materials shall be collected and stored or otherwise anchored until they are properly disposed of

D)	Tracking.  Each site shall have graveled roads, rocked access drives and parking areas of sufficient width and length to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways.  Any sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by street cleaning (not flushing) before the end of each workday.

E)	Drain Inlet Protection.  All storm drain inlets shall be protected during construction with a silt fence, straw bale, or equivalent barrier as approved by the City Engineer.

F)	Site Erosion Control.  The following criteria I) through 4) apply only to construction activities that result in runoff leaving the site.

I)	Channelized runoff from adjacent areas passing through the site shall be diverted around disturbed areas, if practical.  Otherwise, the channel shall be protected as described below.  Sheet flow runoff from adjacent areas greater than I 0,000 square feet in area shall also be diverted around disturbed areas, unless shown to
have resultant runoff rates ofless than 0.5 ft.3/sec. across the disturbed area for
the one year storm.  Diverted runoff shall be conveyed in a manner that will not erode the conveyance and receiving channels.

2)	All activities on the site shall be conducted in a logical sequence to minimize the area of bare soil exposed at any one time.  If at all possible, grading operations that disturb existing vegetation or ground cover shall be placed to minimize the area of bare soil exposed at any one time.
 
3)	Runoff from the entire disturbed area on the site shall be controlled by meeting either subsections a) and b) or a) and c) below:

a)	All disturbed ground left inactive for 14 or more days shall be stabilized by seeding and mulching or sodding (only available prior to September 15) or by mulching or covering or other equivalent control measures.  Stricter requirements do apply for activities located within the Cannon River Watershed or adjacent to trout streams.

b)	For sites with more than one acre disturbed at one time, or if a channel originates in the disturbed area, one or more temporary or permanent sedimentation basins shall be constructed.  Each sedimentation basin shall have a surface area of at least one percent of the area draining to the basin and at least three feet of depth and constructed in accordance with accepted design specifications.  The sedimentation basins shall be maintained regularly and sediment shall be periodically removed to maintain a depth of three feet.  The basin discharge rate shall also be sufficiently low as to not cause erosion along the downstream discharge channel or the receiving water.

c)	For sites with less than one acre disturbed at one time, sedimentation basins are still encouraged.  However, at a minimum, silt fences, straw bales, or equivalent control measures shall be placed along all sideslope and downslope sides of the site.  If a channel or area of concentrated runoff passes through the site, silt fences shall be placed along the channel edges to reduce sediment reaching the channel.  Silt fences placed in concentrated flow channels perpendicular to the flow direction shall be backed by snow fence and support posts that are no more than four  feet apart.  The use of silt fences, straw bales, or equivalent control measures must include a maintenance and inspection schedule.

4)	Any soil or dirt storage piles containing more than 10 cubic yards of material should not be located with the downslope toe of the pile less than 25 feet from a roadway or drainage channel.  If remaining for more than seven days, dirt stockpiles shall be stabilized by mulching, vegetative cover, tarps or other means. Erosion from piles which will be in existence for less than seven days shall be controlled by placing straw bales or silt fence barriers around the pile.  In-street utility repair or construction, soil, or dirt storage piles located closer than 25 feet of a roadway or drainage channel must be covered with tarps or suitable alternative control if exposed for more than seven days, and the storm drain inlets must be protected with straw bale or other appropriate filtering barriers.

G)	Stormwater Management Criteria for Permanent Stormwater Maintenance Facilities.

1)	Runoff Rate Control and General Requirements.
 
a)	An applicant shall install or construct, on or for the proposed land disturbing or development activity, all stormwater management facilities necessary to manage increased runoff so that the 2-year, 10-year, and 100-year storm peak discharge rates, for a 24-hour storm event existing before the proposed development shall not be increased, and accelerated channel erosion will not occur as a result of the proposed land disturbing or development activity. Upon construction of a regional stormwater detention facility in the watershed, the city may allow (but is not obligated to allow) some or all of these stormwater management facilities to be removed.  The city may also require the applicant to make an in-kind or monetary contribution for the development and maintenance of regional stormwater management facilities designed to serve multiple land-disturbing and development activities undertaken by one or more persons, including the applicant.

b)	The applicant shall give consideration to reducing the need for on-site stormwater management facilities by incorporating the use of natural topography and land cover such as wetlands, ponds, natural swales, and depressions as they exist before development to the degree that they can accommodate the additional flow of water without compromising the integrity or quality of the wetland or pond.

c)	A combination of successive practices may be used to achieve the applicable minimum control requirements specified in the subsection above.  The applicant shall provide justification  for the method selected.

2)	Volume Control and Pollutant Management.
Post-Construction  Stormwater Management requires significant attention to stormwater pollution mitigation practices, including limitations on volume, Total Suspended Solids (TSS), and Total Phosphorus (TP) on both new construction and reconstruction sites. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quantity and quality.

The following rules apply:

a)	Green Infrastructure techniques and practices (including, but not limited to, infiltration, evapotranspiration, reuse/harvesting, conservation design, urban forestry, and green roofs), shall be given preference as design options consistent with zoning, subdivision, and Planned Unit Development requirements.

b)	New development projects shall achieve no net increase from pre-project conditions (on an annual average basis) of stormwater discharge volume, discharges of total suspended solids (TSS), and discharge of total phosphorus (TP).  New Developments that create one or more acres of new impervious surface shall manage stormwater volume and pollutants by infiltrating or
 
retaining the first one inch of precipitation over the impervious surface of the site.

c)	Redevelopment projects shall achieve a net reduction from pre-project conditions (on an annual average basis) of stormwater discharge volume, discharges of total suspended solids (TSS), and discharges of total phosphorus (TP). Redevelopments that create one or more acres of new and/or fully reconstructed impervious surfaces shall manage stormwater volume and pollutants by applying the new development treatment requirements in b) above to the net increase of impervious surfaces. Additional treatment must also be included to reduce the volume, TSS, and TP loads from the existing impervious surfaces.

d)	Infiltration prohibited. The use of infiltration techniques are prohibited when the infiltration structural stormwater BMP will receive discharges from, or be constructed in, the following areas:

i)	Where industrial facilities are not authorized to infiltrate industrial stormwater under an NPDES/SDS Industrial Stormwater Permit.


ii)	Where vehicle fueling and maintenance occur.


iii)	Where less than three feet of separation from the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of the seasonally saturated soils or the top of bedrock  exists.


iv)	Where high levels of contaminants in soil or groundwater will be mobilized by infiltrating stormwater.

e)	Infiltration restricted.  The use of infiltration techniques will be restricted when the infiltration device will be constructed in areas:

i)	With predominately Hydrologic Soil Group D (clay) soils;


ii)	Within 1,000 feet up-gradient, or 100 feet down-gradient of active karst features;


iii)	Within a Drinking Water Supply Management Area (DWSMA) as defined in Minn. R. 4720.5100, subp. 13; and,


iv)	Where soil infiltration rates are more than 8.3 inches per hour.
In these restricted areas, the city engineer may request additional information and/or testing to ensure that infiltration basins will perform properly and that groundwater is adequately protected.
 
f)	Roads and other Linear projects. Road reconstruction projects, mill and overlay projects, sidewalk projects, and trail projects that do not create one or more acres of new impervious surfaces are exempt from these stormwater requirements. These projects may be subject to other requirements.

g)	Exceptions. A lesser volume control standard on the site of the original construction activity may be applied, at the discretion of the city, under the following circumstances:

i)	The owner and/or operator of a construction activity is precluded from infiltrating stormwater due to limitations under d), e), or f) above; and,


ii)	The owner and/or operator of the construction activity implements volume reduction techniques, other than infiltration, on the site of the original construction activity that reduce stormwater discharge volume but may not meet the requirements of post-construction  stormwater management.

h)	Mitigation. If the owner and/or operator of a construction activity believes that the requirements for TP and/or TSS cannot be met on the site of the original construction activity, the owner and/or operator must provide appropriate documentation to the city as support. Stormwater discharges that do not meet the TP and/or TSS standards on the site of the original construction activity may be mitigated off-site at the city's discretion. The proposed mitigation must meet the following criteria:

i)	Mitigation project areas should be selected in the following order of preference and in consultation and with approval by the city:


a.	Locations that yield benefits to the same receiving water that receives runoff from the original construction activity;


b.	Locations within the same Department of Natural Resource (DNR) catchment area as the original construction activity;


c.	Locations in the next adjacent DNR catchment area up-stream; and,


d.	Locations within the city.


ii)	Mitigation projects must involve the creation of new structural stormwater BMPs, the retrofit of existing structural stormwater BMPs, or the use of a properly designed regional structural stormwater BMP.

iii)	Routine maintenance of structural stormwater BMPs required by this section cannot be used to meet mitigation requirements.
 
iv)	Mitigation projects must be completed within 24 months after the start of the original construction activity.
v)	If the mitigation project is a private structural stormwater BMP and the city is not responsible for long-term maintenance of the project, the city will require written and recorded documentation of maintenance responsibilities.

i)	Maintenance of private structural stormwater BMPs. Any structural stormwater BMP that the city determines to be private shall meet the following requirements:

i)	A permanent public easement shall be provided to the city for access for inspection and/or maintenance purposes.  Costs incurred by the city for any maintenance of private systems will be billed and/or assessed to the owner/operator;

ii)	Recorded inspection and maintenance agreements that define inspection and maintenance responsibilities are required. A minimum annual inspection for private systems shall be required. These requirements are transferrable to any party that becomes the owner/operator of the site; and,

iii)	If site configurations or structural stormwater BMPs change, causing decreased BMP effectiveness, new or improved structural stormwater BMPs must be implemented to meet the requirements of this section.

H)	Wetlands.

I)	Runoff shall not be discharged directly into wetlands without presettlement of the runoff.

2)	A protective buffer strip of natural vegetation at least 25 feet in width shall surround all wetlands.

3)	Wetlands must not be drained or filled, wholly or partially, unless replaced by restoring or creating wetland areas of at least equal public value in accordance with the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act and Minnesota Rules 8420. Replacement  must be guided by the following principles in descending order of priority:

a)	Avoiding the direct or indirect impact of the activity that may destroy or diminish the wetland;

b)	Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the wetland activity and its implementation;
 
c)	Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected wetland  environment;

d)	Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the activity; and

e)	Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing substitute wetland resources or environments.

I)	Trout Streams.  In addition to the other requirements of this Division, the following best management practices (BMPs) apply to proposed projects located within trout stream watersheds:

1)	Modified dry ponds or "extended detention basins."  Whenever stormwater detention is required in trout stream watersheds, extended detention basins must be installed instead of wet detention basins.  To prevent temperature increases,
no standing water will be allowed in new stormwater detention basins.  The basin
design will include:

a)	Multi-tiered outlet that includes a low flow outlet to detain runoff from the 1- year, 24-hour rainfall event for a period of l 1h to 2 days.

b)	Bottom of the basin must be located above the groundwater table; if not, underdrains must be used to ensure that infiltration is not limited by high groundwater levels.

2)	Bioretention types of stormwater best management practices (BMPs) that use plants and soils to remove pollutants from stormwater.  These BMPs incorporate shallow, vegetated depressions along parking lots and roads to hold stormwater for short periods of time to allow it to infiltrate or drain slowly to natural water bodies.  In most situations, curb and gutter cannot be used in conjunction with bioretention BMPs.  Rainwater gardens are a type ofbioretention area designed to be amenities for the neighborhood, possibly achieved through the combined use of stone retaining walls, wooden fences, flowering perennials, and flowering shrubs.  Ifwell-drained soils are not present, rainwater gardens and other infiltration practices will not be effective.  Ifwell-drained  soils are present,
infiltration basins or rainwater gardens designed to contain the runoff from the 1-
year 24-hour event may be allowed as an alternative to an extended detention basin.

3)	"Stormceptors" and other water quality treatment devices that remove sediment from stormwater may be used in place of other BMPs.

4)	Porous pavement and/or reinforced sod must be used where feasible (i.e., for overflow parking lots).
 
5)	If the proposed project includes a trout stream tributary that currently experiences erosion and/or sedimentation problems, the project proposer must work with the city to include channel modifications in the project that will also address the existing erosion and/or sedimentation problem.

6)	Riparian tree canopy.  The project proposer must preserve all trees and shrubs within 50 feet of the top of the stream bank to provide shade for the trout stream. All stormwater detention facilities shall include planting of new trees and/or preservation of existing trees to provide shade to help minimize water temperature increases in the detention facility.

7)	Project proposers must consider methods for reducing the amount of impervious surface on the site.  The project proposer must provide reasons for why such methods cannot be incorporated into the project.  Suggestions include:

a)	Reduce road widths.  One way to accomplish this is to allow parking on just one side of a residential street.

b)	Eliminate paving in the center of cul-de-sacs.

c)	Reduce sidewalk widths.

d)	Allow and provide for shared parking.

e)	Build two story houses to create a smaller building "footprint."

f)	Install semipermeable/permeable paving (seed) above).

J)	Steep Slopes.  No land-disturbing or development activities shall be allowed on slopes of 25 percent or more.

K)	Drain Leaders.  Wherever possible, all newly constructed and reconstructed buildings shall route drain leaders to pervious areas wherein the runoff can be allowed to infiltrate.  The flow rate of water exiting the leaders shall be controlled so no erosion occurs in the pervious areas.

L)	Inspection and Maintenance.   All stormwater management facilities shall be designed to minimize the need of maintenance, to provide access for maintenance purposes, and to be structurally sound.  All stormwater management facilities shall have a plan of operation and maintenance that assures continued effective removal of pollutants carried in stormwater runoff   The Red Wing City Engineer, or designated representative, will inspect all stormwater management facilities during construction and during the first year of operation.  The inspection records will be kept on file at the Engineering Department.  Any maintenance or repair needed during construction and the first year of operation shall be the responsibility of the applicant.  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide any necessary easements or other
 
property interests to allow access to the stormwater management facilities for inspection and maintenance purposes.

M)	Models/Methodologies/Computations.	Hydrologic models and design methodologies used for the determination of runoff and analysis of stormwater management structures shall be approved by the Red Wing City Engineer.  Plans, specifications, and computations for stormwater management facilities submitted for review shall be signed by a licensed professional engineer.  All computations shall be submitted with the proposed plans for review, unless otherwise approved by the Red Wing City Engineer.

N)	Watershed Management Plans/Groundwater  Management Plans.   Stormwater management plans shall be consistent with the adopted Red Wing Watershed Management Plan and the Goodhue County Groundwater Management Plan.

0) Easements.   If a stormwater management plan involves direction of some or all runoff off of the site, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain from adjacent property owners any necessary easements or other property interests concerning flowage of water.

P)	Building Elevations.  All lowest floor elevations and other permanent fixtures, including heating and air conditioning ventilation systems, shall meet the following:

1)	Minimum of two feet above the 100-year flood elevation for basins with pipe outlets or waterways.

2)	Minimum of two feet above the 100-year landlocked basin (no piped outlet) flood level computed as follows:

a)	Step 1 -Assume the water surface elevation is two feet higher than the normal water surface elevation of the basin.

b)	Step 2 - Above the assumed water surface elevation, store the volume of water equal to 7.2 inches of runoff over the entire drainage area to the landlocked basin.

c)	Step 3 - The 100-year landlocked basin flood level is the elevation the water would rise to from the above Step 1 and Step 2 computation.

d)	Note: The 100-year landlocked basin flood elevation may be lowered by excavating an overflow swale or constructing an outlet pipe at an overflow point.

3)	All lowest entry elevations (i.e., windows, window wells, walkout elevations) for buildings adjacent to overflow swales and/or conveyance channels shall be at
 
least two feet above the 100-year flow elevation of the adjacent swale or channel at the point where the adjacent swale or channel is closest to the building.

57-90	Lawn Maintenance and Vegetation Removal.
A)	Use of Impervious Surfaces.  No person shall apply fertilizer to or deposit grass clippings, leaves, or other vegetative materials on impervious surfaces, or within a stormwater drainage system (including yard swales), natural drainage ways, or within wetland or detention basin buffer areas.

B)	Unimproved Land AreasNegetative Cover Required. Except for driveways, sidewalks, patios, areas occupied by structures or areas which have been improved by landscaping, all areas shall be covered by plants or vegetative growth.

C)	Fertilizer Content.  Except for the first growing season for newly established turf areas, no person shall apply liquid fertilizer which contains more than one-half percent by weight of phosphorus, or granular fertilizer which contains more than three percent by weight of phosphorus, unless the single application is less than or equal to one-tenth pound of phosphorus per 1,000 square feet.  Annual application amount shall not exceed one-half pound of phosphorus per  1,000 square feet oflawn area.

D)  Buffer Zone.  Fertilizer applications shall not be made within 15 feet of any wetland or water resource.

57-100  Violation and Penalties.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Division shall be subject to Section 95-040 of this Chapter. In addition, in the event that any person or entity holding a subdivision approval or permit to allow land disturbing activities violates the terms of this Division, or implements site development in such a manner as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements, the city may revoke said permit.

57-110  Other Controls.  In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Division and any other provisions of the City Code, the more restrictive standard shall prevail.
 
ARTICLE IV - REGULATIONS APPLYING TO ALL DISTRICTS DIVISION 60:  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
60-1	I 0  Statement of Purpose.  The purpose of this Division is to provide for the regulation of
accessory off-street parking and loading facilities, and to specify the requirements for off­ street parking and loading facilities for different uses.  The regulations and requirements that follow are established to promote the safety and general welfare of the community  by:

A)	Increasing the safety and capacity of public streets by requiring off-street parking or off-street loading facilities to be provided.

B)	Minimizing adverse effects of off-street parking and off-street loading facilities on adjacent properties through the requirement of design and maintenance standards.

C)	Lessening congestion and preventing the overtaxing of public streets by regulating the location and capacity of accessory off-street parking or off-street loading facilities.

60-20	General Requirements.


A)	Scope of Regulations.  The off-street parking and loading provisions of this Division shall apply as follows:

I)	For all buildings and structures erected and all uses ofland established after June 22, 2000, accessory parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations of the districts in which such buildings or uses are located.

2)	When the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premises shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein for required parking or loading facilities,
parking and loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.

3)	Whenever the existing use of a building or structure is changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new use. However, if the said building or structure was erected prior to June 22, 2000, additional parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the new use would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were subject to the parking and loading provisions of this Division.

B)	Central Business District.  Developments in the B-3 Central Business District and the Civic District are exempt from the provisions of providing off-street parking, except that parking and loading spaces voluntarily established shall comply with the size and location requirements of this Division.
 

C)	Certificate of Compliance Required.  A Certificate of Compliance is required for all parking areas over 1,800 square feet in size or with more than six parking spaces, unless said parking area is included as part of a zoning application under the terms of this Chapter.

D)	All required parking areas must be completed and landscaped prior to occupancy of any structure except as provided in Division 62, Buffer Yards, Screening, and Landscaping Regulations.  An exception to this requirement may be granted by the Zoning Administer when seasonal conditions prevent the completion of parking areas.

E)	Accessory off-street parking or loading facilities in existence on June 22, 2000, and located on the same lot as the building or use served shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if already less than, shall not be further reduced below the requirements for a similar new building or use under the provisions of this Division.

60-30	Location of Off-Street Parking


A)	General Location.  All parking spaces required by this Division shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served except that parking facilities may be located on land other than the zoning lot on which the building or use served is located, provided:

1)	Such parking facilities are located within 1,000 feet walking distance of a main entrance to the use served and are subject to the provisions of the district within which such parking is located;

2)	Such parking facilities are provided for nonresidential uses; and


3)	Such parking facilities shall be in the same possession, either by deed, long-term lease, or easement, as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use to which the parking facilities are accessory.  The owner of the land on which the parking facilities are to be located shall be bound by a covenant filed and recorded in the office of the Goodhue County Recorder, requiring the owner, and his/her heirs or assigns, to maintain the required number of off-street parking spaces for the duration of the use served.

B)	Setback and Yard Requirements.   Off-street parking spaces may be located on a lot according to the following rules:

1)	In all Districts:


a)	Off-street parking spaces that are located on the ground and open to the sky may be located in any required yard unless otherwise required for screening, buffering, landscaping, or unless prohibited by other provisions of this Chapter
 
or other Chapters of the City Code.  A parking space shall have dimensions as specified in the chart and diagram in Section 60-110, unless an exception is granted by the Zoning Administrator due to the shallow depth of a parcel, the location of existing trees, or other similar circumstances.

b)	Parking structures, detached garages, and carports shall be subject to the minimum yard and setback requirements applicable in the zoning district in which the structure is located.

c)	In all non-residential districts, the required setback for all parking areas shall be five feet, unless the parking area is immediately adjacent to a public right­ of-way. The required setback for parking areas adjacent to a public right-of­ way shall be ten feet and landscaped according to Section 62-110.

d)	In all non-residential districts, no off-street parking shall be located within five feet of a principal structure.

2)	In a Residential District:


a)	In the R-1 district, the required setback for all parking areas shall be three feet. In the R-2 district, there shall be no required setback for off-street parking areas. In the RM-I and RM-2 districts, the required setback areas shall be five feet.

b)	In a front yard or street side yard on an established driveway.  One additional space may be provided outside of the driveway, but not in that part of the front yard in front of the dwelling located upon the lot, if the following conditions are met:

i)	Such space is improved with an all-weather surface.


ii)	The area of the driveway and associated space does not cover more than 25 percent of the front yard or side street yard.

iii)	Access to the space is from the driveway and not the result of a separate or wider curb cut.

iv)	The space is landscaped along the side away from the established driveway with a minimum of five shrubs meeting the requirements of Division 62, Buffer Yards, Screening, Landscaping Regulations.

c)	The Zoning Administrator may permit the encroachment of circulation aisles into the front yard for a multifamily residential use when such arrangement will permit the development of a larger, more usable open space on the site. Such aisles shall not cover more than 50 percent of the front yard and shall
 
not be closer than eight feet to the right-of-way line.  Landscaping shall be provided between the aisles and the right-of-way equal in intensity to Buffer yard A as defined in Section 62-030.  A berm at least four feet in height may be substituted for required canopy and understory trees.

d)	In the R-1 and R-2 districts, no off-street parking shall be located within three feet of a principal structure. In the RM-I and RM-2 districts, no off-street parking shall be located within five feet of a principal structure.

3)	In a Non-residential District:


a)	In a side or rear yard.


b)	Off-street parking in the B-3 Central Business District is not allowed between a building and any street.

c)	Off-street parking areas within all other Business, Industrial, or Special districts are not allowed within a front or street side yard unless a decorative wall, hedge, or other substantial architectural feature is placed between the street right-of-way and parking area according to the standards of Section 62- 110 of this Chapter.

C)  Off-Street Parking in Driveway in Front of Residential Garages
In Residential Districts, Off-Street parking stalls can be provided on driveways in front of garages provided that the space for such stalls is not part of a maneuvering lane and that there is at least 20 feet between the garage and the property line.

60-40	Utilization of Off-street Parking Facilities.


A)	Use of Off-street Parking Areas.  Areas designated for off-street parking space shall not be used for the open storage of goods or the commercial repair of vehicles.

B)	Parking of Trucks in Residential Districts.  No trucks or other commercial vehicles of a rated weight over 3/4 ton shall be parked in any Residential District for more
than four hours consecutively, except:

I)	On non-residential properties;

2)	In a fully enclosed garage or other similar permanent structure; or

3)	On a site under construction where the vehicles are related to the construction activity in progress.

C)	Unlicensed Vehicles.  Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind without current legal license plates or that are inoperable shall not be stored or parked on any
 
property zoned residential except in a completely enclosed building. 60-050  Design and Maintenance of Off-street Parking Areas.
A)	General Design Requirements.  The following requirements shall apply to all off­ street parking areas:

I)	Parking spaces, aisles, and driveways shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or comparable all-weather, dust free surfacing except that in Residential Districts, off-street parking areas for three stalls or less shall not require paving but shall
have a crushed rock, gravel, or similar surface if not paved with asphalt, concrete, or comparable all-weather, dust free surfacing.

2)	Parking areas shall have provision made for the on-site collection of drainage to eliminate sheet flow of such waters onto sidewalks, public rights-of-way, and abutting property, unless the parking area is included as part of an approved storm water management plan.

3)	Lighting of parking areas shall be directed or deflected so as not to shine directly onto adjacent dwellings or cause hazards to motorists on adjacent streets, and shall observe the performance standards of Section 55-100.

B)	Access.  Unobstructed vehicular access to and from a public street or alley shall be provided for all off-street parking spaces.  Vehicular access shall be provided in such a manner as to protect the safety of persons using such access or traveling in the public street from which such access is obtained and in such a manner as to protect the traffic-carrying capacity of the public street from which said access is obtained.

I)	The maximum width for access drives serving non-residential uses is 32 feet.

2)	The maximum width for access drives servicing residential uses is 28 feet.  There shall be only one driveway access for each residential lot, unless approved in writing by the City Engineer and the Zoning Administrator.  Drives servicing residential uses that are located on a State-Aid Route must adhere to the Minnesota Department of Transportation's established standards.

3)	Any driveway access drive to a non-residential use shall be set back at least 25 feet from an adjacent property located in a Residential District.

4)	Vehicular access to public rights-of-way shall be governed by the standards of Section 55-080 of this Division.

D)	Construction Standards.


I)	Unless otherwise stated, all parking spaces must be striped or permanently marked to designate the space.
 
2)	Parking areas at automobile sales and repair establishments and bed and breakfasts do not require lines or striping.

3)	Off-street parking areas, including aisles and driveways may, upon approval of the Zoning Administrator, be exempt from provision A) 2) above if such facilities are for a temporary purpose.

E)	Maintenance.  The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining any parking area in good condition and free of refuse and debris and all landscaping in a healthy and growing condition, replacing it when necessary as determined by the Zoning Administrator.

F)	Signs.  No signs shall be located in any parking area except as necessary for orderly operation of traffic movement; such signs shall meet all applicable requirements of Division 65, Sign Regulations.

60-60	Joint Parking Facilities.  Joint use of required parking spaces is encouraged where two or more uses on the same or separate sites are able to share the same parking spaces because their parking demands occur at different times.

A)	Joint Use Parking Requirements. Joint use of required non-residential parking spaces is allowed if the following documentation is submitted in writing to the Zoning Administrator as part of a building permit or zoning application:

1)	The names and addresses of the uses and of the owners or tenants that are sharing the parking;

2)	The location and number of parking spaces that are being shared;


3)	An analysis showing that the peak parking times of the uses occur at different times and that the parking area will be large enough for the anticipated demands of both uses; and

4)	A legal instrument such as an easement or deed restriction that guarantees access to the parking for both uses.

60-70	General Criteria for Determining Parking.  The following criteria and definitions shall be utilized in determining the number of off-street parking spaces to be provided:

A)	Multiple Use Buildings.  When a building includes a combination of spaces as set forth in this Division, the required parking will be the sum of the required parking for each use.

B)	Uses not Defined.  Where the parking requirement for a particular use is not defined in this Division, and where no similar use is listed, the Zoning Administrator shall
 
determine the number of spaces to be provided based on requirements for similar uses, location of the proposed use, expected demand and traffic generated by the proposed use, and appropriate traffic engineering and planning criteria and information.

C)	Floor Area, Usable.  As defined in Section   10-020.


D)	Places of Public Assembly.  In places of public assembly where patrons occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities, each 20 inches of seating shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining the requirements for off-street parking.

E)	Employee(s).  Reference to "employees on the largest work shift" means the maximum number of employees employed at the facility regardless of whether such person is a full-time employee.  The largest working shift may be a particular day of the week, daily work shift, or peak period such as the lunch or dinner period in the case of a restaurant.

F)	Capacity.  The maximum number of persons which may be accommodated by the use as defined by building or fire code requirements.

G)	Calculating Space. When the calculation of the number of required off-street parking spaced results in a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded up to the next highest number.

60-80	Schedule of Required Off-street Parking Facilities. Accessory parking spaces shall be provided according to the following schedule:

A)	AGRICULTURAL  USE CLASSIFICATIONS


I)	Agricultural Production - Two spaces per new dwelling unit


2)	Agricultural Services - See Section 60-090


3)	Agricultural Support - See Section 60-090


4)	Animal Husbandry-No  requirement


5)	Commercial  Stable -One space per employee on the largest work shift, plus  one space for every four animals stabled

6)	Farm Employee Housing -Two spaces per dwelling unit


7)	Forestry Operations - No requirement
 
8)	Private Kennel- No requirement


9)	Private Stable - No requirement


10)	Wayside Stand - One space per  100 square feet of gross floor area, three spaces mm1mum

B)	RESIDENTIAL USE CLASSIFICATIONS


1)	Accessory Commercial Apartment (Main Level or Lower Level) -Two spaces per dwelling unit

2)	Accessory Commercial Apartment (Upper Level) - Two spaces per dwelling unit

3)	Congregate Housing - One space for each four units, plus one space for each employee on the largest work shift

4)	Duplex (Two Family Residential) - Two spaces per dwelling unit, one per unit must be located in a garage

5)	Family Day Care and Group Family Day Care -One space per  employee on the largest work shift, plus one space for loading and unloading

6)	Group Home -One space per employee on the largest work shift


7)	Group Residential Facility - One space per employee on the largest work shift


8)	Halfway House -One space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per two persons of residential capacity unless residents are prohibited from owner or operating personal automobiles

9)	Home Occupation - No requirement unless approved as a Conditional Use


10)	Manufactured Home Park -Two spaces per dwelling unit


11)	Multiple Family Residential -Two spaces per dwelling unit, one per unit must be located in a garage.  If a building in existence on June 22, 2000, and subsequent thereto is converted to a Multiple Family Use, then both spaces may be left uncovered

12)	Semi-Transient Accommodations - One space per two guest rooms, plus two spaces per permanent residence
13)	Single Family Residential (Detached and Attached) - Two spaces per dwelling unit, one per unit must be located in a garage
 

C)	INSTITUTIONAL AND PUBLIC USE CLASSIFICATIONS


1)	Campgrounds and Trailering - One space at each campsite, plus spaces required for other uses

2)	Cemetery- No  requirement


3)	Colleges and Universities - One space per teacher, employee, or administrator, plus one space per each five students

4)	Community Services - One space per 500 square feet of gross floor area


5)	Correctional Facilities - One space per employee on the largest work shift


6)	Golf Course - Fifty spaces per nine holes, plus spaces as required for other uses


7)	Marina - No requirement


8)	Membership Organization - One space per five persons based on maximum occupancy

9)	Outdoor Recreation Facility - One space per three persons based on maximum occupancy load, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift. Specific Outdoor Recreation Facilities as follows:

a)	Driving Range - One and one-quarter spaces per driving bay


b)	Miniature Golf - One and one-half spaces per hole


c)	Swimming Pool - One space per 100 square feet of water surface area


d)	Tennis and Racquet Court Games - Three spaces per court


10)	Parks and Open Areas - No requirement


11)	Public and Private Schools - One space per teacher, employee, or administrator, plus one space per each three students in 11th and 12th grades


12) Public Assembly - One space per four seats


13) Religious Institutions - One space per six seats, or one space per ten feet of pews in the main unit of worship
D)	COMMERCIAL  USE  CLASSIFICATIONS
 
1)	Adult Establishment - As determined by specific Use Classification


2)	Automobile Maintenance Service - One space per 400 square feet of office space, plus three spaces per service bay, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift

3)	Automobile Parts/Supply- One space per 200 square feet of usable floor area


4)	Bed and Breakfast - One space per guest accommodation, plus two spaces per permanent residence, one of which must be located in a garage

5)	Broadcasting and Communication Tower - No requirement


6)	Business Center - See Section 60-090


7)	Business Services - One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area


8)	Car Wash-As follows:


a)	Full Service - One and one-half spaces per bay, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift for full service, plus stacking as required in Section 60-100

b)	Self Service - One and one-half spaces per bay, plus stacking as required in Section 60-100

9)	Commercial Vehicle Repair - One space per 400 square feet of office space, plus three spaces per service bay, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift

10)	Commercial Kennel - One space per 500 square feet of gross floor area


11)	Communications Services - One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per company vehicle stored on the site

12)	Concessions - No requirement


13)	Day Care Center - One space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per 20 children, plus one space for each vehicle associated with the facility

14)	Drinking and Entertainment - One space per three persons based on maximum capacity of the building

15)	Educational Service - One space per three students plus one space per employee at maximum class attendance period
 

16)	Fast Food and Drive-in Restaurants - One space for each 100 square feet of usable floor area or one space for each two seats provided, plus stacking as required in Section 60-100

17)	Financial Institution - One space per 100 square feet of usable floor area


18)	Funeral Home - One space for each 50 square feet of usable floor area


19)	Garden Center - One space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per 200 square feet of floor area devoted to customer sales and service

20)	Gasoline Station - One space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one stall per service vehicle, plus stacking as required in Section 60-100

21)	Indoor Athletic Facility - One space per three persons based on maximum occupancy load, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift. Specific Indoor Athletic facilities as follows:

a)	Swimming Pool- One space per  100 square feet of water surface area


b) Tennis and Racquet Court Games - Three spaces per court


22)	Indoor Recreation - One space per four seats or similar accommodations, plus one space per two employees on the largest work shift. Specific Indoor Recreation uses as follows:

a)	Bowling Alley- Five spaces per each bowling lane


b) Amusement Arcades, Bingo Parlors, Billiard Halls - One space per three persons based on maximum occupancy

23)	Maritime Commercial Use - See Section 60-090


24)	Medical Facilities - One space per bed, plus one space per two employees on the largest work shift, including doctors

24)	Neighborhood Convenience Store - One space per 100 square feet of usable floor area

25)	Nursing and Personal Care - One space for each four beds, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift

26)	Offices - One space per 200 square feet of usable floor area. Specific Office uses as follows:
 

a)	Clinic - Three spaces per examination or treatment room, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift including doctors

b)	Medical Office - Five spaces per medical professional, or one space per 200
square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater.


27)	Outdoor Entertainment - One space per four patrons expected at maximum capacity

28)	Personal Services - One space per 300 square feet of gross floor area


29)	Repair and Maintenance Shop - One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per service company vehicle stored on the site

30)	Restricted Recreation - One space for every three patrons expected at peak usage time

31)	Retail Trade - One space for each 200 square feet of usable floor area. Specific Retail uses as follows:

a)	Furniture and Appliance Sales - One space for each 800 square feet of usable floor area

32)	Sales and Storage Lots - See Section 60-090


33)	Self Service Storage Facility- See Section 60-090


34)	Shopping Center - One space for each 200 square feet of usable floor area


35)	Standard Restaurant - One space for each 100 square feet of usable floor area or one space for each two seats provided

36)	Transient Accommodations - One space per each occupancy unit plus one space per employee on the largest work shift

37)	Transportation Services - One space per 150 square feet of usable floor area, plus one space per rental/company vehicle

38)	Veterinary Service -Three spaces per examination or treatment room, plus one space per employee on the largest work shift including veterinarians

E)	INDUSTRIAL USE CLASSIFICATIONS


1) Heavy Industrial - See Section 60-090
 

2)	Landfill - See Section 60-090


3)	Laundry Plants - See Section 60-090


4)	Light Industrial - See Section 60-090


5)	Motor Freight and Warehousing - See Section 60-090


6)	Non-production Industrial - See Section 60-090


7)	Railroad Transportation - One space per two employees on the largest work shift

8)	Research and Testing - See Section 60-090


9)	Resource Extraction - One space per employee on the largest work shift


10)	Scrap and Salvage Services - One space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per 10,000 square feet oflot area

11)	Trade Shop - One space per employee on the largest work shift, plus one space per 200 square feet of usable floor area

12)	Truck Fleeting Area - No requirement


13)	Wholesaling - See Section 60-090


F)	SPECIAL USE CLASSIFICATIONS


1)	Air Transportation - No requirement for private facilities, public uses to be determined as part of Conditional Use process.

2)	Local Transit - See Section 60-090


60-90	Alternative  Schedule for Off-street Parking.   The following  schedule sets forth minimum parking requirements for uses with a combination of functions or operating characteristics (all measurements of area represent gross floor area):







FUNCTION OF ELEMENT	REQUIREMENT
 
Office, Research, and Development or Administrative Activity
 
One space per 400 square feet
 

Indoor Display or Service Area	One space per 500 square feet


Indoor Sales	One space per 250 square feet


Maritime Commercial Use	One space per 250 square feet


Motor Vehicle Service Bays	Three spaces per service bay Outdoor Sales, Display, or Service Area	One space per 2,000 square feet General Equipment Servicing or Manufacturing	One space per 800 square feet Indoor Storage or Warehousing	One space per 2,000 square feet
Outdoor Storage or Warehousing	One space per 5,000 square feet 60-100  Stacking Spaces for Drive-Through Facilities
A)	Stacking spaces shall be provided for any use having a drive-through facility or areas
having drop-off and pick-up areas. The following general standards shall apply to all stacking spaces and drive-through facilities:

I)	Stacking spaces and lanes for drive-through stations shall not impede on and off site traffic movements, shall not cross or pass through off-street parking areas, and shall not create a potentially unsafe condition where crossed by pedestrian access to a public entrance of a building.

2)	Drive-through lanes shall be separated from off-street parking areas. Individual lanes shall be striped, marked, or otherwise distinctly delineated.

3)	Approach lanes for drive-through facilities shall have the following minimum widths:

a)	One lane= 12 feet.


b)	Two or more lanes = I 0 feet per lane.


4)	Alleys or driveways in residentially zoned areas adjacent to drive-through facilities shall not be used for circulation of customer traffic.

5)	Each stacking space shall be a minimum of I 0 feet by 20 feet.
 
B)	The number of stacking spaces shall be provided as follows:


1)  Financial institutions with drive-through windows: Four stacking spaces for the first drive-through window and two stacking spaces for each additional window.

2)	Car wash: Four stacking spaces per bay/stall for self-service establishments and five stacking spaces per bay/stall for an automated establishment.

3)	Drive-In or Fast Food Restaurant: Six stacking spaces per drive-through window.


4)	All other uses: Three stacking spaces for each window.


60-110	Off-street Parking Facility Design Parameters.

A)	Parking Stall Dimensions.  Parking areas for automobiles shall meet the following standards (vehicle dimensions in feet):


Parking Angle	oo	
30° to 53°	
54° to 74°	
75° to 90°
Maneuvering  Lane Width	12	12	15	20

Parking Space Width	
8	
8.5	
8.5	
9

Parking Space Length	
22	
20	
20	
20

Total Width for One Tier	
20	
32	
36.5	
40

  Total Width for Two Tiers	28	52	58	60 	


1)	All parking areas, except those serving one and two-family dwellings on local streets and parking areas with access on to a public alley, shall be designed so that cars shall not be required to back into the street. If deemed necessary for traffic safety, tum-around areas may be required for one and two-family dwellings.

2)  All maneuvering lanes shall be designed for one-way traffic movement, except that a 90° parking pattern may permit two-way movement.

B)	Parking Space Length Reduction. A portion of a parking space may be landscaped instead of paved where the landscaping provided is comprised of ground cover plants as follows:

1)	Parked vehicles may overhang a landscape area or walkway with a corresponding two foot reduction in paced stall length if a curb or wheel stop is provided.

2)  Parked vehicles may overhang both sides of a landscape area at least seven feet
 
wide or a walkway at least six feet wide.


C)	Residential Conversion Projects. All residential conversion projects requiring off­ street parking facilities in accordance with this Division shall meet the following standards (vehicle dimensions in feet):
Parking Angle	0° to 90° Maneuvering Lane Width		5
Parking Space Width	9
Parking Space Length	20


  Total Width for One Tier	25 	


1)	Where covered parking exists, the Zoning Administrator may estimate the number of stalls that may be provided in a structure.  In no case shall a parking stall located within a structure cover less than 200 square feet.  All other stalls must meet the layout requirements of this Division.

60-120	Off-Street Loading Facilities.  Off-street loading berths accessory to uses allowed by this Division shall be provided in accordance with the regulations set forth herein as well as in Section 60-020.

A)	Utilization.  Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities.  An off-street loading berth shall be available for its designated purpose when needed.

B)	Size. Unless otherwise specified, a required off-street loading berth shall be 10 feet in width by 35 feet in length, exclusive of isle and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.

C)	Access.  Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements.  No such access shall be located within 25 feet of the intersection of right-of-way lines of any two intersecting streets.

D)	Design and Maintenance.


1)	Surfacing.  All open off-street loading berths, access drives, aisles, and maneuvering spaces shall be improved with bituminous pavement, Portland cement concrete pavement, or similar materials so as to provide a permanent, durable, and dustless surface.
 

2)  Screening.  Where applicable, screening shall be provided as set forth in Division
62.


E)	Location.  All required off-street loading berths shall be located on the same lot as the use to be served, and no portion of the vehicle shall project into a street or alley. A loading berth shall not be located in a required front yard, side yard, or side yard adjoining a street.  A loading berth located in a required rear yard shall be open to the sky.

F)	Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces.  Accessory off-street loading berths shall be provided as follows:

I)	Buildings where all of the floor area is in residential use must meet the following standards:

a)	No loading spaces are required where there are less than 50 dwelling units in a structure.

b)	One loading space is required for all other residential structures.


2)	Buildings where any of the floor area is in uses other than residential must meet the following standards:

a)	No loading spaces are required for buildings with less than 20,000 square feet of floor area.

b)	One loading space is required for buildings with 20,000 or more square feet, up to 50,000 square feet of floor area.

c)	Two loading spaces are required for buildings with more than 50,000 square feet of floor area.

3)	Uses for which off-street loading facilities are not required shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities off any adjacent alley, service drive, or open space on the same zoning lot which is accessible by motor vehicles.
 
ARTICLE IV - REGULATIONS APPLYING TO ALL DISTRICTS DIVISION 62: BUFFER YARDS, SCREENING, AND LANDSCAPING
62-1	I 0 Buffer Yards - Purpose.


A)	The purpose of buffer yards is to limit the view and reduce the noise between abutting incompatible uses, and to ease the transition from one zoning district to another. Buffer yards are intended to provide a physical integration of uses, which promote the public health, welfare, and safety by:

I)	Preventing visual pollution;


2)	Preventing the overcrowding of land;


3)	Preventing the undue congregation of people and vehicles; and,


4)	Promoting the peaceful enjoyment of property within the City of Red Wing. 62-020 Buffer Yards - When Required.
A)	A buffer yard shall be required of any lot in any zoning district when the lot in that district abuts a zoning district of lower intensity.

B)	When a public right-of-way separates zones of different intensities, the following criteria shall apply, regardless of whether the zoning line is on one side or the other or the center of the public right-of-way:

I)	If the public right-of-way is an alley, a buffer yard with screening shall be provided as per the table below in Section 62-030 I).

2)	If the public right-of-way is a local or collector street, a buffer yard with screening shall be provided on any side or rear of the higher intensity use which abuts the right-of-way as per the table below; however, the buffer yard shall not be required on the front of the higher intensity use where the front abuts the public right-of­ way.

3)	If the public right-of-way is an arterial street or highway, no buffer yard or screening shall be required for the portion of the higher intensity use abutting the public right-of-way.

C)	When a site plan is submitted to modify or expand an existing building or site improvements or accommodate a change in land use, buffer yard and screening requirements shall only be applied to those portions of the site that are directly
 
affected by the proposed improvements, or change in land use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.

62-30	Buffer Yards - General Standards.


A)	Buffer yards shall contain vegetative and/or architectural screening that achieves the purpose of the buffer yard and which meets the requirements for screening below.

B)	The maximum slope of any buffer yard shall be 2H: IV where His the horizontal distance and Vis the vertical distance.  Additional width shall be added to any portion of any buffer yard which exceeds this slope such that the minimum buffer yard width
is met by land less steep than 2H: IV.


C)	The buffer yard shall be located entirely within the higher intensity zoning district and abutting the zoning district line, or adjacent right-of-way if such right-of-way separates the lot from the zoning district line.  However, the buffer yard may be placed in the lower intensity zoning district or partially within both zoning districts if both sides of the zoning district line and entire buffer yard width are within common ownership and a permanent easement is provided over any portion of the buffer yard not within the higher intensity zoning district.

D)	A driveway required to serve the principal structure on the site may exist in the buffer yard. This driveway shall run substantially perpendicular to the buffer yard.

E)	Buffer yards shall be maintained in a natural condition free of structures, loading or storage areas, parking, roads, or driveways except as provided for in D) above.

F)	Buffer yards required by this Section shall be applied equally to all similarly situated properties. Modifications to these standards may be granted in writing by the Zoning Administrator if the Zoning Administrator finds any of the following circumstances exist on the proposed building site, or surrounding properties:

I)	Natural land characteristics such as topography or existing vegetation on the proposed building site would achieve the same intent of this section.

2)	Innovative landscaping or architectural design is employed on the building site to achieve an equivalent screening or buffering effect.

3)	The required screening and landscaping would be ineffective at maturity due to the proposed topography of the site and/or the location of the improvements on the site.

4)	The topography of adjacent and surrounding sites is such as to render required screening ineffective at maturity.
 
G)	When the acreage of a site is significantly larger than the area proposed for physical improvements or active usage, buffer yards shall be reserved as required by this section. However, to achieve the intent of this section, the Zoning Administrator may require an alternative location and design for required screening and plantings.

H)	When property lines abut an adjacent jurisdiction, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the specific screening and buffering requirements along that property line after consideration of the zoning designation and/or land use of the adjacent property. Requirements shall not exceed those that would be required for similarly situated/zoned property within the City.

I)	Buffer yard dimensions and screening requirements shall be provided as detailed in the table below:

	Abutted District (Lower Intensity)
Abutting District	AR, R-I, R- 2, R-3	
RM-I, RM-2	CIVIC, MC, MCT, B-I, RF	B-2, B-2A, B-3	
I-I, 1-2
AR, R-I, R-2, R-3	
NIA	
NIA	
NIA	
NIA	
NIA
RM-I, RM-2	B	NIA	NIA	NIA	NIA
CIVIC, MC, MCT, B-I, RF	
B	
A	
NIA	
NIA	
NIA
B-2, B-2A, B-3	c	B	NIA	NIA	NIA
I-I, 1-2	D	c	c	c	NIA

Buffer Yards	lA.rchitecturaI	IVegetative

A	4' screen
IO' buffer yard
Small evergreen trees	20' buffer yard,
Small evergreen trees
and one row evergreen shrubs

B	6' screen
I5' buffer yard
Small evergreen trees	30' buffer yard,
Small evergreen trees, and one row evergreen shrubs


c	6' screen
25' buffer yard
Large and small evergreen trees	50' buffer yard, large evergreen trees, small evergreen trees, and one row of evergreen shrubs


D	8' Screen
30' buffer yard
Large deciduous and large evergreen trees	60' buffer yard,
Large evergreen trees, small evergreen trees, and one row of evergreen shrubs

62-40	Screening - When Required.
 
A)	Screening shall be provided within a buffer yard to ease the transition of one land use or activity to another to achieve the purposes of the buffer yard.  Screening may be accomplished through architectural or vegetative materials.

B)	Screening shall be provided, in addition to the requirements listed below, for:


I)	All articles or materials being stored, maintained, repaired, processed, erected, fabricated, dismantled, or salvaged, such that the activity is not visible from surrounding properties or roads.

2)	Refuse storage and loading areas such that these activities are not visible from surrounding properties or roads.

3)	Rooftop and ground level mechanical equipment such that it is not visible from surrounding properties or roads.

4)	All trash dumpsters or containers used for recycling shall be screened on three sides with architectural screening supplemented by plantings.  Screening shall be based upon the standards below and subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator:

a)	Four-foot tall architectural screening is acceptable when household style trash containers are used in place of dumpsters;

b)	The requirement for supplemental plantings may be waived by the Administrator in cases where dumpsters or containers are added to an existing development.  In determining whether to grant a waiver, the Zoning Administrator shall be guided by these standards: proximity of the facility to residential structures; efficacy of screening to mitigate any adverse effect of the use; and benefit of the screening relative to its cost.

C)	When a site plan is submitted to modify or expand an existing building or site improvements, or accommodate a change in land use, screening requirements shall only be applied to those portions of the site that are directly affected by the proposed improvements, or change in land use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.

62-50	Screening - General Standards.


A)	Screening shall be continuous and in place at the time of occupancy.  Ifvehicular or pedestrian access through the screen is necessary, the screening function shall be preserved.

B)	Screening may be architectural or vegetative, per the requirements below:
 
1)	Required screening for any visual impact may be achieved with fences, walls, earth berms, hedges or other landscape materials. All walls and fences shall be architecturally harmonious with the principal building. The use of chain link fences equipped with slats is prohibited. Earth berms shall not exceed a slope of 3: 1 unless provided with landscaping designed to minimize maintenance. The screen shall be designed to provide effective visual barrier during all seasons.

2)	Architectural screening shall be at least four feet in height, shall be supplemented with plantings, and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 55-030, "Comer Visibility".

3)	Vegetative material shall be alive and in good health.


4)	Small evergreen trees shall be at least four feet in height at planting and allowed to grow to at least six feet in height.  Large evergreen trees shall be at least six feet in height at planting and allowed to grow at least ten feet in height.  All required evergreen vegetation shall be maintained in good condition.

5)	Deciduous trees shall be at least linch caliper or 10 feet to 12 feet in height. They shall be supplemental and not deemed to be adequate screening in themselves.

6)	Acceptable vegetative plantings include any tree listing in the "recommended list of trees" (or approved alternative by the Zoning Administrator) for screening purposes.

C)	Screening design and development shall be compatible with the existing and proposed land use and the development character of the surrounding land and structures.

D)	Screening shall be of sufficient density and diversity to achieve the intent of this section. However, at the time of planting, the spacing of trees shall not exceed 12 feet on center, and the planting pattern shall be staggered.  Shrubbery shall be more
closely spaced.  Specific exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the Zoning Administrator to encourage quality and creativity of design where the intent of this section is met.

E)	Existing vegetation within buffer yards shall be considered as a substitute for otherwise required landscaping or screening, if in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, the type, size, and density of the existing vegetation complies with the standards and intent of this section.

F)	When a proposed buffer yard has a variation in elevation of greater than 10 vertical feet at any point, the required screening or landscaping within the yard shall be placed to maximize the effectiveness of the screening or landscaping, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
 
G)	Trees planted to meet any of the screening requirements may also be used to meet any other landscaping requirement within this Division.

H)	Screening required by this Section shall be applied equally to all similarly situated properties.  Modifications to these standards may be granted in writing by the Zoning Administrator if the Zoning Administrator finds any of the following circumstances exist on the proposed building site, or surrounding properties:

I)  Natural land characteristics such as topography or existing vegetation on the proposed building site would achieve the same intent of this section.

2)	Innovative landscaping or architectural design is employed on the building site to achieve an equivalent screening or buffering effect.

3)	The required screening and landscaping would be ineffective at maturity due to the proposed topography of the site and/or the location of the improvements on the site.

4)	The topography of adjacent and surrounding sites is such as to render required screening ineffective at maturity.

62-60	Landscaping - Purpose.


A)	The preservation of existing trees and vegetation, as well as the planting of new trees and vegetation, can significantly add to the quality of the physical environment of the community.  The regulations outlined herein are designed to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City.  Trees can provide the following benefits to the community:

I)	Provide buffers and screens against noise air pollution, and unsightly and incompatible land uses;

2)	Reduce the hazards of flooding and aid in the control of erosion and stormwater runoff. Trees also assist in the stabilization of soil and replenish groundwater supplies;

3)	Act to moderate extremes of temperature and provide shade;


4)	Absorb carbon dioxide and supply oxygen in our atmosphere, which is an essential ecological function in the preservation of human and animal life. Trees can provide  a haven for birds which, in tum, assist in the control of insects;

5)	Aid in energy conservation;
 
6)	Are physiologically, psychologically, sociologically and aesthetically necessary counterpoints to the man-made urban setting.

62-70	Landscaping - When Required.


A)	The requirements of this Division apply to any development for which a landscape plan is required by this Chapter.

62-80	Landscaping - General Standards.


A)	Acceptable trees include, but are not limited to; those identified as suitable for the intended use in the "Approved Tree List" figure below.  Acceptable vegetative ground cover consists of shrubs and ground cover including grass.  Using standards from recognized texts on the subject, the Zoning Administrator shall decide the appropriateness of any such trees and ground cover.

B)	Species of trees shall not be planted if the roots cause damage to public works, the branches are subject to a high incidence of breakage, and the fruit is considered a nuisance or high maintenance, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.

C)	All trees shall be planted in good condition and meet "American Standard for Nursery Stock" (2004), ANSI Z60. l-2004, as may be amended.

D)	The developer shall plant or install, as appropriate, grass, tree grates, porous pavers, or similar pervious surfaces, which shall extend to twice the initial drip line of the newly planted tree. Minimum tree grate size shall be five square feet.

E)	Trees planted to meet any of the requirements below may also be used to meet any other screening or landscaping requirement within this Division.

62-90	Tree Replacement Requirements.


A)	It is the policy of the City to preserve natural woodland areas throughout the city and with respect to specific site development to retain as far as practical, substantial tree stands which can be incorporated into the overall landscape plan.

B)	No clearcutting of woodland areas shall be permitted except as approved in subdivision, planned unit development, conditional use permit applications, and certificate of compliance applications for forestry operations.

C)	Any trees on the site which are a caliper of five inches or more at a height of one foot above the ground, or ornamental trees over 12 feet in height which are to be removed during site development shall be replaced.

62-100	Vegetation Coverage Requirements.
 
A)	Trees and shrubs shall be provided within the limits of construction to the extent that at 20 years from the date of planting, tree canopies or shrub beds cover at least the following  minimums:

Zoning District ........................................... Tree Canopy
AR, RF ......................................................... 20%
R-1 ............................................................... 20%
R-2, Civic ..................................................... 15% RM-I, RM-2, MC, MCT .............................. 10%
B-2, B-2a, 1-1, 1-2 ........................................ 10%
B-3 ............................................................... 0%
Planned Unit Development ........................... Per Uses Above


B)	Existing trees or wooded areas which are to be preserved, at the applicants option, may be included to meet all or part of the canopy requirements, provided the site plan identifies such trees and the trees meet the standards of size, health, placement, etc. set out in this Section.  The Zoning Administrator shall evaluate use of existing trees to ensure they have adequate health and strength to allow such use.

C)	Existing trees designated to be included as part of these requirements shall be protected during construction by fencing placed at a distance in feet equal to or greater than one and one-half times the diameter of the tree in inches, and at a height equal to or greater than four feet.

D)	The extent of canopy at maturity shall be based on published reference texts, generally accepted by landscape architects, nursery specialists, and arborists.

62-110	Parking Lot Landscaping.


A)	Perimeter  areas.  When parking lot perimeters, including driveways and drive aisles, are not entirely screened visually by an intervening building or structure or land mass from any abutting right-of-way, there shall be provided landscaping designed to buffer direct views of cars and hard surface areas.  The landscaping must break up expanses of hard surface areas, help to visually define boulevards and soften direct views of parking areas and provide for reforestation with overstory trees from the approved tree species list identified for parking or other species as approved by city staff Publicly owned and operated parking lots used for long duration parking may be exempt from this requirement when there is a demonstrated concern regarding
security safety.


B)	Interior Landscaping for Vehicular Uses Areas.


I)	Any open vehicular use areas containing more than 6,000 square feet of area, or 20 or more vehicular parking spaces shall provide interior landscaping in accordance with this Division in addition to "perimeter" landscaping.  Interior
 
landscaping may be peninsular or island types.  Landscaped areas shall include all parking lot and drive islands and perimeter green spaces.  Required setback areas shall be excluded.  This requirement for interior landscaping may be waived by the Zoning Administrator in cases where it is determined to be infeasible.  In such cases, the required interior landscaping shall be added to the required perimeter landscaping.

2)	For each 100 square feet, or fraction thereof, of vehicular use area, 8 square feet of landscaped area shall be provided.

3)	The minimum landscape area permitted shall be 200 square feet, with a 6 foot minimum dimension to all trees from edge of pavement where vehicles overhang and a 4 foot minimum dimension to all trees where vehicles do not overhang.

4)	In order to encourage the required landscape area to be properly dispersed, a minimum of one peninsular, island, or boulevard type landscaped area shall be located within each 6,000 square feet of vehicular use area.

5)	A minimum of one tree shall be required for each 250 square feet or fraction thereof, of required landscape area.  Trees shall have a clear trunk of at least 5 feet above the ground, and the remaining area shall be landscaped with shrubs, or ground cover (not to include rocks or gravel except as a mulch around shrubs and ground cover), not to exceed 2 feet in height.

6)	Concrete curbing shall protect all landscaped areas except where landscaped areas are also designed for stormwater management purposes.

7)	All landscaping areas shall have the proper soil preparation to ensure the viability of the vegetation to survive.  The landscaping plan shall provide specifications for proper soil preparation.

62-120  Foundation and Aesthetic Plantings.  Landscaping plans shall provide for an appropriate mix of plantings around the exterior footprint of all buildings.  The intent of this section is to improve the appearance of the structures and, where necessary, break up large unadorned building elevations.  These plantings are not intended to obscure views
of the building or accessory signage.


62-130  Undeveloped Areas. All undeveloped areas of the site, excluding protected wetlands and tree preservation areas, shall be seeded or sodded.  In addition, an appropriate mix of trees and other plant material shall be provided to create an aesthetically pleasing site.

62-140  Undeveloped Areas Next to Public ROW. Where undeveloped or open areas of a site are located adjacent to public right-of-way, the plan shall provide for overstory boulevard trees.  A minimum of one tree for every 30 feet of frontage is required.  The city may approve alternatives if it meets the intent of this Division.
 
62-150	Plan submission.  The property owner or developer shall prepare a landscape plan drawn by a registered landscape architect or other professional acceptable to the city for review by the city.  The city shall apply the following standards in reviewing the landscape plan:

A)	The contents of the plan shall include the following:


1)	Plot plan, drawn to an easily readable scale, showing and labeling by name and dimensions, all existing and proposed property lines, easements, buildings, and other structures, vehicular use areas (including parking stalls, driveways, service areas, square footage), water outlets and landscape material (including botanical name and common name, installation size, on-center planting dimensions where applicable, and quantities for all plants used).

2)	Typical elevations and/or cross sections as may be required.


3)	Title block with the pertinent names and addresses (property owner, person drawing plan, and person installing landscape material), scale date, north arrow (generally orient plan so that north is to top of plan), and zoning district.

4)	Existing landscape material shall be shown on the required plan and any material in satisfactory condition may be used to satisfy this article in whole or in part.

62-160	Landscaping Materials.


A)	The landscaping materials shall consist of the following:


1)	Walls and Fences.  Walls shall be constructed of natural stone, brick, or other appropriate materials.  Fences shall be constructed of wood, decorative iron, or other appropriate materials.  Chain link fencing will be permitted only if vinyl coated, covered with plant material, or otherwise screened.

2)	Earth Berms.  Earth berms shall be physical barriers which block or screen the view similar to a hedge, fence, or wall.  Mounds shall be constructed with proper and adequate plant material to prevent erosion.  A difference in elevation between areas requiring screening does not constitute an existing earth mound and shall  not be considered as fulfilling any screening requirement.

3)	Plants.  All plant materials shall be living plants; artificial plants are prohibited.
Plant materials shall meet the following requirements:


a)	Deciduous Trees.  Shall be species, at maturity, having an average crown spread of greater than 15 feet and having trunk(s) which can be maintained with over 5 feet of clear wood in areas which have visibility requirements, except at vehicular use area intersections where an  8 foot clear wood
 
requirement will control.  Trees having an average mature spread of crown less than 15 feet may be substituted by grouping of the same so as to create the equivalent of a 15-foot crown spread.  A minimum of 10 feet overall height or minimum caliper (trunk diameter, measured 6 inches above ground for trees up to 4 inches caliper) of at least 2 1h inches immediately after planting shall be required.  Trees of species whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall not be placed closer than 15 feet to such public works, unless the tree root system is completely contained within a barrier for which the minimum interior containing dimensions shall be 5 feet square and 5 feet deep and for which the construction requirements shall be 4 inches thick, reinforced concrete.  Trees shall be selected from the approved tree list delineated in Table I, following this Section, or as approved by the Zoning Administrator.

b)	Evergreen Trees.  Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet high with a minimum caliper of one and one-half inches when planted.

c)	Shrubs and Hedges.  Deciduous shrubs shall be at least two feet in average height when planted, and shall conform to the opacity and other requirements within four years after planting.  Evergreen shrubs shall be at least two feet in average height and two feet in diameter.  Materials to be selected from Table 11, following this Section or as approved by the Zoning Administrator.

d)	Vines.  Vines shall be at least 12 inches high at planting, and are generally used in conjunction with walls or fences.  Materials to be selected from Table II, shown in Section 62-170 or as approved by the Zoning Administrator.

e)	Grass or Ground Cover.  Grass shall be planted in species normally grown
as permanent lawns, and may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or seeded; except in swales or other areas subject to erosion, where solid sod, erosion reducing net, or suitable mulch shall be used, nurse-grass seed shall be sown for immediate protection until complete coverage otherwise is achieved.  Grass sod shall be clean and free of weeds and noxious pests or diseases.  Ground cover such as organic material shall be planted in such a manner as to present
a finished appearance and 75 percent of complete coverage after two
complete growing seasons, with a minimum of 15 inches on center.  In certain cases, ground cover also may consist of rocks, pebbles, sand and similar materials if approved by the city.  Materials to be selected from Table II, following this Section or as approved by the Zoning Administrator.

f)	Retaining.  Retaining walls exceeding four feet in height, including stage walls which cumulatively exceed four feet in height, must be constructed in accordance with plans prepared by a registered engineer or landscape architect of brick, concrete or natural stone.  Artificial material may be
 
approved if appropriate.  A building permit is required for any retaining wall exceeding four feet in height.

62-170	Maintenance


A)	Generally.  The owner, tenant, and their respective agents shall be held jointly and severally responsible to maintain their property and landscaping in a condition presenting a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance and free from refuse and debris. Plants and ground cover which are required by an approved site or landscape plan and which have died shall be replaced within three months of notifications by the city. However, the Zoning Administrator may extend the time for compliance up to nine months in order to allow for seasonal or weather conditions.

TABLE I
Approved  Tree List

Key to notations used:

ST= Relatively tolerant to deicing salt
DT = Relatively tolerant to drought or dry sites Size: (in terms of expected mature height)
L = Large (over 50 feet)
M =Medium (between 25 to 50 feet) S = Small (less than 25 feet)
Blvd = Suitable for boulevard planting and parking lot Pkg. = Suitable for parking lots



	Size	Tolerance	Location	Restrictions
				



M	Pkg.	Protect from sunscald


M	Relatively tolerant of wet
sites
L	DT	Blvd/Pkg

 


murense
 
M	DT
 

Crabapple, Flowering Malus spp	s		Blvd	Many varieties available; check for disease resistance;
from sunscald
	Ginkgo
biloba	M		Blvd	Male trees only
 
Hackberry	L	DT  ST	Pkg. is occidentalis





























Maple, Red Acer rubrum	M-
L		Blvd	Protect from sunscald. Grows best on moists, acid soils.
Maple, Sugar Acer saccharum	L		Blvd/Pkg	Protect from sunscald. Prefers heavy, moist soils. Shade tolerant.
N	orthem Catalpa	M-
L	DT		
		L			
	L	DT  ST	Blvd/Pkg	
	L	ST	Blvd/Pkg	
	L		Pkg.	Relatively tolerant of wet sites.
	M		Blvd	
	L			
CONIFERS				
Arborvitae, American	M			
 

M	Relatively tolerant of wet
 			sites.  Shade tolerant. 	 M	DT

M

 
L	DT
 
State tree
 

M M L
L	e



Larix laricina



TABLE II

Key to Notations Used:


ST= Relatively Salt Tolerant
SN = Relatively Tolerant of Snow Loading DT = Relatively Drought Tolerant

	Common Name	Size
(inches)	Tole	s
	Yarrow	24		
	"Silver Mound"	36	DT	
	Artemisia			
Astilbe	Astilbe	12-30	SN		Partial shade
A egopodium	Goutweed I Snow	12	SN		
	on The Mountain				
	False	36	ST DT	SN	Shrub like
	Cushion Spurge	18	DT  SN		
	
Blue Fescue	
12	
DT  SN		
Full sun
	Day Lil	12-30	ST DT	SN	
 	I    Plantain Lil	12-30     ISN		e 	
Coral Bells	18	ST SN
 


Lamium maculatum



















l	entosa	Yucca	24	ST    DT
 

*Note: Other materials may be used subject to city approval.
 
DIVISION 65:  SIGN REGULATIONS



65-10	Purposes and Applicability


A)	Purpose.  The purpose of these regulations is: to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the City of Red Wing ; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the City's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse affect of signs on nearby public and private property ; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these regulations .

B)	Applicability-Effect.  A sign may be erected , placed , established , painted, or created in the City of Red Wing only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions and other requirements of these regulations . The intent of these regulations is:

1)	To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in commercial and industrial zones and limited variety of signs in residential
zones, subject to the standards and the permit procedures of these regulations .


2)	To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrnsive and incidental to the principle use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to the
substantive requirement of these regulations , but without the requirement for a permit.

3)	To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by these regulations .


4)	To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of these regulations .



65-20	Definitions   .


The following terms, as used in this Section, shall have the meanings stated :


1)	Abandoned Sign- A sign, sign frame, sign message , and its supporting equipment that is left behind after a business or corporation departs from a building or when a "sign" is in disrepair, not working to its original design or a threat to the health , safety and welfare of the general public .

2)	"A" Frame Sign, Swinger Sign or Sandwich Signs-  An advertising device which is ordinarily in the shape of an "A" or some variation thereof,
located on the ground, easily moveable , not permanently attached thereto and which is usually two-sided .
 
3)	Animated  Sign- A sign that features moving parts, either illuminated  or not illuminated , or which projects the appearance or optical illusion of movement , including  animated  graphics, text, or images that  appear to move or change in size, the movement  or appearance of movement  of any illumination  or the flashing,  scintillating or varying of light intensity, and full realistic video . Electronic Message  Signs shall not  be considered  Animated  Signs provided  the sign complies with the criteria established  in Division 65.

4)	Area Identification Sign- A sign to identify a common area containing a group of stmctures, or a single stmcture on a minimum site of two (2) acres, such as a residential subdivision , apartment complex, industrial park, or shopping center, located at the entrance or entrances of the area, and
consisting of a fence or wall or archway with letters or symbols affixed thereto .


5)	Audible Sign- A sign that provides its message by emitting sounds loud enough to be heard at the property line. This shall not include signs that provide a radio transmission that may only be heard by tuning to a particular radio frequency .

6)	Awning Sign or Canopy Sign- A sign that is painted on or attached to an awmng .

7)	Balloon Signs - Signs that are made from inflatable material , have a diameter in excess of four (4) feet, and are considered Temporary Signs.

8)	Banner- Any sign of fabric or similar material that is mounted to a pole or a building at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or official flags of any institution or business shall not be considered a banner. Banners shall be considered temporary signs and shall be placed on a building, lot, or parcel of land for a period not to exceed sixty (90) days during any calendar year. If banners are freestanding they shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet from any property line.

9)	Beacon- A stationary or revolving light which flashes or projects illumination , single colored or multi-colored, in any manner which is intended to attract or divert attention, except, however , this term is not intended to include any kind of lighting device which is required or necessary under safety regulations described  by the Federal Aviation Administration or similar agencies .

10)	Billboard- Any freestanding or building sign or stmcture which is designed and erected for the purpose of selling advertising space or identifying a business not located on the property on which the sign is located .

11)	Building Marker- A sign which identifies the name of a building and date of constmction rather than a business within a building .
 

12)	Building Sign- A sign attached to any part of a building , as contrasted to freestanding signs.

13)	Bulletin Board- Any sign erected by a charitable, educational or religious institution or public body, which is erected upon the same property as said institution, for the purpose of announcing events which are held on the same premises , and contains no commercial message .

14)	Changeable Copy Sign/Reader Board-  A sign or potion thereof with characters , letters or illustrations that can be physically changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign. A sign that changes its message by electronic means shall constitute an Electronic Message Sign (See
Definition for Electronic Message Sign).


15)	Church Sign- Any sign pertaining to the activities of a Church or similar organization .

16)	Combination Sign- A sign incorporating any combination of the features of flashing, animated , projecting or roof signs.

1 7)  Commercial Message- A sign wording , logo, or other representation that directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or call attention to a business , product , service, sale or sales event or other commercial activity .

18)	Construction Sign/Project Sign- A temporary sign erected on the premises prior to or during the period of construction . These signs typically indicate the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar artisans, and/or owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the structure or project , and rental, sale or lease information .

19)	Directional/ General/Public Information Signs- Signs erected and maintained within the public right-of-way , which directs the reader to the route and distance to the location of a public institution, or to the location of historic structures or areas, or to the location of public parks, trails, or buildings . Such signs shall conform to all applicable state regulations and shall be approved by the City Engineer.

20)	Displays , Storefront- Displays or features which do not fall within the definition of a sign, but which direct attention to an object, product , place, activity, person , institution, organization or business and is entirely within the confines of a building , usually in a storefront window, door or building
fa<;ade, but not in any way attached , affixed or painted to such a window, door or fa<;ade .
 

21)	Display Surface Area-  The net geometric area enclosed by the display surface of the sign including the outer extremities of all letter, characters and delineation ; provided , however , "display surface area" shall not include the stmcture  supports

21. 1) Dissolve- A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign accomplished by varying the light intensity of pattern, where the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and legibility of the second message .

22)	Double-faced Sign- A sign with two faces only, with each face oriented 180 degrees from the other.

23)	Electronic Message Signs- Any sign that by electronic means conveys a message and that electronically or mechanically changes said message by remote or automatic means from one message to another message . Signs that only display "Time and Temperature " and signs that are capable of displaying only a single fixed message that is altered less than five (5) times in a twenty­ four (24) hour period , including , but not limited to, "Open/Closed " signs, gasoline pricing signs, and "No/Vacancy" signs, shall not be considered Electronic Message Signs.

24)	Erect- To build , constmct , attach, hang, place, suspend , or affix, and shall also include the painting of walls .

24. 1) Fade-  A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility .

25)	Finder Signs- Temporary signs used to direct the reader to a temporary event such as an open house or garage sale, such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet and  shall only be displayed for up to seven (7) days, during such events.

26)	Flags- Any fabric, banner , bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, often used as a symbol of a government , political subdivision or other entity.

27)	Flashing Sign- An illuminated sign which has a light source not constant in intensity or color at all times while such sign is in use, such as flashing, blinking , revolving , or rotating light. Electronic Message Signs shall not be considered Flashing Signs provided the sign complies with the criteria established in Division 65.
 
27. 1) Frame- A complete, static display screen on an Electronic Message Sign.


28)	Freestanding Sign- A sign which is attached to or part of a completely self­ supporting structure, the supporting structure shall be set firmly in or below the ground surface and shall not be attached to any building or any other structure whether portable or stationary .

29)	Illuminated Sign- A sign which is lighted with an artificial light source.


30)	Industrial Park Sign- A sign which identifies a group of offices, warehouses or manufacturing plants that are four or more in number.

31)	Joint Identification Sign- A sign which serves as a common or collective identification for a group of persons or businesses operating on the same zoned  lot (e.g., shopping center, office complex, etc.). Such signs typically name the persons, or businesses included , but carry no other advertising matter.

32)	Lease- Agreement by which property owners convey, usually for a specified rent ,  to others, permission to erect and maintain an advertising sign upon their property .

33)	Lot- A parcel of land legally subdivided by plat , metes and bounds , registered land  survey, auditor 's plots or other accepted means and separate from other parcels or portions by said description for the purpose of sale, lease or operation .

34)	Mall-  A concentration of retail stores and/or service establishments which share customer parking areas and are located within an enclosure having public walkways whereby a customer in one store or establishment may walk to another store or establishment without leaving the enclosure .

35)	Mansard Roof- Any roof that has an angle greater than forty-five (45) degrees and which derives part of its support from the building wall and is attached to (but not necessarily a part of) a low slope roof and which extends along the full length of the front building wall or three-quarters of the length of a side building wall. For the purpose of this chapter, a low slope roof shall mean any roof with a pitch less than three (3) inches ofrise per twelve (12) inches of horizontal.

36)	Marquee-  Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building , generally designed  and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
 
37)	Marquee Sign- A sign attached to, in any manner , or made a part of a marquee .

38)	Menu Board Sign- An outdoor sign at a business establishment which has a drive-thrn component and is for the purpose of enabling customers to communicate  with the primary building to conduct business associated with said business and where the advertising or promotion component of the sign is secondary .

39)	Mobile Sign - Signs on wheels or trailers that are capable of being moved from place to place (See Also Portable Signs).

40)	Monument Signs- A freestanding ground mounted sign that has a majority of the base of the sign within four (4) feet of the ground and has a total height no greater than twelve (12) feet as measured from the original grade .

41)	Multi-Faced Sign - A spherical or other sign with more than two faces.


42)	Non-Conforming Sign - A sign which does not meet the requirements of this Section.

43)	Painted Wall Sign - A sign painted directly on an exterior wall of a building or strncture.

44)	Park Sign - A freestanding sign identifying public parklands and/or activities available within said lands.

45)	Parking and All purpose Signs- A freestanding or building sign, not exceeding six (6) square feet, typically located in a parking lot or like facility and on private and public property , which typically includes such
messages as "No Parking", "Entrance", "Loading Only", and similar directives .


46)	Pole Sign or Pylon Sign - A freestanding sign erected on one or more supports which is solidly affixed to the ground and which is between twelve
(12) and twenty-five (25) feet in height as measured from the existing grade .


47)	Political Sign- A sign(s) which announces an issue of concern to citizens or a candidate seeking office in an upcoming public election .

48)	Portable sign-  Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent strncture, or a sign designed to be transported by means of wheels .

49)	Project Sign - A monument sign which identifies a residential subdivision , a major real estate development , apartment complex, industrial , commercial or public project and may provide additional information such as how the owner
 
or management can be reached .


50)	Projecting Sign - A sign other than a wall sign, which projects
from and is supported by a wall of a building or structure and projects more than 18 inches from said wall or structure.

51)	Real Estate Sign - A freestanding or building sign typically used to advertise the offering of a property (land and/or buildings) for sale, lease or rent.

52)	Roof Sign - A sign erected and constructed wholly on and above the roof of a building , supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof

52. 1) Scroll- A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign where the message appears to move vertically across the display surface.

52.2)  Sequencing- A mode of message conveyance on an Electronic Message Sign that uses two or more successive frames to convey a message .

53)	Sign- The term "sign" shall mean to include every device, frame, letter, figure, character , mark, point , design, picture , logo, stroke, trademark , or reading matter , which is used or intended to be used to attract attention
/convey information when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public : in addition, any of the above which is not placed out of doors, but which is illuminated with artificial or reflected light, and attached or painted directly on the window or door of the building facade. An independent stripe is not a sign.

54)	Shopping Center Signs- A sign, which identifies a group of shops or offices.


55)	Sign Face - The surface of the sign including letters and background upon,
against or through which the message is displayed or illustrated .


56)	Sign Area - The entire area within  a continuous perimeter  enclosing the extreme limits of the sign message  and  background . However , such perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying outside of such sign and not forming an integral part  or border of the sign.

57)	Sign Structure - The supports, uprights, braces and framework of the sign.


58)	Suspended Signs-  A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane and is supported by such surface.
59)	Temporary Sign - A sign placed on a Zoned Lot or parcel of land without a permit for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days out of any twelve-
 
month  period .


59. 1) Transition- A visual effect used on an Electronic Message Sign to change one message to another.

59.2)  Travel- A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign where the message appears to move horizontally across the display surface.

60)	Useful Life of Sign - A period of time when the sign is kept in good repair ; with no fading or unreadable messages ; advertising products or services of the current business occupant , maintained in good strnctural and electrical order.

61)	Vehicle Sign - Signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way , unless said vehicle is used in the normal day to day operations of the business or owned and operated by a government agency .

62)	V-Type Sign - A freestanding sign with two sign faces that are angled from each other by more than 0 degrees and less than 90 degrees .

63)	Wall Sign - A sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building or strncture with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the wall.

64)	Zoned Lot-  A parcel of land under a single ownership that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage, and use, and that can provide such yards and other open space as required by these Zoning regulations



65-30	General Information


A)	Information - The information contained in this section is intended to be used as criteria in all other parts of this section of this Ordinance , however , there may be areas that need more detailed explanation . In those cases the information in those chapters or sections of the Zoning Regulations shall be used .

B)	Required - No person shall erect, repair , alter, relocate or maintain , a sign within the City of Red Wing except as provided in this Ordinance .

C)	Zoning Administrator - The Zoning Administrator is charged with the issuance of permits and enforcement of this section of the Zoning Regulations . His/her interpretation will be valid in areas of interpretation , vagueness , etc. Areas of conflict may be appealed following the process outlined in Section 90-120 of these Regulations .
 


65-40	General Sign Requirements. The following requirements shall apply to all signs


A)	Maintenance


I)	Unsafe and Unlawful Signs. If the Building Inspector shall find that any sign regulated herein is unsafe or loose, or has been constrncted or erected in violation of the safety or strnctural provisions of this Section, he/she shall give written notice to the permittee . If the permittee fails to remove or alter the strncture so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within thirty (30) days after such notice, such sign may be removed , or altered to comply by the Building Inspector at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property upon which it is located . If the Permittee or owner fails to pay the expense of removal , the cost may be assessed against the property to be paid with property taxes . No permit shall be issued to any applicant for a sign, which is an immediate peril to persons or property . Such sign shall be subject  to removal without notice .

2)  All signs must be maintained in a neat and clean condition, having no chipping or peeling paint , faded letters, or deteriorating backboards .

B)	Structure Requirements


I)	Wind Requirement.   All sign strnctures shall be designed and constrncted to withstand  a wind  pressure  of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot of area.

2)  Attachment to Buildings .   All signs attached to buildings shall be thoroughly and rigidly secured in a manner approved  by the Building Inspector.  Signs shall be repaired  and maintained  as necessary to keep them secure so that the public is safe and free of danger.

(C)	Safety


1)	Obstruction to Doors, Windows or Fire Escapes . No sign shall obstrnct access to fire escapes, or required  windows, doors, exits, or standpipes .

2) Signs Not to Constitute Traffic Hazard . No sign or other advertising strncture as regulated by this Ordinance shall be erected or continued to be displayed at the intersection of any street or public right-of-way in such a manner as to obstrnct free and clear vision : or at any location, by reason of position , shape, or color, interfere with, obstrnct the view, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device : or which makes use of the words, "STOP", "LOOK ', "DRIVE-IN ", "DANGER", or any other word , phase,
 
symbol or character in such a way as to interfere with, mislead , or confuse vehicle operators .

D)  Setbacks .  Setback requirements for all signs shall mean the setback distance as measured from the nearest edge of any portion of the sign including the base, strnctural supports, or sign face.



65-50	Computations and Area Calculations.  The following will be used in the computation for sign height and sign area.

A)	Sign Area  Calculations .  The following will be used  to calculate the gross surface display sign area.

I)	Ifthe sign is enclosed by a box or other outline, the box or outline will be the sign area.

2)	If a sign consists of individual letters, figures or the area is of an
irregular shape, the sign area shall be computed by enclosing the surface area within the place of a known geometric shape or shapes. Ifthe background is an integral part of the sign it shall be included in the sign area calculation .

3)	The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding the area of all sign faces.

B)	Computation of Maximum Total Permitted Sign Area for a Zoned Lot or Parcel. The permitted sum of the area of all individual signs, when regulated , shall be computed by applying the formulas as provided for in this Ordinance .

C)	Height. The following will be used to determine sign height.


I)	A sign height shall be measured from the highest point of the sign to the existing grade .



65-60	Placing Signs on Public and Private Property


A)	Placing Signs on Public Property.  No sign other than the signs approved by the City Engineer , or the Engineer 's Authorized representative , or in accordance with this Ordinance and following conditions shall be erected or maintained . The following requirements shall apply :

I)	The signs direct the reader to the location of a public facility, to a facility operated by a non-profit entity, to a facility relating to public health , safety or welfare, to scenic or historic sites and trails, or to general business or
 
industrial   districts .


2)	The signs are fabricated , erected and maintained by the entity requesting the sign.

3)	The cost of the sign is borne by the entity requesting the signs.


4)	The signs are installed at locations where they would not constitute a traffic hazard .

5)	If signs are located within the public road right-of-way they shall conform to the uniform traffic-control devices manual.

B)  Placing Signs on Private Property .   No sign shall be placed on any private property  without  consent  of the property  owner.



65-70	Sign Permits, Forms and Application Fees.


A)	Signs Permits.


I)	It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any sign that requires a sign permit according to this Ordinance without first securing a permit for such erection and for such maintenance , except as provides herein .

2)	Permits shall also be required  for all governmental agency (except traffic and safety) signs. All fees for such sign shall be waived . However, all other conditions and requirements of this Ordinance shall apply .

3)	Permits for the erection and maintenance of signs regulated by this Ordinance shall be issued for the useful life of the sign. Replacement signs or changes in the message or symbols/design shall require a new permit.

4)	Any sign for which a permit is issued shall be erected and in place within six
(6) months from the date of such permission , or the permit will become automatically void and a new permit shall be applied for pursuant to this Ordinance .

B)	Sign Permit Application Form.


I)	Application for a sign permit shall be made on Sign Permit Application form available from the Zoning Administrator and shall be submitted to the same, and provide the following information :
a)	Name, address, and telephone number of the applicants and owner;
 
b)	Name , address, and telephone number of firm or agency erecting,
maintaining or designing the sign if any;
c)	Location, zoning district, parcel number , and length of building frontage of lot where sign is to be attached or located ;
d)	Total number of existing sign(s), square feet of existing sign(s), number of new sign(s) proposed and square feet of proposed new sign(s);
e)	A scaled sketch showing the location and dimensions of the proposed sign(s);
f)	Type of illumination to be used if any;
g)	Any electrical permit required and issued for said sign;
h)	Authorization to file a sign application ; and
i)	Signature of applicant and date.


C)   Sign Application Fees


The City Council shall set the fee schedule for sign permits by Resolution . Said fee schedule shall be updated from time to time at the discretion of the City Council.
The Zoning Administrator shall provide applicants with information designating the amount of fees to be paid . All fees shall be payable to the City of Red Wing .

65-80	Sign Application Administration  and Enforcement.


A)	Administration


1)	Upon receiving a complete and signed application , (including appropriate fee) the Zoning Administrator shall have a period of ten days to either reject or approve the sign application subject to the provisions and regulations of this Ordinance .

2)	Ifthe application is approved , the Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant with a copy of the approved sign permit application .

3)	Ifthe signed application is denied , written reasons for said denial shall be supplied to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator.

4)	Upon notice of any application being rejected by the Zoning Administrator , the applicant shall have access to the appeal and/or variance procedure pursuant to and as defined in section 90-110 and 90-120 of the City of Red Wing Zoning Ordinance .

B)	Enforcement


Any person who either erects or has erected on his/her property any sign
 
governed by this Ordinance prior to a permit being issued , shall pay a fee, in addition to the sign permit fee, as adopted by resolution by the Council, which shall not constitute a penalty , but shall be deemed an additional administration fee.

C)	Non-Conforming Signs


1)	All existing signs that have sign permits as of March 1, 2003 , and all existing billboards that have sign permits as of January 1, 2007, shall be considered preexisting , conforming signs. In addition, a preexisting sign, including a billboard , that would require a sign permit as of the March 1, 2003 , but was not required to have a sign permit prior to that date, shall be considered a
conforming sign. These signs shall be permitted to remain until such time as the sign strncture needs to be replaced or relocated . At that time, the sign shall be brought into full conformance with this ordinance . This shall not prevent refacing of the sign, minor maintenance or repair , or keeping the sign painted and in neat and readable condition .

2)	All existing signs which do not require a sign permit under this Ordinance shall be brought into full conformance with this ordinance no later than September
1, 2003 .



65-090	Left blank purposely due to amendment.



65-100	Prohibited Signs.  The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts .


A)	Projecting signs on the public right-of-way or sidewalk, except as permitted in this Section.

B)	Flashing signs.


A)	Animated signs.


B)	Combination signs.


C)	Signs on Utility Poles . Signs placed on utility poles, light poles, telephone poles,
stop signs, traffic signs, etc. except for utility identification or similar purpose .


D)	Vehicle  Sign . Signs placed  or painted  on motor vehicles or trailers and parked  on private property with the primary purpose  of providing  signage shall be prohibited .

G)	Roof Signs
H)	Audible Signs.
 
I)		Sign Types Not Provided For Within Zoning Districts .	Whenever in any zoning district a sign type is neither specifically permitted  nor denied , the sign type shall be considered a prohibited  sign.

J)   Billboards.


65-110	Signs And Visual Displays Exempt from Regulation in All Zoning Districts. These signs shall be exempt from regulation in all zoning districts in this Ordinance .

A)	Any sign inside a building , not attached to a window or door.


B)	Works of art that do not include a commercial message .


C)	Holiday lights and decorations on residential zoned lots with no commercial message .

D)	Vending machines and the advertising on such machines .


E)	Official notices or signs by local, State, or federal regulations .


F)	Government signs, including but not limited to traffic control and regulatory purpose signs, street signs, information signs and railroad crossing signs.

G)	Official government flags and emblems, provided such signs shall not be placed in the public right-of-way .

H)	Home security signs, "no trespassing" signs "no parking" signs, provided such signage on a zoned lot shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area, and such signs shall not be placed or maintained in the public right-of-way and shall not be illuminated .

I)	Historic plaques placed by recognized historical agencies, provided such signs shall not be placed or maintained in the public right-of-way without permission from the City Council.

J)	Religious symbols attached to institutional and public buildings , provided such symbols shall not be placed or maintained in the public right-of-way .

K)	Murals .


L)	Address Signs.


M)	Outdoor advertising signs and temporary banners located on the grounds of publicly-owned athletic facilities at the Red Wing Athletic Field , A. P. Anderson
 
Park, the Red Wing High School, and Twin Bluff Middle School, and that meet the following criteria :
a.	The signs are intended to be seen specifically by users of the facility and are not directed  for off-site viewing .
b.	.   The signs are attached to a building , fence, scoreboard , or other existing strncture; no freestanding signs are allowed .
c.	Scoreboard advertising signage shall be limited to 30% of the actual scoreboard's square footage and shall not extend above the height of the actual scoreboard .
d .  Temporary banners shall not exceed 24 square feet in size and shall be limited to two (2) per playing field , court, or rink being used for an event.
e.	Temporary banners shall be installed and removed the day of the event.
f.		Signs on fences or freestanding walls shall fact home plate or the center of the playing field , court, or rink and shall not extend higher than the fence or wall for which it is attached and shall be removed during the normal off-season .
g.	No individual sign shall exceed 48 square feet in size.
h.	No sign, with the exception of scoreboard signs, shall be installed at a height exceeding 12 feet, measured from the grade immediately in front of the sign.
1.	The sign is approved by the property 's governing body and meets any applicable policies of such body .

65-120	Signs Allowed in All Zoning Districts Without A Sign Permit. These signs may be placed on public or private property without requiring a sign permit but they shall meet all applicable requirements and conditions of this Ordinance and all other City Ordinances .

A)	House identification signs, such as one containing the address and any building marker, having no more than four (4) square feet and attached to the referenced building .

B)  Temporary Personal message signs, such as the announcing of births, anniversaries, birthdays , not to exceed twelve (12) square feet. These signs shall only be displayed up to seven days during the event. Signs that are used to announce Grand Openings, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet, may be displayed up to 90 days during such events.

C)  Construction Signs typically indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar artisans, and/or owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the strncture or project , and rental, sale or lease information . Such signs shall have a display area not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet for R-1 and R-2 zoned areas and thirty-two (32) square feet for all other zoned areas. These signs shall be attached to a single or double post. All lettering and other markings shall be neat and legible . Before issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the builder/contractor shall be responsible for removing all such signs.
 

D) Directional/General/Public  Information Signs that meet all applicable state regulations and that are approved by the City Engineer.

E)	Finder Signs such as the ones used for garage sale and open house events. Such total signage shall be twelve (12) square feet or less, shall only be displayed for up to seven (7) days during such events, shall not be illuminated , and shall not be placed in the public right-of-way . Such signs shall meet all safety requirements in section 65-040 of this ordinance .

F)	Freestanding Park Signs that identify public park lands or activities available in the City of Red Wing .

G)	Parking/All Purpose Signs provided that they are six (6) square feet or less in area. Such signs on public right-of-way shall require approval by the City Engineer .

H) Church Signs on church property , provided that such signs do not exceed 32 square feet in area, are no higher than ten (10) feet above the ground , and set back a minimum often (10) feet from the right-of-way and five (5) feet from all other property lines. Church properties shall be allowed one (1) freestanding sign.
I)	Political Sign. In all zoning districts, political signs are permitted on private property prior to an election and up to seven days following an election . All signs shall be setback a distance from all property lines equal to the installed height of the sign.

J)	Monument Project Signs that as a mle identify residential subdivisions, a major real estate development , apartment complex, industrial , commercial or public project  and may provide additional information such as how the owner or management can be reached . Such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size if one sided and sixty-four (64) square feet in size if two sided .

K)	Real Estate Signs, provided that they are limited in number to one per zoned lot (except that two shall be permitted on corner lots, one facing each street), do not exceed twenty-four square feet in area, are not closer than eight feet to any adjoining lot, are not higher than six feet above the ground and do not project beyond the property line.

L)  Bulletin Board Sign, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet if one sided and sixty-four (64) square feet if two sided . Church properties are allowed one freestanding sign including bulletin board signs.



65-130	Signs allowed in the R-1 and R-2 Residential Zoned Districts.
 
A)	No  Permit  Required :


1)	All signs in Sections 65-110 and 65-120 of this ordinance .


2)	Home Occupation Signs are allowed for home occupations with a valid home occupation permit, provided that such signs are non-illuminated, not more than one in number for each residence , and do not exceed six (6) square feet in area, unless freestanding the sign may be up to twelve (12) square feet in total area. Ifthe sign is freestanding, it shall be set back a minimum often (10) feet from the right-of-way and five (5) feet from any other property line.

3)	Licensed Day Care Providers are allowed one sign either fixed flat to the surface of the building or free standing, not to exceed six (6) square feet in area, unless freestanding the sign may be up to twelve (12) square feet in total area. Ifthe sign is free standing it shall be set back a minimum often (10) feet from the right-of-way and five (5) feet from any other property line.

4)	Bed and Breakfast Uses - are allowed one sign either fixed flat to the surface of the building or free standing, not to exceed six (6) square feet in area, unless freestanding may be twelve (12) square feet in total area. Ifthe sign is free standing it shall be set back a minimum often (10) feet from the right-of-way and five (5) feet from any other property line.

65-140	Signs Allowed in RM-1 and RM-2 Residential Zoned District. The following signs shall be allowed in RM-I and RM-2 districts provided they meet all other applicable requirements and conditions in this Ordinance .

A)	No Permit Required:


1)	All signs and conditions in Sections 65-110, 65-120, and 65-130 of this Ordinance .

B)	Sign Permit Required :


I)   Awning and Canopy Signs not more than 64 square feet in total area.


2)   Building Signs over six (6) square feet in sign area but less than 64 square feet in area

65-150	Signs Allowed in A, AC and AR Agriculturally Zoned Districts . The following signs shall be allowed in A, AC and AR districts provided they meet all other applicable requirements and conditions in this Ordinance .

A)	No Permit Required :
 
1)	All signs and conditions in Sections 65-110, 65-120 and 65-130 of this Ordinance .

B)	Sign Permit  Required :


1)	Building Signs over six (6) square feet in sign area but no larger than 64 square feet in sign area.

2)   Freestanding  Sign - One freestanding  sign is allowed for projects that require a conditional use permit in the Agricultural zoning districts . Said signs shall be no larger than thirty-two  (32) square feet in size or if two sided  shall not exceed  sixty-four (64) square feet in size and  set back a minimum  often (10) feet from any property line.



65-160	Signs Allowed in Bl, B2a, B3, Civic, MC, and MCT Zoned Districts. The following signs shall be allowed in B 1, B2a, B3, Civic, MC and MCT districts provided they meet all other applicable requirements and conditions in this Ordinance .

A)	No  Permit  Required :


1)	All signs and conditions in Sections 65-110 and 65-120 of this Ordinance .


2)	No more than one Temporary sign, such as a banner or painted sign, is allowed per Zoned Lot or building , for a period of ninety (90) days out of any twelve month period . Each banner or painted sign with a different sign face is considered a different temporary sign and is allowed for a period of ninety (90) days out of any twelve month period . Such signs shall be no larger than 24 square feet in size and if free standing shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any property line. Temporary signs attached to the surface of a window shall be allowed , but shall not obscure more than eighty (80) percent of the total square footage of such window .

3)	No more than one (1) Portable Sign is allowed as a temporary sign placed on a lot or parcel of land for a period of ninety (90) days during any twelve-month period . Said sign shall be placed a minimum of ten feet from any property line. Said sign shall be no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet in size or if two sided , sixty-four (64) square feet in total size.

4)  Balloon Signs are allowed as a temporary sign placed on a lot or parcel of land for a period of up to ninety (90) days during any twelve-month period .

5) Building Signs that are six (6) square feet or smaller in size are allowed as a permanent sign provided that such signs attached to the surface of a window shall be allowed , but shall not obscure more than eighty (80) percent of the
 
total square footage of such window . Building Signs that are six (6) square feet or smaller in size shall not exceed a total of twenty-four (24) square feet in cumulative size.

B)	Permit Required:	Property  owners are allowed  a total of three  square feet of signage for every lineal foot of building frontage up to a total of 300 square feet.  Signs in this district are allowed and require a permit as follows :

1)	Building signs over six (6) square feet in sign area.


2)	Awning or Canopy Signs.


3)	Freestanding Monument Signs over six (6) square feet in sign area. There shall be no more than one such sign per building or zoned lot and said signs shall be setback a minimum often (10) feet from all property lines. These signs shall include Changeable Copy Signs/Reader Boards and Joint Identification Signs.

4)	Multi-faced  Signs.
5)	Painted Wall Signs.


6)	Projecting Signs providing that such signs are no larger than six (6) square feet per sign face and that there be no more than one projecting sign per storefront business with a street entrance except that malls shall be allowed
one projecting sign per major public entrance . There shall be no more than two projecting signs located within any 20 foot block frontage on the same side of the street. Projecting signs shall be placed at least eight (8) feet above the  grade .

7)	Menu Boards are allowed in addition to the one freestanding monument sign.


8)	Marquee Signs.


9)	Barber Poles.


10)	A-Frame/Swinger/Sandwich  Signs provided  they meet the following regulations :
a.	Such signs shall be no larger than twenty four (24) square feet in sign area per side.
b.	.	Such signs shall not be higher than six (6) feet or wider than four (4) feet.
c.	Such signs shall only be displayed  during business hours .
d . Such signs may be placed on private property or on the public sidewalk near the place of business but must provide at least sixty (60) inches of clearance on the sidewalk for pedestrian movement.
 
e.		Such signs shall be placed no closer than forty-eight (48) inches from the face of the public street curb .
f.	Only one such sign shall be allowed per Zoned Lot.



65-170	Signs Allowed in B2 Business Zoned Districts. The following signs shall be allowed in B2 Business districts provided they meet all other applicable requirements and conditions in this Ordinance .

A)	No Permit Required:


1)	All signs and conditions in sections 65-110 and 65-120 of this Ordinance .


2)	No more than two Temporary signs, such as a banner or painted sign, are allowed per Zoned Lot or building , for a period of ninety (90) days out of any twelve month period . Each banner or painted sign with a different sign face is considered a different temporary sign and is allowed for a period of ninety (90) days out of any twelve month period . Such signs shall be no larger than 24 square feet in size and if free standing shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any property line. Temporary signs attached to the surface of a window shall be allowed , but shall not obscure more than eighty (80) percent of the total square footage of such window .

3)	No more than one (1) Portable Sign is allowed as a temporary sign placed on a lot or parcel of land for a period of ninety (90) days during any twelve-month period . Said sign shall be placed a minimum of ten feet from any property line. Said sign shall be no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet in size or if two sided , sixty-four (64) square feet in total size.

4)  Balloon Signs are allowed as a temporary sign placed on a lot or parcel of land for a period of up to ninety (90) days during any twelve-month period .

5) Building Signs that are six (6) square feet or smaller in size are allowed as a permanent sign provided that such signs attached to the surface of a window shall be allowed , but shall not obscure more than eighty (80) percent of the
total square footage of such window . Building Signs that are six (6) square feet or smaller in size shall not exceed a total of twenty-four (24) square feet in cumulative size.

B)	Permit Required:	Property owners are allowed a total of three square feet of signage for every lineal foot of lot frontage up to 400 square feet. Businesses with lot frontage in excess of 500 feet shall be allowed a maximum of 500 square feet of total signage . Signs in this district are allowed and require a permit as follows :

1)	Building Signs over six (6) square feet in sign area.
 

2)	Awning or Canopy Signs.


3)	Freestanding Signs over six (6) square feet in sign area. One freestanding monument , pole or pylon sign shall be allowed for each building or zoned lot except that businesses with lot frontage on a public street in excess of 500 lineal feet shall be allowed up to two freestanding signs. These signs shall include Changeable Copy Signs/Reader Boards and Joint Identification Signs.

4)   Monument Sign (See Freestanding Signs above).


5)	Multi-faced  Signs.


6)	Painted Wall Signs.


7)	Projecting Signs.


8)	Menu Boards are allowed in addition to the one freestanding monument , pole or pylon sign.

9)	Marquee Signs.


10)	Pole or Pylon Signs. (See Freestanding Signs above).


11) Shopping Center Signs. Shopping Centers shall be allowed one freestanding sign for each road providing access to the shopping center or mall. The location and size of all shopping center signage including free standing signs and building signs shall require review by the Zoning Administrator. Freestanding shopping center signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all property lines.

12)	Barber  Poles .


13)	Electronic Message Sign. One Electronic Message Sign shall be allowed for each Zoned  Lot  subject to the following criteria :
a.	An Electronic Message Sign shall be allowed only as part of a freestanding Monument Sign.  An Electronic Message Sign shall not be allowed as a Building Sign or Pylon Sign.
b.	. An Electronic Message Sign may not be a stand alone freestanding Monument sign, but must be incorporated into the body of a freestanding Monument sign and may not exceed 40% of the total sign area of the freestanding Monument Sign that it is associated with or forty-five (45) square feet in size, or if two sided , ninety (90) square feet in total area, whichever is less.
 
c. An Electronic Message Sign shall not be allowed within 300 feet of a signalized highway intersection or within 300 feet of an intersection that is not currently signalized but is designated to be signalized according to the City's Comprehensive Plan .  In addition, no new electronic message sign shall be permitted to be closer to any other such advertising device on the same side of the street or highway facing traffic heading in the same direction than five hundred (500) feet.
d . An Electronic Message Sign must have a minimum frame display of four (4) seconds.  Such frames shall contain static messages and backgrounds only, changed only through dissolve or fade transitions , or with the use of other subtle transitions that do not have the appearance of moving text or images . Scrolling, traveling , or other similar special effects messages that have the appearance of movement or animation are prohibited .  Sequenced messages are prohibited .
e. The transition between static messages shall take a minimum of two (2) seconds to complete and a maximum of four (4) seconds to complete .
f. No Electronic Message Sign may be erected that, by reason of position , shape, movement or color, interferes with the proper functioning of a traffic sign or signal or which otherwise constitutes a traffic hazard .
g.	An Electronic Message Sign shall not cause direct glare nor become a distraction due to excessive brightness , as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Chief of Police .
h.	All new Electronic Message Signs shall have installed manual dimmer switches and ambient light monitors and shall at all times allow such monitors to automatically adjust the brightness level of the Electronic Message Sign based on ambient light conditions .
1.	Except as may otherwise be provided by provisions in this ordinance or State law governing nonconformities , all existing Electronic Message Signs, installed  or approved as of June 11, 2007, shall be exempt from these standards .

14)	A-Frame/Swinger/Sandwich  Signs provided they meet the following regulations :
a.	Such signs shall be no larger than twenty four (24) square feet in sign area per side.
b.	.	Such signs shall not be higher than six (6) feet or wider than four (4) feet.
c.	Such signs shall only be displayed  during business hours .
d . Such signs may be placed on private property or on the public sidewalk near the place of business but must provide at least sixty (60) inches of clearance on the sidewalk for pedestrian movement.
e.		Such signs shall be placed no closer than forty-eight (48) inches from the face of the public street curb.
f.	Only one such sign shall be allowed per zoned lot.
 
65-180	Signs Allowed in 1-1 and 1-2 Industrially Zoned Districts . The following signs shall be allowed in 1-1 and 1-2 Industrially Zoned Districts provided they meet all other applicable requirements and conditions in this Ordinance .

A)	No  Permit  Required :


1)	All signs and conditions in Sections 65-110 and 65-120 of this Ordinance .


2)	No more than one (1) Portable Sign is allowed as a temporary sign placed on a lot or parcel of land for a period of ninety (90) days during any twelve-month period . Said sign shall be placed a minimum of ten feet from any property line. Said sign shall be no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet in size or if two sided , sixty-four (64) square feet in total size.

3)	Balloon Signs are allowed as a temporary sign placed on a lot or parcel of land for a period of ninety (90) days during any twelve-month period .

4)	No more than two Temporary Signs, such as a banner or painted sign, is allowed per zoned lot or building , for a period of ninety (90) days out of any twelve-month period . Each banner or painted sign with a different sign face is considered a different temporary sign and is allowed for a period of ninety (90) days out of any twelve-month period . Such signs shall be no larger than 24 square feet in size and if free standing shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any property line. Temporary signs attached to the surface of a window shall be allowed , but shall not obscure more than eighty (80) percent of the total square footage of such window .

5)	One Industrial Park Sign is allowed for each industrial park area of the City.
Such signs shall be no larger than sixty-four (64) square feet in size or one hundred and twenty eight (128) square feet in size if two sided . Such signs shall be set back a distance often (10) feet from all property lines.

6)	Building Signs that are six (6) square feet or smaller in size are allowed as a permanent sign provided that such signs attached to the surface of a window shall be allowed , but shall not obscure more than eighty (80) percent of the
total square footage of such window . Building Signs that are six (6) square feet or smaller in size shall not exceed a total of twenty-four (24) square feet in cumulative size.

B)	Permit Required : Property owners are allowed  a total of two square feet of signage for every lineal foot of lot frontage up to 500 square feet, except that billboards  shall not be included in the total maximum signage allowed .
1)	Building Signs over six (6) square feet in sign area.


2)	Awning or Canopy Signs.
 

3)	Beacons


4)	Freestanding Signs over six (6) square feet in sign area. Property owners shall be allowed one freestanding monument, pole or pylon sign for each road providing  access to the property. Such signs shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet from any property line.

5)	Monument Signs. (See Freestanding Signs above).


6)	Multi-faced  Signs.


7)	Painted Wall Signs.


8)	Pole or Pylon Signs. (See Freestanding Signs above).


9)	A-Frame/Swinger/Sandwich  Signs provided they meet the following regulations:
a.	Such signs shall be no larger than twenty-four (24) square feet in sign area per side.
b.	Such signs shall not be higher than six (6) feet or wider than four (4) feet.
c.	Such signs shall only be displayed during business hours.
d.	Such signs may be placed on private property or on the public sidewalk near the place of business but must provide at least sixty (60) inches of clearance on the sidewalk for pedestrian movement.
e.	Such signs shall be placed no closer than forty-eight (48) inches from the face of the public street curb.
f.	Only one such sign shall be allowed per zoned lot.


10)	Electronic Message Sign.  One Electronic Message Sign shall be allowed for each I-1 Light Industrial Zoned Lot subject to the following criteria:
a)	An Electronic Message Sign shall be allowed only as part of a freestanding Monument Sign.  An Electronic Message Sign shall not be allowed as a Building Sign or Pylon Sign.
b)	An Electronic Message Sign may not be a stand alone freestanding Monument sign, but must be incorporated into the body of a freestanding Monument sign and may not exceed 40% of the total sign area of the freestanding Monument Sign that it is associated with or forty-five (45) square feet in size, or if two sided, ninety (90) square feet in total area, whichever is less.
c)	An Electronic Message Sign shall not be allowed within 300 feet of a signalized highway intersection or within 300 feet of an intersection that is not currently signalized but is designated to be signalized according to the City's Comprehensive Plan.  In addition, no new Electronic Message Sign shall be permitted to be closer to any other such advertising device on the
 
same side of the street or highway facing traffic heading in the same direction than five hundred (500) feet.
d)	An Electronic Message Sign must have a minimum frame display of four
(4) seconds.  Such frames shall contain static messages and backgrounds only, changed only through dissolve or fade transitions, or with the use of other subtle transitions that do not have the appearance of moving text or images. Scrolling, traveling, or other similar special effects messages that have the appearance of movement or animation are prohibited.  Sequenced messages are prohibited.
e)	The transition between static messages shall take a minimum of two seconds to complete and a maximum of four seconds to complete.
f)	No Electronic Message Sign may be erected that, by reason of position, shape, movement or color, interferes with the proper functioning of a traffic sign or signal or which otherwise constitutes a traffic hazard.
g)	An Electronic Message Sign shall not cause direct glare nor become a distraction due to excessive brightness as determined by the Zoning Administrator or Chief of Police.
h)	All new Electronic Message Signs shall have installed manual dimmer switches and ambient light monitors and shall at all times allow such monitors to automatically adjust the brightness level of the Electronic Message Sign based on ambient light conditions.
i)	Except as may otherwise be provided by provisions in this Section or State law governing nonconformities, all existing Electronic Message Signs installed or approved as of June 11, 2007 shall be exempt from these standards.
 
Sign Chart.




Sign Permit Chart	
SP  Sign Permit Required
	N	Not Allowed
	p	Permitted Use (Without a Permit)
	



Sign Type	Zoning Districts
	R-1 & R-2	RM-1 & RM-2	A , AC , & AR	B-1, B-2a,
B-3, Civic, MC, & MCT	B-2	1-1 & 1-2
						

"A" Frame, Swinger , or Sandwich Signs	
N	
N	
N	
SP	
SP	
SP

Animated Signs	
N	
N	
N	
N	
N	
N

Area  Identification Sign (See Project Sign)	p	p	p	p	p	p

Audible Sign	N	N	N	N	N	N

Awning Sign or Canopy Sign	N	p	N	SP	SP	SP

Balloon Signs	N	N	N	p	p	p

Banner	N	N	N	p	p	p

Barber Pole	N	N	N	SP	SP	N

Beacon	N	N	N	N	N	SP

Bed & Breakfast Sign	p	p	p	N	N	N

Billboard	N	N	N	N	N	N

Building Marker	p	p	p	p	p	p

Building Sign (Over 6 SF)	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

Building Sign 6 SF or smaller	N	N	N	p	p	p

Bulletin Board	p	p	p	p	p	p

Changeable Copy Sign/Reader  Board	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP

Church Sign	p	p	p	p	p	p
						

Construction Sign/Project Sign	p	p	p	p	p	p

Directional/General/Public Information	p	p	p	p	p	p

Displays, Storefront	p	p	p	p	p	p

Electronic Message Sign	N	N	N	N	SP	N

Finder Signs	p	p	p	p	p	p
 









Sign Type	




R-1 & R-2	




RM-1 & RM-2	




A , AC , & AR	




B-1, B-2a,
B-3,  Civic , MC, & MCT	




B-2	




1-1 & 1-2

Flags	
p	
p	
p	
p	
p	
p

Flashing Signs	
N	
N	
N	
N	
N	
N

Home Occupation Sign	p	p	p	N	N	N

Industrial Park Sign	
N	
N	
N	
N	
N	p

Joint Identification Sign	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP

Licensed Day Care Sign	p	p	p	p	p	p

Marquee Sign	N	N	N	SP	SP	N

Menu Board Sign	N	N	N	SP	SP	N

Mobile/Portable Sign	N	N	N	p	p	p

Monument Sign	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP

Multi-Faced Sign	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP

Painted Wall Sign	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP

Park Sign	p	p	p	p	p	p

Parking and All-Purpose Sign	p	p	p	p	p	p

Pole or Pylon Sign under 25 ft. high	N	N	N	N	SP	SP

Political Sign	p	p	p	p	p	p

Portable/Mobile Sign	N	N	N	p	p	p

Project Sign	p	p	p	p	p	p

Projecting Sign	N	N	N	p	p	N

Real Estate Signs	p	p	p	p	p	p

Roof Sign	N	N	N	N	N	N

Shopping Center Signs	N	N	N	SP	SP	N

Temporary  Personal Message Sign	p	p	p	p	p	p

Temporary Sign	N	N	N	p	p	p

Vehicle Sign	N	N	N	N	N	N
 
ARTICLE IV - REGULATIONS APPLYING TO ALL DISTRICTS DIVISION 70:  NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
70-0 I 0 Applicability and Intent.  Any use ofland or structures, or any lot or structure which
existed at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Chapter which would not be permitted or permissible by the provisions of this Chapter as adopted or amended, shall be deemed non-conforming. It is the intent of this Chapter to permit such nonconformities to continue, subject to certain restrictions.  Private or public property which was conforming at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Chapter which is subdivided as part of a public taking for a project benefitting the public good or welfare and which results in a lot or structure that would not normally be dimensionally permitted or permissible by the provisions of this Chapter as adopted or amended, shall be deemed conforming.

70-20	Nonconforming Uses of Land (Or Land With Accessory Structures Only).  Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Chapter, a use ofland exists which would not be permitted or permissible in the district in which it is located, or where such use involves an accessory structure or structures, such use may be continued subject to the following restrictions:

A)	Such use shall not be enlarged, increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of the lot than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Chapter.

B)	Such use shall not be moved in whole or part to any other portion of the lot other than the portion occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Chapter.

C)	When such use is discontinued for a period of more than one year for any reason whatsoever, or when such use is replaced by a permitted or permissible use, a nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed. For the purposes of this section, a use shall be considered replaced by a permitted or permissible use when an existing nonconforming use has been terminated and the permissible use has commenced and continued for a period of one month or more.

D)	No additional structure in connection with such use shall be erected.


70-30	Nonconforming Uses of Structures.  Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Chapter, the use of a principal structure(s) exists which would not be permitted or permissible in the district in which it is located, such use may be continued subject to the following restrictions:

A)	No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted or permissible shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in
 
changing the use of the structure to a use permitted or permissible in the district in which it is located.

B)	Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Chapter. Any nonconforming use, which occupied a portion of a building not originally designed or intended for such use, shall not be extended to any other part of the building. No nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy any land outside the building, nor any other building not used for such nonconforming
use.

C)	There may be a change in tenancy, ownership, or management of a nonconforming
use provided there is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming use.


D)	When such use of a structure is discontinued for a period of more than 12 consecutive months for any reason whatsoever, or when such use is replaced by a permitted or permissible use, a nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed.

E)	If a structure occupied by a nonconforming use is removed or destroyed or damaged to an extent of more than 50 percent of its estimated market value, as indicated in the records of the county assessor at the time of damage, the nonconforming use shall not be resumed, except as described in Section 70-050 below.

70-40	Preservation of Nonconforming Uses.  Except as hereinafter provided in this Section, the lawful use of land or the lawful use of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this Chapter or on the effective date of any amendment thereto may be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions of this Chapter; provided,  however:

A)	Any future use of such land, building, or structure shall conform to the provisions of this Chapter.

B)	Any such use may be extended throughout the building, but no structural alterations, except those required by law, shall be made therein.

C)	Preexisting uses, which under this Chapter would require a conditional use permit, shall automatically be considered an approved conditional use on the effective date of this Chapter or any amendment thereto.  Future alterations, enlargements, or intensifications of such use shall require a public hearing and amendment of the conditional use permit.

70-50	Preservation of Nonconforming Buildings or Structures.
A)	Nonconforming buildings or structures lawfully existing on the effective date of this Chapter or any amendment thereto may be repaired, replaced, restored, maintained,
 
or improved, but not expanded although such building or structures do not conform to the dimensional standards of this Chapter.

B)	Any building or structure, which is considered nonconforming only because it cannot meet the setback requirements of the zoning district, may be expanded provided such expansion shall not increase any existing substandard dimensions.

C)	If a nonconforming building or structure is destroyed or damaged by fire or other peril to the extent of 50 percent or less of its estimated market value, as indicated in the records  of the county assessor at the time of damage, it may be reconstructed
provided reconstruction shall substantially reflect the prior structural arrangement and shall not increase the degree of nonconformity. If such structure is destroyed or damaged to the extent of more than 50 percent of its estimated market value as indicated in the records of the county assessor at the time of damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of the district in which it is located, unless a building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property is damaged. In this instance, the structure may be repaired or reconstructed, provided that the repairs or reconstruction begin and are diligently pursued to completion within one year of the date of such damage and the reconstruction shall substantially reflect the prior structural arrangement and not increase the degree of nonconformity.

D)	When a nonconforming structure in the shoreland district as provided for in Division 50 of this Chapter with less than 50 percent of the required setback from the water is destroyed by fire or other peril to greater than 50 percent of its estimated market value, as indicated in the records of the county assessor at the time of damage, the structure setback may be increased if practicable and reasonable conditions are placed upon a zoning or building permit to mitigate created impacts on the adjacent property or water body.

70-060  Nonconforming Characteristic of Use.  If characteristics of use such as lighting,  parking, noise or other matters pertaining to the use of land, structures and premises are made nonconforming by the provisions of this Chapter as adopted or amended, no change shall thereafter be made in such characteristics of use which increases the nonconformity; provided, however, that changes may be made which do not increase, or which decrease, such nonconformity.

70-70	Nonconforming Lots of Record. An existing vacant lot having less than the minimum frontage, depth, or area required by the provisions of this Chapter may be developed for all uses in the appropriate zone, provided:

A)	All other provisions of this Chapter are satisfied.
 
B)	Such lots are serviced by public water supply and public sanitary sewer disposal facilities or alternatively meet the requirements of the authority having jurisdiction for private sewerage disposal.

C)	Such lots have a minimum lot frontage of 25 feet on a road or street; frontage on an alley does not constitute frontage on a road or street.

70-080  Unlawful Uses, Buildings, or Structures.  No unlawful use of property existing on the effective date of this Chapter or any amendment thereto nor any building or structure which unlawfully exists on such date shall be deemed a nonconforming use or a nonconforming building or structure.

70-090  Permit Holders and Permit Applicants.  Any nonconforming structure that is ready for or under construction on the effective date of this Chapter or any amendment thereto may be completed and occupied in accordance with the requirements of any valid building permit issued therefor prior to such effective date.

70-100	Change From One Nonconforming Use to Another.


A)	A nonconforming use may be changed to a use permitted in the district in which it is located; except that if no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more restrictive classification, and provided such change is approved by the Board of Adjustments as hereinafter provided.  Once changed to a conforming use, no building or land shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use.

B)	Change of use with approval of the Board of Adjustments: A nonconforming use all  or partially conducted in a building or buildings may be changed to another nonconforming use only upon determination by the Board of Adjustments, after a public hearing, that the proposed new use will be no more detrimental to its neighborhood and surroundings than is the use it is to replace.  In determining relative "detriment", the Board of Adjustments shall take into consideration, among other things: traffic generated; nuisance characteristics such as emission of noise, dust, and smoke; fire hazards; and hours and manner of operation.
 
ARTICLE  V -ADMINISTRATION  AND ENFORCEMENT DIVISION 75:  GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE  PROVISIONS
75-010  Purpose.  This Division is established to set forth the procedures required for the
administration of this Chapter, to outline the powers and duties of the officials and bodies charged with such administration, to establish standards for required zoning approvals, and to provide for its enforcement in a manner which adds to the quality of land use and development and protects the public health, safety and welfare.

75-020  Concurrent Review.  In order to provide for the efficient administration of this Chapter, whenever a project or proposal requires more than one land use review, including but not limited to a conditional use permit, zoning amendment, expansion or change of a nonconforming use, variance, subdivision, or vacation of public right-of-way, all applications shall be processed concurrently.

75-030  Period of Decision.  No decision of the Zoning Administrator, Advisory Planning Commission, Board of Adjustments, or City Council, except zoning amendments, shall be valid for a period longer than one year from the date of such decision unless a required building permit is obtained within such period and the permitted activity is substantially begun and proceeds on a continuous basis toward completion, or the use is established within such period by actual operation pursuant to the applicable conditions and requirements of such approval. The Zoning Administrator, upon written request, may for good cause shown grant up to a one year extension to this time limit.

75-040  Plan Consistency.  The City shall withhold any building permit, demolition permit, grading permit, utility connection, license or other approval required for a use if the proposed plan is inconsistent with the final plan approved by the Zoning Administrator, Advisory Planning Commission, Board of Adjustments, or City Council.

75-050 Pending Applications. No new applications for zoning approval for the same project or proposal shall be submitted or accepted until all previous applications for such project or proposals have been fully acted upon or withdrawn.

75-060  Substantially Similar Uses.  Whenever an application contains a use not included in this Chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a statement of clarification finding that the use either is substantially similar in character and impact to a use regulated in this Chapter or that the use is not sufficiently similar to any other use regulated in this oChapter. Such statement of clarification shall include the findings that led to such conclusion and shall be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator. If said use is not sufficiently similar to any other use regulated in this Chapter, the use shall be prohibited.
 
ARTICLE V -ADMINISTRATION  AND ENFORCEMENT DIVISION 80: DUTIES AND DECISION MAKING BODIES AND OFFICIALS
80-10	Zoning Administrator.


A)	Establishment.  There is hereby created the office of the Zoning Administrator. The City Council Administrator shall appoint an individual to act in the capacity of Zoning Administrator for the City of Red Wing.

B)	Jurisdiction and Authority.  The Zoning Administrator (and the Zoning Administrator's designee) shall have the following powers and duties in connection with the administration of this Chapter:

I)	To interpret the provisions of this Chapter and maintain records of such interpretations.

2)	To issue certificates of compliance permits, sign permits, grading permits, certificates of design review, and maintain records of such permits.

3)	To maintain permanent and current records of this Chapter, including but not limited to all maps, amendments, conditional use permits, variances, appeals, site plan reviews, and expansions or changes of nonconforming use.

4)	To provide information relative to all matters arising out of this Chapter.


5)	To receive, review, file, and forward all complete land use applications to their respective review bodies, as herein provided.

6)	To review and make recommendations concerning conditional use permits, interim uses, variance requests, and zoning amendments.

7)	To coordinate the review of other agencies and departments related to applications and proposed land use development projects.

8)	To enforce this Chapter by commencement of appropriate administrative and legal remedies but not limited to issuance of citation or written orders, or reference to the city attorney for issuance of a formal complaint.

9)	To provide staff support to the Red Wing Advisory Planning Commission and Board of Adjustments.

I 0) To establish and administer rules and regulations relating to the administration of this Chapter, including application forms.
 
11) To take such other actions as reasonable and necessary for the administration and enforcement of this Chapter.

80-20	Building Inspection.


A)	Establishment.  The City of Red Wing shall create a Building Inspection service that is responsible to perform the building official duties as required in the administration and enforcement of the City's Building and Housing Codes.

B)	Building Inspection shall coordinate with the Zoning Administrator as to the administration and enforcement of this Chapter. In particular, Building Inspection shall have the following powers and duties in connection with the administration of this Chapter:

1)	Make inspections, file reports, and enforce the provisions of this Chapter to insure compliance on site.

2)	To refer questions of compliance with this Chapter to the Zoning Administrator prior to issuance of any building permit.

3)	To issue certificates of occupancy for any project involving a zoning permit after determining that all requirements of this Chapter have been met and that all conditions of approval of a zoning permit have been met.

80-30	City Planning Commission.


A)	Establishment.  The Advisory Planning Commission is established by Chapter 2 of the Red Wing City Code, and shall perform the duties and exercise its powers as provided therein.

B)	Jurisdiction and Authority. The Advisory Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties in connection with the administration of this Chapter:

1)	To initiate amendments to the text of this Chapter and to the zoning map.


2)	To hear and make recommendations to the City Council on proposed amendments to this Chapter, including amendments to the zoning map.
3)	To initiate amendments to the comprehensive plan.


4)	To hear and make recommendations to the City Council on proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan.

5)	To hear and make recommendations to the City Council on proposed conditional use permits.
 
6)	To hear and make recommendations to the Board of Adjustments on zoning appeals and variance requests.

7)	To hear and make recommendations to the City Council on proposed interim uses.

8)	To make recommendations to the City Council concerning projects that require environmental assessments and whether environmental impact statements should be required.

C)	Public Hearings.  The Advisory Planning Commission shall schedule public hearings at least once per month, if necessary, and may schedule additional public hearings as required. Such public hearings shall be noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Section 85-020 of this Chapter.

D)	Rules and Procedures.  The Advisory Planning Commission shall adopt policies and procedures for the conduct of its meetings, the processing of applications, and for any other purposes considered necessary for its proper functioning, and select or appoint officers as it deems necessary.  Such policies and procedures shall be consistent with the Minnesota State Statutes, City Charter, the City Code, and this Chapter.

80-40	Board of Adjustments.


A)	Establishment.  There is hereby established a Board of Adjustments, which shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided by law in such way as the objectives of this Chapter shall be observed.

B)	Jurisdiction and Authority.  The Board of Adjustments shall have the following powers and duties in connection with the administration of this Chapter:

1)	To hear and decide applications for variances from the provisions of this Chapter pursuant to the provisions and standards set forth in Section 90-110.

2)	To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, determination, or interpretation made by the Zoning Administrator or other official in the administration or the enforcement of this Chapter.

C)	Finality of Decisions.  All decisions and findings of the Board of Adjustments shall be final.

D)	Membership. The Board of Adjustments shall consist of the members of the City Council. The officers of the Board of Adjustments shall be the same as the officers for the City Council.
 
E)	Public Hearings.  The Advisory Planning Commission shall schedule public hearings for variance requests and zoning appeals at least once per month, if necessary, and may schedule additional public hearings as required.  Such public hearings shall be noticed and conducted pursuant to the provisions of Section 85-020 of this Chapter. The Board of Adjustments shall schedule meetings to review and act on the recommendations of the city planning commission at least once per month, if necessary, and may schedule additional meetings as required.

F)	Rules and Procedures.  The Board of Adjustments shall adopt the same policies and procedures for the conduct of its meetings as those adopted by the City Council.

80-50	City Council.  The City Council shall have the following powers and duties in connection with the administration of this Chapter:

A)	To initiate amendments to this Chapter.


B)	To adopt amendments of this Chapter.


C)	To deny an application to amend this Chapter.


D)	To initiate or adopt and amend a comprehensive plan for the city or a portion thereof.


E)	To deny an application to amend the comprehensive plan or a portion thereof.


F)	To act as the Board of Adjustments and decide zoning appeals and variances.


G)	To adopt or amend interim ordinances.


H.  To deny an application to adopt or amend an interim ordinance.


I)	To approve or deny interim uses.


J)	To approve or deny conditional use permits.


K)	To decide on the need for Environmental Impact Statements or other actions related to projects that require an environmental assessment.

L)	To take such other actions not delegated to other bodies that may be desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of this Chapter.
 
ARTICLE V -ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT DIVISION 85: GENERAL APPLICATION PROCEDURES
85-10	Application Procedures.


A)	In General.  All applications submitted shall be processed by the Zoning Administrator who shall make a preliminary investigation in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Division.

B)	Determination of Completeness.  The Zoning Administrator shall review all applications and determine whether such applications are complete.  Applications shall not be accepted complete until the applicant has complied with all of the following:

1)	A pre-application meeting with city staff during which the appropriate application procedures, requirements and applicable Zoning Code provisions are reviewed and explained.

2)	Submittal of all required application forms relating to the application, including all additional applications for concurrent review as outlined in Section 75-020.

3)	Submittal of all supporting information required by the Chapter and application form.  At a minimum, the supporting information shall consist of that submission material required for the specific zoning permit as provided for in this Chapter.

4)	Submittal of all fees.


5)	Submission of all required environmental reviews pursuant to Minnesota Statutes and Rules.

C)	Incomplete Applications. If, after the application has been received, the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is not complete, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing within 15 business days of receipt, specifying any deficiencies of the application, including any additional information which must be supplied, and that no further action shall be taken by the city on the application until the deficiencies are corrected.

D)	Remedy of Deficiencies.  If the applicant fails to correct the specific deficiencies within 30 days of the notification of deficiency, the application shall be deemed withdrawn and will be returned to the applicant, including all application fees.

E)	Extension of Time.  Upon written request by the applicant, the Zoning Administrator may, for good cause shown and without any notice or hearing, grant extensions of any time limit imposed on an applicant by these application procedures.
 

F)	Re-Application.  No application for a conditional use permit, interim use, variance, zoning appeal, and zoning amendment shall be resubmitted for a period of 12 months from the date of the denial of a previous application.

85-20	Public Hearings.


A)	Notice.


I)	Land Use Applications. For all land use applications that require a public hearing as set forth in this Chapter, notice of the public hearing shall be given in the following manner.  The failure to give mailed notice to individual property owners, or defects in the notice, shall not invalidate the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with this Section has been made.

a)	Newspaper of General Circulation. The Zoning Administrator shall publish notice of the time and purpose of the public hearing at least once, not less
than I 0 calendar days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation.

b)  Affected Property Owners. The Zoning Administrator shall mail notice, not less than I 0 calendar days prior to the hearing, to all owners of record of property located in whole or in part within 500 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, as identified by the appropriate records.

2)	Zoning Text Amendments.  For all applications for zoning text amendments, including those initiated by the City Council or Advisory Planning Commission as set forth in this Chapter, except interim ordinances, notice of the public hearing shall be given in the following manner:

a)	Newspaper of General Circulation. The Zoning Administrator shall publish notice of the time and purpose of the public hearing at least once, not less
than I 0 calendar days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation.

b)  Property Owners.  Notice to property owners shall not be required.


B)	Procedures.  All hearings conducted shall be open to the public.  Any person may appear and provide written or verbal comment at a hearing, either in person or by duly appointed agent or attorney.  Upon conclusion of the hearing, the review body shall announce its decision or recommendation or shall lay the matter over to a subsequent meeting.  The review body shall keep minutes of its public hearings, and shall also keep records of its official actions.  Decisions of the review body shall be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator or in the office of the city clerk.
 
85-30	Fees.


A)	Established.  In recognition of the cost of services performed and work and materials furnished, persons who desire to avail themselves of the privileges granted them
under this Chapter shall pay certain fees depending on the type of permit required and the administrative services associated with the permit.

B)	Fee Ordinance.  The City Council shall set the fee schedule for all permits associated with this Chapter by ordinance.  Said fee schedule shall be updated from time to time at the discretion of the City Council.

C)	Forms and Payment of Fees.  The Zoning Administrator shall provide applicants with forms and other information designating the amount of fees to be paid.  All fees shall be payable to the City of Red Wing.
 
ARTICLE  V -ADMINISTRATION  AND ENFORCEMENT DIVISION 90:  PERMITS, AMENDMENTS, APPEALS, AND VARIANCES
90-10	Building Permits and the Building Code.


A)	No improvement or structural alteration to any land, building, or structures shall be made without first obtaining a building permit as required by Chapter 4 of the City Code.  Any necessary building permits are required in addition to any zoning permit required by this Chapter.

B)	No site preparation work, including rough grading, driveway construction, footing excavation, intensive vegetative clearing, or other physical changes to the site shall occur prior to issuance of a building permit and any other required zoning permit as established by this Chapter.

C)	No building permit shall be issued for any improvement, which would result in a use, building, or structure in violation of this Chapter, or any other City Code provisions.

D)	Building inspections shall refer any project to the Zoning Administrator to determine if a building permit application also requires any zoning permit and to clarify any questions concerning any regulation or requirement of this Chapter prior to issuance of a building permit.

90-20	Certificate of Occupancy.


A)	No building or structure or parts thereof, erected after the effective date of this Chapter, shall be occupied or used unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such building or structure.

B)	A certificate of occupancy shall be approved only when the use and the new or altered structure are in compliance with this Chapter and the Building Code.

C)	Building inspections shall be responsible for issuance of the certificate of occupancy.


D)	Pending the issuance of said certificate of occupancy, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued, subject to the Building Code, by Building Inspections at Building Inspections' discretion, for a period not to exceed 12 months during the completion of the erection or the alteration of a building.  The temporary certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights, duties, or obligations or any other matter except under such restrictions and provisions as will adequately insure the safety of the occupants.

E)	Building inspections shall keep records of all certificates of occupancy.
 
90-30	Certificate of Compliance.


A)	Purpose of Certificates of Compliance.  A certificate of compliance permit (CC) is a zoning permit that is intended as a means of administratively reviewing uses and activities which, because of their unique characteristics or because of special zoning requirements, cannot be permitted as a right in a particular zoning district, but can be permitted upon meeting specific requirements of this Chapter.

B)	Initiation of a Certificate of Compliance.  Any person having a legal or equitable interest in land may file an application to use such land for the use that requires a certificate of compliance permit.  Uses and activities that require a certificate of compliance permit are provided for in the district regulations for the underlying
zoning district in which the property is located and in other provisions and regulations of this Chapter.

C)	Submission Requirements.  Certificate of compliance permit applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on such form and accompanied by such information as required by the Zoning Administrator, as specified in Section 85-010. In addition, the Zoning Administrator may require some or all of the following specific submission information:

I)	Site plan drawn to scale showing parcel and building dimensions.


2)	Location of all buildings and their size, including square footage.


3)	Curb cuts, driveways, access roads, parking spaces, off-street loading areas, and sidewalks.

4)	Landscape plans meeting the requirements of this Chapter.


5)	Grading and Erosion Control Plans meeting the requirements of this Chapter and the requirements listed in Section 90-060.

6)	When required a Stormwater Management plan meeting the requirements of this Chapter and Section 90-070 of this Chapter.

7)	Type or types of business or activity and proposed number of employees.


8)	Proposed floor plan of any building with use indicated.


9)	Building elevation drawings of any new construction or building renovation proposed.
 
10)	The Zoning Administrator may require that the applicant supply proof of ownership of the property for which the certificate of compliance permit is requested.

11) Any other submission material required for the certificate of compliance as provided for in this Chapter.

D) Action by the Zoning Administrator.   The Zoning Administrator shall issue or deny the application for a certificate of compliance after all information has been submitted. The Zoning Administrator may issue the certificate of compliance permit and apply such conditions that are deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and such conditions may include a time limit for the use to exist or operate, or the Zoning Administrator may deny the issuance of a certificate of compliance permit.

E)	No Action.  Ifno action on the application for a certificate of compliance permit is taken within 10 days of the receipt of a complete application, the application shall be considered denied.

F)	Appeal. If the request for a certificate of compliance permit is denied or if conditions are imposed, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Board of Adjustments. The procedure for an appeal is provided for in Section 90-120.

G)	Discontinuance of Certificate of Compliance Permit.  Where a certificate of compliance use has been established and is discontinued for any reason, for a period of 12 months or longer, the certificate of compliance permit shall become null and void.

90-40	Conditional Use Permit.


A)	Purpose of Conditional Use Permits.  A conditional use permit (C.U.P.) is a zoning permit that is intended as a means of reviewing uses or activities which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be permitted as a right in a particular zoning district, but can be permitted upon showing that such use or activity in a specific location meets the standards specified in this Chapter.

B)	Initiation of a Conditional Use Permit.  Any person having a legal or equitable interest in land may file an application to use such land for the conditional uses or activities provided for in the district regulations for the underlying zoning district in which the property is located and in other provisions and regulations of this Chapter.

C)	Submission Requirements.  Conditional use permit applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on such form and accompanied by such information as required by the Zoning Administrator, as specified in Section 85-010 and with the following specific submission information:
 
1)	Site plan drawn to scale showing parcel and building dimensions.


2)	Location of all buildings and their size, including square footage.


3)	Curb cuts, driveways, access roads, parking spaces, off-street loading areas, and sidewalks.

4)	Landscape plans meeting the requirements of this Chapter.


5)	Grading and erosion control plans meeting the requirements of this Chapter and the requirements listed in Section 90-060.

6)	When required, a stormwater management plan meeting the requirements of this Chapter and Section 90-070.

7)	Type or types of business or activity and proposed number of employees.


8)	Proposed floor plan of any building with use indicated.


9)	Building elevation drawings of any new construction or building renovation proposed.

10)	The Zoning Administrator may require that the applicant supply proof of ownership of the property for which the conditional use permit is requested.

11) The Zoning Administrator may require traffic generation information to determine the adequacy of existing transportation infrastructure.

D) Hearing on Application for Conditional Use Permit.  The Advisory Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on each complete application for a conditional use permit as provided in Section 85-020 of this Chapter.  After the close of the hearing on a proposed conditional use permit, the Advisory Planning Commission  shall consider findings and shall submit the same together with its recommendation to the City Council.

E)	Required Findings for Conditional Use Permits.  The Advisory Planning Commission shall consider the following before making its recommendation to the City Council:

1)	The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare.

2)	The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the vicinity and will not impede the normal and orderly development
 
and improvement or surrounding property for uses permitted in the district, or substantially diminish property values.

3)	Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, or other necessary facilities have been or will be provided.

4)	Adequate measures have been or will be taken to minimize traffic congestion in public streets.

5)	The conditional use permit is consistent with the applicable policies of the Comprehensive Plan.

6)	The conditional use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations or the district in which it is located.

F)	Council Action.  The City Council shall consider the report of the Advisory Planning Commission and any other information provided.  The City Council shall make findings of fact before granting the conditional use permit based on the findings listed above.  The City Council may impose such conditions on any proposed conditional use permit and require such guarantees as it deems reasonable and necessary to protect the public interest and to ensure compliance with the standards and purposes of this Chapter and policies of the Comprehensive Plan.

G)	Discontinuance of Conditional Use Permits.  Where a conditional use has been established and is discontinued for any reason for a period of 12 months or longer, or where a conditional use has been changed to a permitted use or to any other conditional use, the conditional use permit shall become null and void.

H)	Review.  If a review is imposed as a condition of the granting of a conditional use permit, the permit shall be reviewed by the Advisory Planning Commission at a public hearing within 30 days of the date established for the review period.  Notice of the public hearing shall be distributed as provided for in Section 85-020 of this Chapter and the permit holder shall be notified at least I 0 days prior to the hearing.

90-50	Public Improvements and Services.


A)	A number of public improvements and services are often required by developments and applications affected by this Chapter.  Development projects may require the need to install driveway access onto public streets, curb and gutter, street repairs, sidewalks, street extensions, sewer extensions and connections, stormwater extensions and connections, and water service extensions and connections.  In addition, city services may be required in connection with a development including
such services as tree removal, snow removal, and other similar services.  When public improvements and services listed above are required and not petitioned for through
 
Chapter 429 of Minnesota State Statutes, the applicant shall be required to receive approval from the city for such public improvements or services.

B)	An application for improvements and services shall be available from the engineering and public works offices.  Said application form shall be filled out by the applicant indicating the type of work requested.  The application form shall be referred to the offices of engineering or public works who shall estimate the cost of improvements and services identified.  Once the charges are estimated, the owner shall sign said application form indicating that they agree to pay all costs and charges for said improvements and services and conform to the rules, regulations, and ordinances of the city in the installation of said improvements.  The office of the engineering and/or the office of public works shall be responsible for approving all applications for improvements and services.

90-60	Grading and Erosion Control Permit.


A)	Applicability. Grading and erosion control permits are required for the following projects, or a series of projects, that involve more than 50 cubic yards of earthen material:
•	The raising or lowering of ground elevations.
•	The removal of topsoil.
•	The alteration of the contours of land.
•	The utilization, disturbance, or removal of earthen material.


Single Family residential construction shall be exempt from the requirement of obtaining a grading and erosion control permit, except that said development shall follow any requirements for grading and erosion control set forth in the approval process for the subdivision or conditional use permit or if the area to be graded with a single family residential construction is one acre or more.

B)	Initiation of Grading and Erosion Control Permit.  Any person having a legal or equitable interest in land may file an application for a grading permit.

C)	Permit Process.  Grading and erosion control projects that are not part of another permit requiring a conditional use permit shall follow the procedures for a certificate of compliance as listed in Section 90-030 of this Chapter.

D)	Submission Requirements.  Applicants shall submit materials as listed for a certificate of compliance as listed in Section 90-030 of this Chapter.  In addition, the city engineer shall review the grading plan and said plan shall address erosion control and sediment control as follows:

1)	If the area to be graded is less than one acre, the project proposer will be required to install temporary erosion and sediment controls at locations as directed by the city engineer or designee.
 

2)	If the area to be graded is one acre or more, the project proposer must obtain an NPDES construction stormwater permit from the MPCA.

E)	Exceptions.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to farming or agricultural activities.

90-70	Stormwater Management Plan.


A)	Purpose of a Stormwater Management Plan.  The purpose of a stormwater management plan is to protect, preserve and enhance the natural resources within the City of Red Wing by providing regulations that control stormwater rates/volumes and protect water quality.  When any land disturbance project or a series of projects will disturb less than one acre of land, the city engineer and the Zoning Administrator shall determine if a stormwater management plan is required, and what submittals, if any, are required.  When any disturbance project or a series of projects will disturb one
acre or more of land, submittal requirements shall include a stormwater management plan, in accordance with Division 57 of this Chapter, provided by a Minnesota licensed professional.

B)	Plan Review Procedure.  The procedure for the review of a stormwater management plan is listed in Section 57-070 of this Chapter.

C)	Submission Requirements.   The submission requirements for a stormwater management plan are listed in Section 57-060 of this Chapter.

D)	General Standards.  Standards for a stormwater management plan are listed in Section 57-080.

90-80	Environmental Assessment and Impact Statements.


A)	Purpose.  The purpose of the environmental review process is to determine whether a proposed action is a major action with the potential for significant environmental impact.

B)	Initiation of Environmental Review Process.  Minnesota State Statutes and Rules provide for the requirements for an environmental assessment worksheet or environmental impact statement.

C)	Process.  The process for environmental assessment worksheets and environmental impact statements are provided for in Minnesota State Statutes and Rules.  When the City of Red Wing acts as the Responsible Government Unit, the City shall follow all state laws and rules in the processing of the environmental review.  At any time that the City Council is required to make an official determination in its role as the Responsible Government Unit, the following process shall be followed:
 

1)	Advisory Planning Commission Review.  The Advisory Planning Commission shall review the matter and forward a recommendation to the City Council for consideration.

2)  City Council Action.  The City Council shall consider the recommendation of the Advisory Planning Commission, make findings of fact, and make a final decision in terms of any official determination that must be made by the city in its role as the Responsible Government Unit.

90-90	Certificate of Design Review.


A)	Purpose.  These regulations shall apply to Division 45 of this Chapter pertaining to the Design Review Regulations.

B)	Process.  A Certificate of Design Review shall be processed in accordance with Section 45-050 of this Chapter.

1)	Prior to issuance of a grading permit, parking lot permit, certificate of compliance, sign permit, or building permit for a project listed in Section 45-040, an applicant shall provide information to the Zoning Administrator in accordance with Section 45-060 of this Chapter.  The Zoning Administrator shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the Certificate of Design Review based upon compliance with the site plan criteria, design review standards, conformance with the City of Red Wing Comprehensive Plan and all City laws, rules and regulations.

2)	Prior to issuance of a conditional use permit, planned unit development, zoning amendment, or variance for a project listed in Section 45-030 of this Chapter, an applicant shall receive a Certificate of Design Review.  Approval from the review authority (in this case the review authority shall be the Red Wing City Council). The city planning commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of an application based upon compliance with the site plan criteria, design review standards, conformance with the City of Red Wing Comprehensive Plan and all City laws, rules and regulations.

90-100	Septic Permits


A)	Purpose.  These regulations shall apply to individual sewage treatment systems serving a dwelling, other establishment, or group thereof that uses subsurface soil treatment and disposal.

B)	County Ordinance Applies. Goodhue County has adopted ordinances that comply with Minnesota Statutes 115.55 and Minnesota Rules 7080. These ordinances apply to all areas located within the City of Red Wing.
 

C)	Septic Permit Prior to Issuance of Building Permit.  In any area located within the City of Red Wing and where no public sewer facilities are available, no building
permit shall be issued for any use requiring an individual sewage treatment system until a septic permit has first been issued by Goodhue County.  In addition, special regulations and lot requirements related to the use of individual sewage treatment systems may be in place depending upon the specific zoning district classification.

90-110	Variance


A)	Purpose.  Variances are intended to provide a means of departure from the literal requirements of this Chapter where strict adherence would cause practical difficulties due to special conditions or circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner.  Variances shall only be permitted when they are in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this Chapter and when the variances are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.

B)	Initiation of Variance.  Any person having a legal or equitable interest in land may file an application for a variance of a dimensional requirement of this Chapter.  No variance may be granted that would allow any use that is not allowed in the zoning district in which the subject property is located.

C)	Application for Variance.  An application for a variance shall be filed on a form approved by the Zoning Administrator, as specified in Section 85-010.  Submission materials may include the following information as determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator:

1)	Site plan drawn to scale showing parcel and building dimensions.


2)	Location of all buildings and their size, including square footage.


3)	Curb cuts, driveways, access roads, parking spaces, off-street loading areas, and sidewalks.

4)	Landscape plans meeting the requirements of this Chapter.


5)	Grading and Erosion Control Plans meeting the requirements of this Chapter and the requirements listed in Section 90-060.

6)	When required by Division 57, a Stormwater Management Plan meeting the requirements of said Division and Section 90-070 of this Chapter.

7)	The Zoning Administrator may require that the applicant supply proof of ownership of the property for which the variance is requested.
 
8)	The variance requested and the reasons for it.


9)	A letter of acknowledgment signed by a majority of the owners of property lying adjacent to the parcel on which a variance is sought.  Ifproperty owners of adjacent property are unable or unwilling to sign a letter of acknowledgment, the applicant may submit a letter indicating the effort made to contact adjacent property owners.

D)	Process for Variance.  The city planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each complete application for a variance as provided in Section 85-020.  Once the city planning commission has conducted the public hearing and has gathered all necessary information it shall make a recommendation to the Board of Adjustments. The Board of Adjustments shall place the matter on the next agenda and consider the variance and recommendation of the city planning commission.  The Board of Adjustments shall have the exclusive power to order the issuance of variances from
the requirements of this Chapter including restrictions placed on nonconformities.  All findings and decisions of the Board of Adjustments concerning variances shall be
final.


E)	Finding of Facts.  The Board of Adjustments shall not vary the regulations of this Chapter unless it makes each of the following findings based on the evidence presented to it in each specific case:

I)  Because of the particular physical surroundings, or the shape, configuration, topography or other conditions of the specific parcel of land involved, strict adherence to the regulations of this Chapter would cause practical difficulties. Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical difficulties.

2)	The conditions upon which a petition for variance is based are unique to the parcel ofland for which the variance is sought and are not applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning classification.

3)	The alleged practical difficulty is caused by this Chapter and has not been created by any persons presently having an interest in the parcel of land.

4)	The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the locality or be injurious to other property in the vicinity in which the parcel of land is located or substantially diminish property values.

5)	The proposed variance will not substantially increase the congestion of the public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or be detrimental to the public welfare or endanger the public safety.
6)	It has been demonstrated that the granting of the variance will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this Chapter and is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
 

F)	Variance Conditions.  The Board of Adjustments may impose such conditions on any proposed variance and require such guarantees, as it deems reasonable and necessary to protect the public interest and to ensure compliance with the standards and purposes of this Chapter and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. A condition must be directly related to and must bear a rough proportionality to the impact created by the variance.

90-120	Zoning Appeal


A)	Appeals of Decisions of the Zoning Administrator.  All findings and decisions of the Zoning Administrator or other official involved in the administration or enforcement of this Chapter shall be final subject to appeal to the Board of Adjustments, except as otherwise provided by this Chapter.  All appeals shall be filed within 20 calendar days of the date of the decision and shall be accompanied at the time of filing with payment of the application fee as specified in Section 85-030. Timely filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in the action appealed from unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Adjustment, with service of a copy on the applicant, that by reasons of fact stated, a stay would, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed.  The city planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each complete application for an appeal as provided in Section 85-020. Once the city planning commission has conducted the public hearing and has gathered all necessary information it shall make a recommendation to the Board of Adjustments.  The Board of Adjustments shall place the matter on the next agenda and consider the appeal and recommendation of the city planning commission.  All findings and decisions of the Board of Adjustments concerning appeals shall be final.

B)	Lake and Shoreland Management Overlay Regulations, Flood Plain
Regulations and Cannon River Management Overlay Districts.  When the appeal is of a decision relating to the Shoreland Management Overlay Regulations (Section 50); Flood Plain Regulations Overlay District (Section 52); or Cannon River Management Overlay District (Section 53); as established in this Chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall submit to the Minnesota Commissioner of Natural Resources the notice of appeal at least ten days before the hearing.

90-130	Zoning Amendment


A)	Purpose of Zoning Amendments.  Amendments to the text of this Chapter and the zoning maps are made for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and general welfare, and in consideration of changing conditions, conservation of property values, changes in the City's Comprehensive Plan, the trend of development, and the current and anticipated future uses of property.
 
B)	Initiation of Zoning Amendments.  Amendments shall be initiated by the City Council, Planning Commission or by application of any person with a legal or equitable interest in a property.

1)	Amendments Initiated by Application.  An application for an amendment to the zoning classification of a particular property shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on such form and accompanied by such information as required by the Zoning Administrator, as specified in Section 85-010 and with the following specific submission information:

a)	Conceptual site plan drawn to scale showing all affected parcels and general concept for development.

b)	General location of all buildings and their approximate size and square footage.

c)	Approximate location of all curb cuts, driveways, access roads, parking areas, off-street loading areas, and sidewalks.

d)	Preliminary landscape plan indicating general planting areas for trees, shrubs, and lawns.

e)	Preliminary grading, erosion control, and Stormwater Management Plan as specified in Section 57 of this Chapter.

f)	Preliminary Sewer and Water Utility Plan for the development.


g)	Narrative indicating the types of uses or business that is contemplated for the development, number of employees, parking and traffic impacts, and other pertinent information about the proposed development.

h)	The Zoning Administrator may require the applicant to supply proof of ownership of the property for which the amendment is requested that illustrate legal or equitable interest in the property.

2)   Amendments Initiated by the City Council or the City Planning  Commission. The City Council or the city planning commission may initiate amendments to the text of this Chapter or to the zoning classification of specific properties. Amendments initiated by the City Council or city planning commission shall be referred to the city planning commission by the Zoning Administrator for study.

C)	Hearing on Zoning Amendments.  The city planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each completed application for zoning amendment and all amendments
 
initiated by the City Council or city planning commission, as provided for in Section
85-020.


D)	Findings and Recommendation of the City Planning Commission.  After the close of the hearing on a proposed amendment, the city planning commission shall make findings with respect to the following and shall submit the same together with its recommendation to the City Council:

1)	Whether the amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.


2)	Whether the amendment is in the public interest and is not solely for the interest of a single property owner.

3)	Whether the existing uses of property and the zoning classification of property within the general area of the property in question are compatible with the proposed zoning classification, where the amendment is to change the zoning classification of particular property.

4)	Whether there has been a change in the character or trend of development in the general area of the property in question, which has taken place since such property was placed in its present zoning classification, where the amendment is to change the zoning classification of particular property.

E)	Action by City Council on Zoning Amendments.  The City Council shall make the final decision regarding all zoning amendments.  Approval of a zoning amendment shall require a two-thirds vote of all its members.
 
ARTICLE  V -ADMINISTRATION  AND ENFORCEMENT DIVISION 95:  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
95-010  Complaints Regarding Violations.  The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority
to investigate any complaint alleging a violation of this Chapter or the conditions of any zoning approval and to take such action as is warranted in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Chapter.

95-20	Procedures Upon Discovery of a Violation.


A)	Notice of Violations.  The Zoning Administrator shall provide a written notice to any person responsible for such violation, identifying the property in question, indicating the nature of the violation, and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including a reasonable time period to remedy the violation.  The written notice shall advise that the Zoning Administrator's decision or order may be appealed to the Board of Adjustments in accordance with the provisions of Section 90-100. Additional written notices may be provided at the Zoning Administrator's discretion.

B)	Enforcement Without Notice.  Whenever the Zoning Administrator finds that an emergency exists in relation to the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter which requires immediate action to protect the health, safety, or welfare of occupants of any dwelling or the public, the Zoning Administrator may seek immediate enforcement without prior written notice, notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter.

95-30	Fees for Reinspection.


A)	Initial Inspection and First Reinspection.   There shall be no fee charged for an initial inspection to determine the existence of a zoning violation, nor any fee for the first reinspection to determine compliance with an order to correct a zoning violation.

B)	Subsequent Reinspections.  The City Council shall set a fee by ordinance to be charged for each subsequent reinspection occurring after the due date for compliance with an order.

C)	Notice of Reinspection Fee.  Every notice of violation and order to correct zoning violations shall contain a clear and conspicuous explanation of the policy in this section requiring reinspection fees for subsequent reinspection.

D)	Waiver.  Upon written request by the applicant, the Zoning Administrator may, for good cause shown and without notice or hearing, waive a reinspection fee.



95-40	Penalties and Remedies For Violations.
 

A)	Violations of the provisions of this Chapter or the conditions of any zoning approval granted, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in specific provisions of this Chapter.

B)	This Chapter may also be enforced by injunction, abatement, mandamus, or any other appropriate remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction.

C)	Each day that any violation continues after notification by the Zoning Administrator that such violation exists shall be considered a separate offense for purpose of the penalties and remedies specified in this section.

D)	Any one, all, or any combination of the forgoing penalties and remedies may be used to enforce this Chapter.
